
































































Hansard: August 23, 1989


August 23, 1989 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 

Prayers 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

Hon. Mr. Hodgins: - Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I wish to advise the Assembly 
that I would desire to withdraw Bill No. 49, An Act to amend The Stray Animals Act 
from the non-controversial Bills committee and place it before the Assembly for second 
reading. 

Leave granted. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Parks, Recreation and Culture 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

Item 1 (continued) 

Mr. Kowalsky: - Did you want to make some introductions, Mr. Minister? 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, hon. members. If I may, I 
would like to make an introduction or two. It’s been some time since we’ve been in 
estimates. 

Seated to my immediate right is Doug Cressman, the deputy minister of the department; 
seated immediately behind me is Dick Bailey, assistant deputy minister; and to Dick’s 
right is Keith Rogers, assistant deputy minister. There are some other officials available 
should we need them. 

Mr. Kowalsky: - I want to spend the first few moments, Mr. Minister, dealing with the 
effects of lottery tax on the department and the activities that the department sponsors. 
And I want to deal first of all, Mr. Minister, with what is happening to the sales. 

The information we have available was that the projected sales for the month of July were 
10.6 million. They came in at 7.9 million, which gives us a net loss of 2.7 million for 
July. The April to July figures were projected to be 37.4 million and they actually came in 



at 31.8 - that was just following the announcement of the lottery tax - at 5.6 million. I 
want to know, Mr. Minister, whether you would confirm these figures and if you’ve 
consulted with the kiosk operators and the ticket vendors about how their August sales 
are coming, whether they are stable, whether they are recovering, or whether they are 
going down, or just what is happening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I don’t have the hard numbers the hon. member just 
gave me. I have not reason to dispute those numbers at all, but I don’t have those figures 
in dollar terms. What we’ve looked at is percentage of target sales year over year, and if 
we translated to dollar figures, I’m sure they would come out in those kind of ballpark 
figures. 
 
In terms of the kiosk operators and vendors, Mr. Chairman, they don’t work for me. 
They’re totally at arm’s length; further than that, they’re totally removed from my 
auspices or that of my department. They’re under contract to Sask Sport Distributors 
Incorporated - SSDI is the acronym - and their dealings are between the governing body 
of SSDI and the kiosk operators. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Well, Mr. Minister, the kiosk operators are the people that are in the 
front lines administering this tax that your government has set up. Apart from how it’s 
hurting them and their businesses, there’s a definite relationship between what happens to 
them and what they’re hearing and what’s happening to your department. And I would 
think it would be very much your responsibility to find out exactly which way things are 
going in the sales so that you can defend the organizations that are going to be hurt by 
this, and I’m rather surprised that you haven’t made an attempt to out. 
 
Let me tell you that in survey results which I have taken from the kiosk operators who 
have voluntarily given their results, they tell me that their - 98 per cent of them tell me - 
that their sales have decreased, have decreased by 10 per cent or more, that a full 40 per 
cent of those that replied, not necessarily those of the total words, but 40 per cent of those 
that replied tell me that their sales have decreased by over 50 per cent. Now that’s quite a 
shot. 
 
More recently, when I just stopped in and visited a kiosk operator on a random basis and I 
asked them, well what’s happening in August? They tell me that it seems to be about the 
same. Some say well, if you think July was bad, August is worse. Others say, well a 
marginal recovery although not necessarily a big recovery, but my reading of it is that it’s 
about . . . it’s roughly staying the same. 
 
Now you have the staff, Mr. Minister, and you have the responsibility over this. I guess 
my responsibility is to make sure that you’re doing your job. So I’m going to ask you: 
why won’t you put into place some type of a survey, either a telephone survey or a mail-
out survey, to find out directly so that you know exactly what’s happening. I think it 
would be very foolish for you to ignore this from your department. I think you should put 
it in and put it into place immediately. You have the staff; you could do this within a day 



or two, and you’d know exactly what was going on. And once you got the picture, then I 
think you’d have something to arm yourself with to go and talk to the rest of your 
colleagues and get rid of this rather ill-conceived tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, as I’ve stated two or three times in the past, we 
haven’t had any discussion either at cabinet or caucus as yet regarding the tax or the 
ramifications. In terms of kiosk operators and vendors, they have been sending results, 
their tabulated results and their sales, I believe, on a weekly basis to the parent body, 
which is Sask Sport Inc. who oversees SSDI. I have had discussions with them at their 
request. They’ve talked to me on more than one occasion, and they’re just keeping me 
apprised of the situation. 
 
Obviously we have some concern - and I’ve said this in the past too - in terms of future 
ramifications. Should sales remain at the level they are now, there would be a reduction in 
revenue to a number of groups, 1,185 of them across the province. So of course we’re 
concerned that that would happen. We are watching the situation, and we are trying to 
determine if there is a definite trend being set, irreversible, in the sales. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - With respect to the groups that you mention, Mr. Minister, the 1,175 - or 
85 is it? - groups, or close to 1,200 groups that are affected by this, I would think that it 
would also be incumbent upon you to consult with some of them, at least on a random 
basis, to find out what the effects on them are. I want to give you a couple of example of 
the type of information that I’m sure you will get more of. 
 
But the Viscount Recreational Board has sent a letter to the Western Gaming Systems 
through Saskatoon, and I’m going to . . . I want to read a couple of portions of the letter. 
The letter is written on behalf of the Viscount Recreation Board, and after detailing how 
they sell the tickets, the line at the end of one paragraph says: 
 

I do not care whatever way you slice it the bottom line is a net loss to our 
organization. 
 

The point he’s trying to make here is that the taxis hurting the Viscount Recreational 
Board much more than it is hurting . . . or that it’s costing them, as opposed to costing the 
individual ticket buyer because they use the Nevada system of raising their money. And 
as you know, the Nevada system in some cases takes the money right out of . . . it reduces 
the net that’s available to their club, rather than taking money on top of the ticket sales. 
 
And they go on to say: 
 
Therefore this brings us to the final analysis if we cannot clear at least 20% on the 
nevada’s we in all likelihood will quit selling them. So in the end you lose we lose the 
government loses and the hospitals lose. 

 



They make an excellent point for what’s happening to their scheme. I want to give you an 
idea of what they use their money for, Mr. Minister. And he writes in a covering letter to 
me: 
 
The ticket money is now being used by the Recreational Board to keep our community 
centre operating. Half the money has been designated for a community kitchen, 
gymnasium, hall project as part of a new school complex. 

 
Dealing with the tickets he indicates that: 
 
Since the government has licensed these tickets they have been a great asset to the 
community and I would hate to see any government remove them unless they are 
prepared to give a yearly unconditional grant to make up the difference. 

 
And he ends his letter by saying: 
 
Another thing that is funny is that the Culture and Recreation has announced a new 
Facilities Grant which are fifty, fifty sharing. I would like to point out that the Nevada 
and the 4-25 ticket sales in the future were going to be used to match these grants. It will 
take a lot of bake sales to make up the lost revenue in the Nevada sales. 

 
Well, Mr. Minister, what solution have you got for them, what solution have you got for 
these folks at Viscount and probably many more like them? What solution for them have 
you got other than to say, look I think the best we can do is to work on your behalf to 
drop the tax on these ticket sales? 
 
(0815) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is quoting from a letter. 
There were one or two inaccuracies. They’re minor things so I’m not going to get into 
them. There isn’t a 50-50 grant on culture-recreational facilities, and one or two other 
things, but that’s not really germane to our discussion right how. 
 
The hon. member is making the point that there are a number of groups in the province 
who could well receive reduced level of funding for their programming, and he’s relating 
it to this lottery tax. I have nothing to do with Nevadas or any of the other gaming 
activities, only lotteries, so I’ll confine myself to lotteries. 
 
He described the tax as being ill-conceived. We did do some public sampling, Mr. 
Chairman, prior to that tax coming in, and there was overwhelming support for it at that 
particular time. And it was couched in the terms of, would you give a dime to health care 
if you spent a dollar on a lottery ticket, and some 78 per cent of respondents had said yes. 
And on that basis, it did not appear at that time to be ill-conceived. We’re not totally 
convinced that it is, but time is going to tell. 
 



So we are watching a situation and we are consulting with groups, as a matter of fact, 
who have taken the trouble to write to me. I don’t believe I was cc’d on that Viscount 
letter. I don’t believe I received it. So I haven’t seen that one, but there have been other 
groups who have been corresponding directly with me. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - I think, Mr. Minister, that’s one reason that I would suggest that you 
make a direct attempt contact these people at this time, because in addition to items like I 
have mentioned, some of the letters that I’ve gotten have also given some alternative 
suggestions, for example, and I would quote form his letter, and he says, “. . . I believe 
there is enough money for both sports and hospitals without the 10% tax . . .” in a portion 
of the letter. I mention that just as an aside. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you are aware of how many people, how many 
kiosk operators or vendors have actually been shut down? How many have closed down? 
How many are actually quitting selling tickets because of the . . . because it’s simply not 
paying them to do so any more? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I haven’t heard of any. There are 781 of those 
outlets. I haven’t heard of any. That doesn’t mean it’s not happening; I just haven’t heard 
of any. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - There’s another case, Mr. Minister, where I think some consultation 
should take place, just from phone calls we’ve received. I can assure you of three 
including one really bit on in Saskatoon that’s already shut down. And I’m sure that it 
wouldn’t take you long to find out. But there again if you take a look, you’ll get some real 
good evidence of what’s happening. And your earlier indication of your . . . If you were 
able to consult before, before you implemented this tax, as you indicated, and I believe 
you did, I think it would be incumbent of you again to follow up because these people 
now have a different perception of what’s happened that they might have originally. You 
know, the initial idea of tax, especially if you say a tax for hospitals, might seem quite 
plausible, but once you find that the consumers are rebelling against a tax, it raises a 
completely different picture. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether you have consulted with other provinces to find 
out how their sales are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, we are tracking sales and we are keeping a 
comparison with other provinces. And this is being done through Sask Sport Inc. I’ve 
spoken with my counterpart ministers in western Canada, the lottery corporation, I 
believe, on two occasions but not in the last month. But we are tracking their sales too. 
We receive a weekly report form the corporation’s head office in Winnipeg. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - So what is happening. Would you confirm that your market share in July 
dropped from 19.4 per cent to 17.1 per cent? Would you confirm that Manitoba sales 
increased by 5 per cent and Alberta sales increased by 5 per cent, while Saskatchewan 



lost $2.7 million. Would you confirm that B.C.’s unofficial figures is an increase of 11 
per cent in the month of July? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Well we’ve been using a different set of figures. I can’t dispute 
those figure, I don’t have them. What we have been doing is tracking the sales according 
to the percentage we have achieved of our target, and we’ve been doing the same thing 
with the other province. 
 
For the month of, I believe it was July, Manitoba and Alberta were slightly below target 
and we had some reduction in target. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - I don’t want to take any more time then on this topic, Mr. Minister. I 
think I’ve made my points on it. I leave it with you and with your department to follow up 
on the suggestions that I’ve given you, and I actually wish you the best in your cabinet 
meetings and in your caucus meetings with our colleagues because I sincerely feel that 
it’s very important that these cultural organizations be kept in place and kept funded. We 
have an excellent example right now in Saskatchewan with the Saskatchewan summer 
games, an activity which is very worthwhile which we’ve been building for years and 
years towards. We want it to be sustained. We want the search for excellence in athletics, 
in cultural activities, to be sustained in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would urge all of the members on the opposite side who are here at this time to 
support the minister when he goes to bat for the cultural organizations in Saskatchewan. 
Support him, support him, it’ll be on your necks if you don’t support him. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a few questions about multiculturalism. I want to know, 
Mr. Minister, whether you have any agreement between. . . with the federal government 
on immigration. I understand you’ve been trying to work on or there’s been at least a 
desire on the part of the multicultural groups across the province that you establish a 
policy . . . an agreement; if not that, at least a policy on multiculturalism with respect to 
especially as it affects the immigration request towards it to Saskatchewan. And I want to 
know whether you’re supporting the multicultural organizations of Saskatchewan position 
on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I don’t have responsibilities for immigration, but I 
would like to spend some moments discussing immigration with the hon. member. You’ll 
gather by my accent, it’s a topic that’s quite near and dear to my heart. 
 
The Minister of Trade and Investment, the Minister of Justice has statutory responsibility 
and obligations towards immigration in this province. But because of the nature of this 
particular portfolio and the multicultural components with it, I do spend quite a bit of 
time speaking with immigrant groups and visiting with them. 
 
What I would say to the hon. member is that the task force, the multicultural task force 
which has been touring the province and taking briefs and holding hearings, has 



completed their work, and we expect a final report within weeks. I think probably by the 
end of August or early September that final report will be available for public perusal. I’ll 
certainly make sure the hon. member has a copy. 
 
I know that one of the things they did when they were going around the province was 
listen to immigrant groups and take a lot of their suggestions. I don’t know what’s sin it 
or what they’re going to be recommending, but I look forward to receiving it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Something that I would like you to clarify here. Are you attempting to 
establish a two-party agreement or a policy with the federal government on immigration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - There is discussion and there is an agreement that is usually worked 
out on a annual basis, Mr. Chairman, between the federal and provincial levels of 
government, but they don’t deal with my department on that. They deal with the Minister 
of Justice or Minister of Trade and Investment. I believe it falls under that category. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Thank you. And you’re indicating that you’re expecting the task force to 
be delivered toward the end of August. Are you telling me that you have not yet received 
that task force report? You have not received it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - No, Mr. Chairman, I haven’t received the task force report. I haven’t 
seen it yet. I’m just advised it’s at the printers. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - could you advise who establishes that organizations attain PCO 
(provincial cultural organizations) status, particularly with respect to the multicultural 
groups, and what is the criteria for the status? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I wanted to get this accurate, so I did some checking 
with officials. 
 
First of all, a PCO would have to be a provincial organization which would have 
representation in a minimum of five of the eight zones into which the province is divided. 
And they would have to have been a bona fida organization for two years. There is an 
established set of criteria. We don’t have it here, but I’ll make sure you get a copy of it 
just as soon as we can dig it out. 
 
So once they apply, the make the application themselves, and three members from the 
Saskatchewan council of Cultural Organizations and three from my department would sit 
down and go over the criteria and make sure they are in fact eligible. Then they would 
come back and decide on a . . . they would each make a recommendation for eligibility 
for any kind of allowance. That’s called the eligibility meeting. And then it would go 
forward from there as a recommendation to me that they be included on the list for an 
allowance. 
 



Mr. Kowalsky: - Thank you. I now want to turn to another topic, and that is to deal for a 
few moments with the fledgling film industry here in Saskatchewan, and I want to ask 
you several questions about that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to delve into this topic briefly because I think it’s something that’s 
fairly new to Saskatchewan and the film industry is on somewhat tenuous and unstable 
grounds here in Saskatchewan. And I know that it’s a growing organization, and I think 
that there are certain things that need clarifying. 
 
I want to state at the outset, Mr. Minister, that I feel that it’s desirable to develop and help 
to develop a film industry because I guess I can look at it from three points of view. First 
of all, I think that a film industry is a worthwhile endeavour in itself as an art form. It is 
one way of reflecting our culture. Secondly, I think it’s worthwhile because it can be a 
source of employment and a source of economic development for Saskatchewan I think 
we should get into as many niches as we can. 
 
And last of all, I think it’s important because it’s one of the vehicles that we can use right 
now in Saskatchewan that can help boost the Saskatchewan image, and by boosting the 
Saskatchewan image it will in turn help boost the economic development of 
Saskatchewan. I guess one of the best example of that is what Crocodile Dundee has done 
to Australia. And if somehow or other, you know, we can sponsor some film - because 
there’s so many people that watch videos nowadays and see these things on television, 
that it can go a long way. 
 
(0830) 
 
Now my analysis of the instability of our film industry is that there seems to be no clear 
cut definition between the professionals in the industry who would be doing it for a living 
versus the amateurs who are maybe sort of doing it out of interest, or as a sideline; or 
another way of looking at it, the business versus the culture aspect of it. And there’s that 
end of it that needs to be defined. 
 
I understand that you’ve developed a film development office, or that you’ve mandated a 
film development office. I want to know what the mandate of this office is. I think it’s 
important to clarify what the mandate of the office is so that those that are interested in 
trying to make a living through the film industry have it quite clear as to what they can 
expect from this office and who the office is supposed to served. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, the original concept for their office was to develop 
film makers right here within the province. As I’ve said before, we’re interested in having 
an indigenous industry within the province and we also want to attract film makers to the 
province. Then we are willing to provide pre-production financing. 
 
I want to say at the outset of this particular discussion, Mr. Chairman, that when we went 
into this and went ahead with the film development office, we did so with the 



consultation and the advice of SMPIA (Sask Motion Picture Industry Association) and 
ACTRA (Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists), and indeed their 
recommendations were followed in all of this. And you may have seen some responses 
each of them sent to the major newspapers in the province in support of the office and the 
fund and indeed pointing out that what we have done is followed their advice and set it up 
according to the criteria that they had established. 
 
And I think it’s going to work extremely well once we get things up and running. We 
don’t make any moves without further consultation with both of those bodies, and they’ve 
been extremely supportive and indeed extremely helpful in giving us advice and guidance 
to getting the industry off the ground. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Now you mention then that the purpose of the film development office 
is to develop an indigenous industry. I take it from that you’re . . . I guess, a long-term 
objective, although it would be to develop a sort of a self-sustaining industry, that its 
function is not dealing primarily with the cultural aspect of filming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, we want to make films here in Saskatchewan, 
not necessarily what would fit in the term cultural activity, it that means multicultural 
activity. Film making in and of itself it a cultural activity, and we would view it that way. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Well this needs just a little further clarification. You see, I understand 
that film development is a cultural activity in regard to some of our . . . I support whether 
it’s done for commercial purposes or just out of interest. But what I’m trying to get at 
here is the mandate of the moneys produced through Sask Sport is to support “cultural 
activities,” not to support economic development. 
 
I read this as sort of an economic development thrust. I read this as an economic 
development thrust, and I think it needs to be clarified as to exactly what the thrust is 
here. Are we talking economic development? Because I think the way we should proceed 
in nurturing the industry would be somewhat different than nurturing a cultural activity 
such as theatre in the city. We don’t expect that our theatre, The Globe Theatre or 
Persephone, will ever . . . or will in the near, within five or 10 years, I think, end up 
making a profit for somebody, for somebody to actually end up a shareowner of it. 
 
And yet in this industry my understanding is that if you’re following the B.C. model or 
the Alberta model, that in the end you’ll probably want to try to develop some 
entrepreneurship that is capable of attracting outside movie makers and outside producers 
to the province so that our people can learn hand in hand with working with the world’s 
best. Because we know now that Hollywood people are more than prepared to go out into 
other parts of U.S. and particularly interested in Canada, part of it because of the 
uniqueness and part of it because it’s cheaper and we’re still friendlier in terms of 
allowing them to blow up vehicles in the middle of our fields and so on, without wanting 
exorbitant fees, and we can use that to advantage to bring some economic development 
into the province. 



 
I know that when Love and Hate was filmed here in Saskatchewan, the film industry 
people, or people that were working with were rather impressed with the economics it 
generated, and with what they were able to learn and some of the jobs they were able to 
get through it. And so, for example, my understanding is that the Ramada in Saskatoon 
got $5,000 worthy of hotel rooms booked over a weekend. So that’s why I think it needs a 
little more clarification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, the film development fund comprises a training 
component and we want to train people here on the ground in Saskatchewan. We are 
already producing graduates, for instance at the U or R (University of Regina) from their 
film outfit, and they’re good people doing a good job. The problem we have is they leave 
the province because we haven’t been making films here. There haven’t been the 
incentives to stay here or the incentives to make films, and there hasn’t been that training 
component. 
 
In the one major production that was done last year, there were 61 jobs during the 
production. The Hotel Saskatchewan ran at full capacity, and it hadn’t done that for a very 
long time and had their best quarter ever in history because of that one film that was made 
here. And I should say that the film development fund is a loan. We lend them the money 
interest free and they repay it. It’s not a gift of any kind. 
 
And yes, there is economic spin-off activity and we want to encourage that, but I’d like to 
point out that we have economic activity as well through, let’s say, the Canada Games or 
the Western Canada Games. Those things attract tourists. We also have the legacy after 
the games of new facilities that have been built and the economic activity that went into 
building those facilities and the jobs that were created. So there are economic spin-offs, 
and I would count sport as well as part of that cultural mosaic, and film making as part of 
that cultural mosaic as well. 
 
As to what kinds of films would be made here, that would be freedom for artistic freedom 
and we wouldn’t be in any way involved in that. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Mr. Minister, the way I view this time is that we have the cultural aspect 
of the industry which we can support like we do support games and that has an economic 
spin-off. And that’s what I call the cultural aspect of it. Then over and above that, I 
believe that there is some room for an economic development component to encourage 
entrepreneurs to get into it - people who through their own initiative will be able to work 
on things like become agents, try to attract outside products, try to attract outside movie 
makers. 
 
See, we know that to produce a TV movie it costs approximately a million per hour, and 
that would be a low budget movie, a low budget movie. We know that more than half of 
them do not recover their costs. Any movie that’s shown on television now or on the 
networks, that only may be one in 10 makes a profit. And in order to make a profit, you 



first of all have to get on a television network and then maybe you have to go through . . . 
then you get into a syndication process. As an example of a cost, Love and Hate 
apparently cost very close to four and a half million dollars to produce. 
 
The point I’m trying to get at here, Mr. Minister, is if you do not work hand in hand with 
an economic development strategy, but try to take the entire film industry on yourself, but 
not work hand in hand through economic development, that you’re going to be, the 
province is going to be faced with trying to sustain a very, very costly industry - very, 
very costly for what it’s going to pay off. I think we have to try to build the two hand in 
hand. 
 
So my question is then, state it this way: do you believe, do you really believe that we can 
develop a film industry by ignoring the private sector and not working hand in hand 
through economic development and leave this strictly as something that we’re funding at 
the rate of $700,000 per year, is what I think you’re funding the film development office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Well, Mr. Chairman, most of the work that will be done and the 
loans that will be going out will be going to private sector. That’s to whom this is aimed. 
 
I’ll quote to you from a letter dated July 21, I received from Gerald Sperling, who’s 
probably well known to all the members in here. He’s the president of the Saskatchewan 
branch of ACTRA, the Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists. He 
says: 
 
The position of ACTRA, nationally and provincially, is fully in support of the 
Government’s initiatives in film policy and development. We fully support these 
establishment of the Film Fund and the Film office. The Saskatchewan ACTRA helped to 
initiate the Saskatchewan Film Task Force and was instrumental in drafting the brief to 
the Government on film policy which contained proposals for a film fund and film office. 
We are very pleased that the Government has listened attentively to the concerns of the 
film industry and developed a program closely based on industry proposals. 
 
That’s the direction we have taken based on what the industry is telling us of their 
requirements. In terms of economic development, yes, I think there will be economic 
spin-offs and economic development activity. And if other departments are appropriately 
involved in this, then that’s just find; we’d like to involve them. The point is in this initial 
state we have taken on the initiative at the behest of the professional groups within the 
province who represent actors and writers, and that’s the direction we’re going in. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - One more question on this, Mr. Minister. We know that you have been 
advertising for a film development officer. My understanding is that that person has been 
offered between 40 to $70,000, or at least the job is worth between 40 and $70,000. I also 
understand that you have not been able to find a candidate up to this time. 
 



I think that that in itself is somewhat symptomatic of some of the confusion that is now in 
place, and confusion that I’ve been drawing your attention to, because I think it’s quite 
symptomatic because a person coming into here would be . . . not knowing exactly what 
the mandate was or seeing the mandate as being one which is impossible to succeed in, 
would not take the job unless he didn’t know anything about the job. And we don’t want 
that kind of person in here; we want somebody in here that can really, that understands 
and has some experience in the film industry, so that we can do for the Saskatchewan film 
industry, at least on a comparable and proportional basis to what happened in B.C. 
 
I now that we are underdeveloped. We know it’s a growing industry. We know we want 
image. We know that most films are economic failures. Have you considered going to 
pursue funding to help fund the film industry through ERDA (economic and regional 
development agreement), or what was formerly known as ERDA? 
 
(0845) 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - In terms of ERDA agreements, discussions had been going on 
within the governmental affairs and Government of Canada. And I think it’s fair to say 
the federal government doesn’t know which direction they want to go right now. The 
FRDA (Canada-Saskatchewan forests resources development agreement) agreements, for 
example, are expiring across the country as well as ERDA agreements, and we don’t have 
a firm indication that they will be renewed. There is some negotiation taking place, 
however. 
 
In terms of the film development officer, it was advertised. I believe there were 45 
applicants form across Canada and hardly anybody within province. It’s a very 
specialized job and it’s a very technical job, and they also required not only extensive 
knowledge of the film industry but extensive contacts within the industry. And it did tend 
to exclude, unfortunately, most of our home-grown talent - lack of experience. 
 
The job was offered to three different individuals. And I won’t give you their names and 
titles, but I can let you have this for your own perusal. I hate to read it into the record 
because you know they did apply for the position and we don’t want to put this right 
across the country who they were. 
 
But the first candidate was form Toronto, and the woman was very interested in the job. 
And there was several lengthy discussions with officials but when we got around to 
priorizing the order of the candidates, the first candidate had decided not to pursue a 
career in government and continue in the private sector where she was capable of 
generating far higher income. So that’s why she turned it down. 
 
The second candidate, at his interview, was told he would have to move to Regina, and 
he’s from Edmonton, and he said he consulted with his family and they were quite willing 
to move to Regina. After he was offered the position, his family said, you go to Regina, 
Dad, and you’re going by yourself. They’d changed their minds. They decided they were 



going to stay with their friends in Edmonton. Although he was very excited about the 
position and very anxious to take it, he put family ahead of career, so he’s still in 
Edmonton. 
 
And the third candidate who was very interested - constantly phoned the department and 
offering suggestions on how the program could be established and discussing issues 
within the industry - while we’re in the process of offering the job to the first two people, 
this individual took a job some place else. So we lost all three and decided we were going 
to re-advertise. So that’s the history on that one. I’ll let you have this. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - It kind of illustrates a point of the need for enhancing Saskatchewan’s 
image, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to deal a little bit more with FRDA; I defer to my colleague from Prince Albert-
Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Chairman, as the economic regional development agreements 
pertain to forestry in Saskatchewan, you a moment ago mentioned that there were 
negotiations ongoing. It’s our understanding that the federal government plans to scrap 
these agreements for regional development and move into the Western Diversification 
Fund as a means of funding. Could you enlighten us on that and explain how the 
negotiations are going at this point, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Our last FRDA, which expired at the end of March, was a $28 
million agreement over five years. Projects are being continued to be paid out to end of 
this current year. Federal forestry officials and provincial forestry officials, my director of 
forestry, have been meeting discussing what the content of the new agreement would be 
and what it might look like. The financing has not yet been approved by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Minister, I would sort of, I guess, want to know what your opinion 
is in terms of funding for forestry agreement. If you were satisfied with the economic 
regional development agreement, or if you feel that through the western diversification 
office with western diversification of funds we could accomplish the goals set out as they 
relate to forestry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - We’ve been very happy with FRDA agreement we had with federal 
forestry, and we’d like to renegotiate a new agreement with them. If the question was 
going through FRDA as opposed to WDO (western development office), when we deal 
with FRDA, we’re dealing with the Ministry of State for Forestry in Canada, and we’re 
dealing with forestry people, and I kind of enjoy that relationship. We’ve been dealing 
with them now for four and a half years. 
 
They changed minister last year, but Gerry Marrithew, when he was the minister, was a 
great ambassador for forestry and he fought to get these agreements into place right across 



the country, and I thought he did an excellent job with them. I think it would a shame if 
we couldn’t renegotiate those and continue them on the basis we had them in this last 
four, five-year period. 
 
If there’s money available through WDO, we’d like to go after that too. And without 
criticizing federal colleagues at all, the difference is I’d rather be speaking to forestry 
officials who understand the forest industry than speaking to economists who may not 
have quite the same grasp of the forest industry, certainly in Saskatchewan where it’s 
different than in our neighbouring provinces. Manitoba would be similar to us, but our 
forest type and mix and age is certainly way different, for example, from British 
Columbia. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well, Mr. Minister, I would want to say today that I’m very pleased to 
hear that that would be your preference. Very disappointed we were to hear the 
negotiations hadn’t been completed for an extension of this agreement and for more 
federal funds, but it was especially, it was a concern of our during the federal campaign of 
northern Saskatchewan residents that the tree trade agreement may in fact scrap these 
kinds of regional development programs. And I think what you’re seeing now, frankly, 
Mr. Minister, are the results of the free trade agreement, and the fact that the federal 
government is trying to move out of these regional economic development agreements. 
 
I’d want to say, and I would like you to comment o this, Mr. Minister, the Western 
Diversification Fund as it relates to Saskatchewan, I don’t believe has had a good track 
record in terms of the kinds of dollars that we’ve been able to get here in Saskatchewan in 
that with 16 per cent of the western population, we’ve only received some 6 per cent of 
the funds. And I think that’s a concern that all of us in Saskatchewan should have in 
terms of what we’re able to generate here from federal dollars. And I think in terms of 
forestry and northern economic development programs and tourism programs - but we’re 
dealing now with the forestry programs - there is some need for concern and there is need 
for some strong lobbying with your federal counterparts to ensure that this kind of an 
agreement continues. 
 
A lot of people are feeling that the Western Diversification Fund is nothing more than a 
political slush fund and would rather see an ERDA agreement carry one, and we’ve had 
examples of politics being intertwined in that federal money. We’ve had it here in 
Saskatchewan. And so I will certainly hope, Mr. Minister, and I’d like you to comment on 
this, I will hope you would pursue this with all the vigour you can muster to make sure 
that in out forestry, we do have a forestry agreement that well suits the needs of our forest 
and the future forestry development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I can give every assurance to the hon. member that 
we are pursuing most vigorously a new FRDA. In fact, I have corresponded with Frank 
Oberle, the current Minister of State for Forestry for Canada, impressing upon him the 
importance of having a new agreement negotiated with the province. 
 



We also have an upcoming council of forest ministers’ meeting. I believe it’s in October, 
and that will be as far we’re concerned from a Saskatchewan viewpoint the number one 
agenda item. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Mr. Minister, with respect to forestry, there’s an increasing and growing 
number of small wood-lot operators, owner-operators, who are existing on very small 
incomes from their forestry work to day. I think you can acknowledge that in the forest 
industry, it usually takes several years before you can develop any kind of sustainable 
living off of it. And yet at the same time we know that there’s a lot of land that’s very 
marginal in northern Saskatchewan, and they are quite capable of turning otherwise 
useless land into production, which in turn can be used to help with pulp, with saw logs. 
Some of them are going into specialty woods, things that large industries would not be 
able to do, finding uses for tamaracks and willows, hobby woods, some of them are going 
into Christmas trees. 
 
They tell me that they’re quite pleased in many cases just to be able to get a couple of 
thousands dollars, maybe 4 or $5,000 a year income off of it, and they feel that that . . . 
because it’s an interest and I think it’s valuable for us to keep this kind of an industry and 
that association going. I want to know whether you are looking at providing any kind of 
funding, continuing any old funding or adding any new funding to this, again, sort of 
fledgling industry, but one which I think is very desirable of support and need of support 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - There was some money under the last FRDA for activities such as 
this, Mr. Chairman. It wasn’t an awful lot of money, and actually seeing as the hon. 
member raised it, I should tell him it’s one of the items in discussion in the new FRDA, 
because we agree. We think this is a very worthwhile economic activity. And quite often 
as you identify for some of the marginal farms, it can be the difference between a break-
even year or going under. 
 
There is some money to be made in wood-lot operations, especially in specialty woods, as 
the hon. member identified, that are not generally used by industry on any large scale 
basis. In fact, I mat with one wood-lot operator here three years ago who supplied the 
major Christmas tree that was put outside the building. And in fact he makes his sole 
living just from his wood lot, and he’s been managing it intensely for a number of years. I 
believe he’s managed it for something like 50 years, and he has been making a living 
doing that. So it is possible, and yes, we would like to see something, some type of 
incentive program put into a new FRDA for these types of operators. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, under the forest management 
lease agreement with Weyerhaeuser, small operators are reduced to what appears to be to 
me a very small amount of timber. My understanding is that there are about 114,000 
cubic metres available for small forest manufactures, which is really a very small portion 
of the allowable softwood cut in Saskatchewan. My belief is that it works out to 
something in the neighbourhood of 1 per cent. 



 
I know that in other jurisdictions, in other province, B.C. is an example, they’re starting 
to realize that job creation through smaller operators in the forest clearly creates more 
economic activity and more job opportunities for the people in their province. British 
Columbia’s component, just as an example, is around 17 per cent; Alberta is around 17 
per cent as well; Manitoba, the small-business component is up to almost 50 per cent, I 
understand. 
 
When I look at the 1 per cent that’s allowed and when I see the number of smaller 
operators who have shut their operations down in the Prince Albert area and in the 
northern area of Saskatchewan, smaller operators who just aren’t being able to make a go 
of it in the forest right now simply because the allotment isn’t conducive to making a 
profit. And I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, if you’ve turned your mind or if you would 
turn your mind to increasing the amount of allowable softwood cut for the smaller 
independent operators? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - At the outset, Mr. Chairman, just as you would well know, Mr. 
Chairman, let me say that, you know, everybody wants a piece of the action in the forest 
industry and there just isn’t always enough action to go around. 
 
When the FMLA (forest management licence agreement) with Weyerhaeuser was 
negotiated and the level was established at 86,000 cubic metres, that was roughly what 
they’d been taking out prior to the agreement coming into place. So that’s why that was a 
figure that was put into the negotiated FMLA. 
 
(0900) 
 
In terms of acquiring new sources of wood, officials have been identifying in concert with 
small operators, indeed meeting with SCIFI, Saskatchewan Council of Independent Forest 
Industries, over a three-year period, alternate sources of wood and areas that perhaps big 
industry would not be interested in going into for reasons of economics, but small 
operators would. Plus we have increased the volumes to them quite considerably and the 
Besnard reserve was made available to them. 
 
I know that Weyerhaeuser has right of first refusal, but they have not exercised that right. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Minister, the point that you raised is just exactly what the problem 
is. The areas that you’re allotting to these small independent operators are not 
economically viable. Weyerhaeuser has got the bulk of the usable forest in that area, in 
that lease area, and it’s basically the commercially viable forest. But the small 
independent operators who’ve been harvesting timber, who’ve been cutting saw timber 
and saw logs and posts and rails, are now moved into areas where they can’t make a 
living. 
 



And it’s not a decision where they can go to government officials any longer. They’ve got 
to go to Weyerhaeuser in order to decide where they’re going to be cutting. And that’s the 
problem, Mr. Minister, and that’s why a lot of them aren’t operating in the forest any 
longer. 
 
They’ve had to shut their operators down. I’ve had small-business man who have been 
harvesting timber in northern forests for 35 and 40 years, people who’ve worked with the 
sweat off their brow to feed their families and employ people, who had employed 6, 8, 
and 10 people, who’ve had to shut their operations down. And you haven’t allowed the 
room for them in that lease agreement. You’ve cut back the number of cubic metres that 
is allotted to them, and not only that, the decision as to where they’re allotted these 
cuttings rights doesn’t allow them to make a living. 
 
I mean you have to understand, Mr. Minister, that there’s got to be room for the small 
operators. Everybody knows in our area in northern Saskatchewan, and I’m sure in your 
area as well, the riding you represent, that those small operators employ an awful lot of 
people and create an awful lot of economic activity in the communities where they reside 
and where they run their business out of. 
 
But the fact is that your government has chosen Weyerhaeuser over Saskatchewan 
business men and women who have been operating, some of them, for 30 and 40 years in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s the problem, and that’s the big-business mentality of this PC 
government, and that’s why I ask you, Mr. Minister, to reassess what you’re doing in 
terms of that lease agreement so that you will create room for small-business people from 
northern Saskatchewan so that they can continue their business in that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Now, Mr. Chairman, we have been having discussions and 
negotiations with small operators in the area mentioned by the hon. member. We have 
been looking at putting them into areas where stand quality is very high, and it is 
scattered. There’s 30,000 cubic metres of saw logs that are excellent quality within that 
lease area that will be made available to operators, and we’re doing this over a 20-year 
period. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - I think you probably had had requests for an archery season for elk. I 
want to know whether you’re going to extent it? If not, why not? Are you going to extend 
an archery season for deer? Are you going to approach the Manitoba example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, as I’m sure the hon. member knows, there’s been 
quite a letter-writing campaign regarding bow hunting for elk and for deer. The problem 
is one of demand and supply. The demand far outstrips the supply. The number of people 
who want to hunt elk . . . If we put in an extra season, we would be giving preferential 
treatment to one group who want to hunt with a bow. They can’t hunt with a bow during 
the regular season. 
 



Now I understand because I’ve met with the wildlife federation members often and it’s 
been a topic of discussion, I understand that they’re saying, well, the chances of taking an 
elk with a bow are far less than taking it with a rifle in regular season; therefore they may 
not have a great impact upon the numbers. 
 
But unfortunately, as with extending the seasons, with the changing the seasons with 
white-tail deer, what we do it we run the risk, Mr. Chairman, of alienating the farmers. 
And after all, the farmers are really the stewards of our wildlife in this province to a very 
large degree, and we don’t want to alienate the very people who are playing host to 
wildlife running wild across their land. And that’s the basic reason that we’d be very 
reluctant to tamper with this. 
 
Any of the seasons that we operate, whether it be for elk or white-tail, antler, mule deer, 
all go before a wildlife advisory committee. And we given them all kinds of information, 
the biological information, the numbers, the number harvester, where they were 
harvested, all that kind of information, and this committee, which operates independently 
from me, advises on what the dates should be and the difference zones. And in the years 
that I’ve been minister responsible for wildlife, I’ve never overturned a recommendation 
that they have sent to me. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - How many archery licences did you give out last year and how many 
were filled? Same question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - I just did some checking on numbers and we found the archery tags 
in our information. For antelope, there were 300 archery tags; for mule deer, 950; elk, 
there’s no archery season for them; moose is 34, but there is an open season in the north-
west, which doesn’t . . . it’s not included in here; and white-tail, you have the option of 
archery or rifle. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - And how many of those were filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - I’m advised they were all filled, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - No, no. You’re not telling me that there were 950 deer shot by how. And 
how many return, how many of those actually resulted in animal kills? 
 
An Hon. Member: - You’re asking harvest? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Harvested. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - We have a relatively low success rate, Mr. Chairman. We have a 
number for antelope; it was only 53. And moose, we don’t have a number for. I think we 
can do some checking on these and get those numbers to you if that’s okay. We’ll find out 
what the total harvest was for each. We can give you it by rifle and by archery, I believe, 
and we’ll sent that to you. I think I realize the point you’re making hon. member, that 



considering the number of tags that are issued, there are not that many animals harvested 
by bow. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - I think that’s exactly the point, Mr. Minister, that the number, that ratio 
on animals harvested to the ratio of number of licences issues is rather low, much lower I 
think than for firearm hunters, and I think that the number of additional kill would be very 
much, is really insignificant. I think you should have a good hard look at extending and 
taking a look at the archery season. And the argument of sustained . . . of being able to 
sustain game doesn’t seem to, I don’t think hold as much, as great an argument here as 
perhaps maybe some other lobby. 
 
I would like to thank you, Mr. Minister, and your officials for the forthright answers that 
you have given me here today. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 18 - Statutory. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 - Statutory. 
 
Items 21 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 33 to 35 inclusive - Statutory. 
 
Items 36 and 37 agreed to. 
 
Item 38 - Statutory. 
 
Item 39 agreed to. 
 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Parks, Recreation and Culture 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 39 

 
Items 1 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 39 agreed to. 
 



(0915) 
 

Forest Renewal and Development Fund 
 

Mr. Chairman: - Any questions? 
 
I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to thank the officials in 
their preparations for the estimates and the unfailing professional service to this 
government. 
 
I also thank the members of the opposition for the civilized manner in which the debate 
was carried out. 
 
Mr. Gerich: - Do I have leave to introduce some guests, Mr. Chairman? 
 
Mr. Chairman: - The member for Redberry has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Gerich: - Mr. Chairman, and members of the Legislative Assembly, I would like to 
introduce a tour group from Louisville, Kentucky, and welcome them to the city of 
Regina. I hope that you have a pleasant and entertaining trip and enjoy Saskatchewan’s 
hospitality. Please help me make our guests welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: - Mr. Chairman, I would like to join with my colleague from Redberry to 
welcome the tour group from Louisville, Kentucky. And I do so on behalf of Her 
Majesty’s royal opposition. I mention Her Majesty here because that’s something that, I 
think, might be unique to you. We extend our hospitality to you and we extend our good 
neighbour policy. We hope that you have a very warm visit here while you’re in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
New Careers Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 59 
 



Mr. Chairman: - Order. Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated to my right is Terry Lyons, acting 
CEO (chief executive officer) of New Careers Corporation; and behind is the manager of 
the New Careers Corporation, Tony Antonini. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could just outline the mandate of New Careers. I think there’s many people in the 
province who don’t understand what New Careers is all about. I wonder just in a couple 
of lines - I don’t really need along dissertation, but if you just could in a few words 
outline what the mandate of this New Careers is all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Yes. The purpose, Mr. Chairman, over the last few years has been to 
take trainees into the program and equip them with skills they need to get off social 
assistance and get into long-term career positions in society. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Minister, I don’t have a lot of questions to ask here, but I just 
want to say that, I guess, the opposition on behalf of the public are concerned and worried 
about the number of job positions being opened in the province of Saskatchewan and the 
government will attempt to blame it all on the poor crops and the drought. But I think at 
any rate, we have to be concerned about the fact that we have the present time in the 
province, 43,000 people who are on the unemployed list in the province and that doesn’t 
include the 50,000 people who have left the province since 1985. 
 
I don’t want to go through the list of towns, average size towns that would be made up to 
make up 50,000 people, but the list would include many towns like Nipawin and 
Assiniboia and Shaunavon and Maple Creek, and the list would be very long. The 50,000 
who have left the province in the last four days are leaving because there are no jobs here. 
 
And I guess what I would like to say is there seems to be in the province at the same time, 
a belief that the government is finding high paid jobs for friends of the Conservative 
Party. And if you look at the list of new careers that have been found for Tory politicians 
- I just want to go through the list - but Paul Schoenhals, a defeated MLA from Saskatoon 
Sutherland now has a new career, not to the tune of a minimum wage job, but to the tune 
of something in excess of $100,000; John Gormley, the defeated PC MP from North 
Battleford-Meadow Lake is now a senior adviser in the department of privatization. 
There’s a new career for someone and it’s not at minimum wage; it’s at a very, very high 
level, with all the perks and privileges that that position would take with it. 
 
We have Louis Domotar, defeated PC MLA from Humboldt, now special projects co-
ordinator for the property management corporation, another new career for a Tory 
politician. We have Keith Parker, who was in the Assembly yesterday, not as an elected 



member, but as a new employee with tourism, now advising the government - very high 
paid. 
 
We had Sid Dutchak, a defeated PC MLA from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, interim 
president of the Sask Housing Corporation back in 1986, appointed after he was defeated 
. . .(inaudible interjection) . . . a special adviser to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Okay, 
I’ll correct that. He was appointed as a special assistant to the Minister of Urban Affairs 
after he was defeated. 
 
We have Myles Morin, the defeated PC MLA from The Battlefords, is now working with 
the government, a very high-paid position. We have Gordon Dirks, who was appointed 
right after the election to do a project for the government. 
 
Now the list is much longer than that - much longer that that. We have Larry Bikbeck and 
Katzman and many others who were defeated who are presently working directly for the 
government. And then we have Gay White Caswell who’s working in a front group for 
the PC party. There’s a great belief that that group is being funded by the PC party as a 
political action committee for the next election. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Minister, that while New Careers may be doing an excellent 
job - I’m not being critical here of New Careers and your people who you have working 
on the project - what I am critical of is the vast amount of money that is going out in 
political appointments that could be used, I think, to hire many thousands of people who 
are presently leaving the province. And I say again that since 1986, 50,000 people more 
have left the province than have come in. And the vast majority of those, over 60 per 
cent, are people under the age of 30. And I just think we have a disaster looming here if 
we don’t get a grip on unemployment and the fact that people are fleeing the province. 
 
And that’s my comment here. I’m not being critical of you or your department, the New 
Careers Corporation, in terms of what you’re trying to do. But the simple fact is is that the 
Premier of this province, I think, is not doing what he could be doing in terms of stopping 
waste and mismanagement, for example, GigaText, Canapharm - places like that where 
we’re dumping millions of dollars. And we should be using that money in places like 
New Careers in order to create jobs and employment that would be meaningful to the 
people of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, obviously the matter under consideration is the New 
Careers Corporation, and I’d love to have the opportunity to lay some numbers and facts 
out. In terms of just the political discussion we’re having, I really don’t think it serves any 
useful purpose here this morning for me to respond with our book of defeated NDP 
MLAs and MPs in Saskatchewan who subsequently obtained employment with the 
former government. These are all well documented and both sides have been through 
these before. For me to bring up the member for Regina Centre who was a defeated 
candidate and then subsequently got a job with the then NDP government, really wouldn’t 
help anything. 



 
So I’m just going to leave all those aside and not read any of them into the record. In 
terms of out-migration from the province, of course it’s a concern. But we also recognize 
that we have been beset with some very severe economic difficulties in the last number o 
years. And we hope that with a little help from Mother Nature, that can be turned around 
too. 
 
As well as the programs that my colleague, the Minister of Social Services and the 
Minister of Economic Development, have been putting in place to try and encourage 
people to stay here, to give them training programs, to give them opportunities, and in our 
case to get them off the minimum wage job and into something that is better paying. 
What we are trying to do is provide a combination of on-the-job training and counselling 
with prospects on the field to be hired into something that is long-term. The 86 per cent of 
our graduates who complete the course successfully are still gainfully employed, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Minister, I want to just ask you a few questions about the 
operation of the New Careers Corporation. Could you tell me the staff that you would 
have employed in your office as minister? Is there anyone on staff who words specifically 
with the New Careers Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - No, Mr. Chairman. In my office staff no one is assigned specifically 
duties with New Careers. Almost all of the inquiries that come into my office - well in 
fact all of the inquiries - are referred to the chief executive officer and the staff over in the 
New Careers offices. We don’t have any executive assistant paid for by the New Careers 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Minister, what about in the New Careers Corporation, can you 
give me a list of the executives and their positions and titles, and the salaries that these 
people are presently receiving, along with any extra perks - automobiles and any extra 
travel allowance that they would be getting at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, if it’s agreeable with the hon. member, I will send 
him the list with the background information on the employees of the New Careers 
Corporation. Salaries are not on it. And I can have the salaries sent over to you separately. 
We didn’t put salary on it. I know verbally what the top two people are making; I prefer 
not to just throw it out verbally. I’ll write it on. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Minister, if you would send those to me on paper that’s fine. I just 
want to get an idea of what the executive offices in the different Crowns and in the 
departments are making. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, a short question on some of the projects you’ve involved in in 
New Careers. Can you give me a list? Have you got the list with you? Can you read it out 
to us the different projects that you’re involved in at the present time? 



 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I’ll send over to the hon. member a copy of the 
summary of work plan for ‘89-90. I believe what’s what you’d be looking for, these 
projects. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Minister, I want to ask about one specific program that you have 
going and to ask you about it, but the Elbow gold course, can you tell me what the 
agreement amounts to, how much money’s involved there, and what the terms of that 
agreement are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, that was a project undertaken on behalf of 
Parks department, which is also my department. The arrangement is a long-term lease to 
the proponents for a percentage of their gross. And I don’t have that because these 
officials don’t deal with that, but I believe it’s 4 per cent of gross is the lease 
arrangement. I’ll have to confirm that. I believe I was asked that earlier in estimates 
actually. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would give to me the name of the 
individual or group that that lease is with and the term of the lease. What I’d like to know 
is the amount of the lease, the name of the individual, and the number of employees that 
would be involved in that project? 
 
An Hon. Member: - . . . year, because it’s Parks . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Well that’s fine. If you’ll get it to me that would make . . . Mr. 
Minister, if you would just confirm that on the record then we can get on with something 
else. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Certainly, Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to confirm that. We’ll get 
those details and I’ll submit them to the hon. member. I believe I gave those figures in 
estimates a few weeks ago. I don’t recall. But I’ll certainly get them definitively and send 
them to him. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 59 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman I would like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too would like to thank the officials 
and members of the opposition for their questions. 
 
(0930) 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 



Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 53 

 
Mr. Chairman: - I’d ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, Mr. Chairman, I’d be pleased to do that. Seated beside me is Otto 
Cutts, the president of the property management corporation; behind Otto is Ian Laidlaw, 
vice-president of operations and services; seated behind myself is Shirley Raab, the vice 
president of finance and administration; and beside Shirley is Trevor Clark, financial 
analyst for the corporation. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, we had some discussions 
previously about the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
participation credit, and my understanding is, at the time when you answered the question 
during question period, was that if a department or agency is overcharged by SPMC, they 
receive a credit back because in fact they were overcharged. Can you tell me whether or 
not the departments and agencies that have been overcharged by SPMC receive that credit 
back on a monthly basis? Do they receive it back annually, or is there a charge against 
them that’s placed by SPMC lowered in the following fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, as I explained it in question period, if you’ll recall, I used the 
analogy of a co-op dividend as something of the similar type of thing as the credit. It’s not 
an overcharge. It isn’t for an overcharge, and they receive it on a monthly basis. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well how is the participation credit determined for each of the 
departments or agencies that are supplied services by SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Again I think the analogy of a co-op dividend is the easiest for us to 
understand. It’s based on the amount of space that they would have and then on our 
profits, based on our profits, and then paid back on a monthly basis to them. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well it would be nice if we could get a little more detail than a co-op 
dividend example. I think I understand how co-op dividends work. You buy a share in 
your local co-op, and the more money you spend there during the year, the more your 
dividend will be at the end of that particular fiscal year. 
 
I would like to know from you, Mr. Minister, in more detail, as to how the participation 
credit actually works. Does that mean if a large department like the Department of Health 
spends $40 million to SPMC, would they get back even more though they used more 
space than say the Department of Finance who, in relationship to the Department of 
Health, pays very little to the property management corporation? 
 



Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think an example I could give you that . . . say we had a department 
of government that had 10 per cent of the space. Okay? And our profit was . . . let’s take a 
figures of $50 million, then their dividend would be $5 million paid in 12 equal 
instalments. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, the participation credit, it has nothing to do then with 
the cost, the actual cost of delivering those services to the department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - The operating costs are split across the whole operation of the 
corporation, and then the participating credit is back on the percentage of the corporation 
that that department would occupy, as I said previously. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I understand the participation credit in ‘87-88 fiscal year amounted to 
some $42.7 million. I’m wondering, can you tell us whether or not that $42.7 million has 
at this point been all disbursed back to the departments and agencies that are served by 
SPMC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, it has. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Can you tell us what the participation credit was for the fiscal year, 1988-
89? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - It’s on page 15 of the recent annual report of the property management 
corporation if you have it with you, ‘88-89, and the figure on page 15 is $54,440,000. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, if the participation credit seems to keep increasing, why do 
you keep increasing the amounts charged to government departments and agencies? What 
happens is that when we look at the budget each year, it unfairly or misleadingly inflates 
the budget of some government department and agencies . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: - Education, Health. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - . . . such as Education and Health were it looks to the public . . . for 
someone who doesn’t give close scrutiny to the budget so that budget has actually gone 
up for the department. And actually the budget hasn’t gone up a whole lot at all. It’s an 
increase in payments from the particular department of Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. So why don’t you just reduce the rents and service charges that 
you make to government departments and agencies? 
 
We see this year that I spoke about, ‘86-87, you have a participation credit of 42.7 
million, and then the following fiscal year, the participation credit was even more. So 
instead of increasing the participation credit each year, why don’t you just reduce the 
amount of rent that’s paid by government departments and agencies? It seems to me to be 
an administrative nightmare for someone to collect all this rent when you know you’re 
collecting too much. And then you have to go through all the problem of making the 



disbursements back to the government departments and agencies. It seems like you make 
two administrative steps which are unnecessary to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - The difference between the years of the participating credit of 1988, 
not all the buildings and everything was on stream, and this year they are. So that 
accounts for the rise between the year years. My officials indicate to me that this should 
somewhat level out now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well if you’re operating at the optimum ideal level within SPMC and Mr. 
Cutts has everything all running smoothly, and you’ve got the exact amount of space, and 
the exact amount of people, and the exact amount of departments, the exact amount of 
agencies, and the exact amount of services provided to them, then I would just have to 
assume there would be a zero participation credit because everything is operating on an 
even keel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well we operate on a market base and certainly that’s the figure that 
comes in, and we turn that back to the department. So it should stabilize somewhere in 
that area now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I don’t know what would stabilize there at all. I don’t know why you need 
that money and then turn it back to the government departments and agencies. It doesn’t 
make a whole lot of sense. 
 
What I ask you, Mr. Minister, is if everything was operating smoothly in an ideal 
situation, which I know may never happen, but governments should strive for that, 
especially someone like property management corporation who we don’t have a lot of 
access to information . . . Likely the greatest accessed information we have about your 
department, sir, is the estimates process we’re going through right now, and it’s an 
accountability process. And you understand that. 
 
So I’m asking, if everything was operating ideally, is what you’re striving for I’m sure, 
would there be participation credit? I would think there should not be a participation 
credit because you’re not in the business of making profit. If you’re in the business of 
making profit, you’ll likely be sold off in the near future because you privatize everything 
else that makes money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think your question illustrates the difference in philosophy and 
opinion. Certainly we are operating for a profit. We’re not a line department of the 
government. And not like you used to have it under the NDP where is was supply and 
service and you’d try and hide things and so on. We operate; we operate for a profit, but 
in this case we turn some of it back as a dividend as I explained earlier .So we make no 
apology for having a profit in this Crown corporation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - You say where we hid things in supply and service. You’ve got to be 
joking. You know, in the last year that the department of supply and service were reported 



in the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan is the ‘86-87 fiscal year, there 
was a whole section on department of supply and service in the Public Accounts. There 
were 21 pages of detailed expenditure information, plus a 30-page annual report that 
listed in greater detail the projects undertaken by the department. 
 
Now in ‘86-87 the SPMC annual report, there’s 15 pages, only six of which give a 
summary of financial information. So don’t you use your political rhetoric saying that we 
hid information in supply and service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(0945) 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I don’t question the integrity of your officials in Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation, but I tell you, sir, there was much greater public accountability 
in the department of supply and service than there ever has been under the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. There’s no question about that. 
 
Now if you’re operating for a profit, why do you give this money back to your customers? 
It makes no sense to give $42 million back to government departments and agencies. If 
you’re in the business to make a profit, why didn’t you keep that money and reduce the 
bloody deficit of your government which you now pay $384 million a year on. Why do 
you refund it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - No. I think what you fail to explain is that under the property 
management corporation as it exists now - let me give you an example. If you wanted to 
know what the rent was that the Department of Health paid for its buildings, we could tell 
you that. Under supply and service, as it was previously, you had no idea, no idea at all 
what the rent was of any government department; there was no way of ascertaining that. 
But now we do have that. And we charge those rates, at the business rate; we make a 
profit and we pay a dividend. 
 
As I say, the best example is the co-op. A co-op operates for a profit. Any co-op I belong 
to operates for a profit. I happen to be a member; I get a patronage dividend. That’s the 
best example I can give you as the way the departments of government work with the 
property management corporation. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well I don’t know why you’d charge rent on something you already own 
in many cases. The other examples that distress us somewhat are the ways in which you 
conduct your leases to properties that you don’t own. When you commit yourselves to 
long-term leases for facilities which didn’t cost the departments any more, it might be 
good business practice for property management corporation, but it’s poor business 
practice for government departments because they end up spending millions of dollars 
which used to go into programs that were administered and delivered by those particular 
departments and agencies. 



 
I’d like to go to the profitability of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, 
Mr. Minister. In ‘87-88, besides the $42.7 million participation credit, which has all been 
paid back to departments and agencies, there were an additional $22.192 million in 
retained earnings. What do you do with the retained earnings, Mr. Minister? If it’s 
invested, at what rate is it invested and where is it invested? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well certainly as you pointed out before, and I think maybe a little 
misleading saying that there was money that could have been used for programs, there 
was rent paid before, but as I say, under the old system, you never knew what it was. I 
mean, if you’re using these buildings and occupying the space, you’re obviously paying 
some rent. Now we have it so that we can put our finger on it and say how much it is, and 
the public can know. 
 
If you go down the statement a little further - and I don’t know if you have this with you, 
but you mentioned the retained earnings of 22 million - going down the 1989 statement, 
you’ll see a dividend paid to the province of Saskatchewan of 20 million. That that leaves 
2.821 million left as retained earnings. So 20 million was paid back to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well is it invested, the remaining amount? There’s still retained earnings 
there, regardless what you paid back to the government. You admit there’s still retained 
earnings in the property management. When do you do with the retained earnings? Is it 
invested? And if it is invested, where is it invested and what rate of return are you getting 
on the investment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - It’s invested, they tell me, in inventory and equipment and things of 
that nature - the 2.8. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - You don’t invest like that. If you’re in the business of making profit in the 
property management corporation, you try and get an optimum return on your retained 
earnings, the money that you’ve got to deal with, that you know you’ve got. You don’t 
invest it in paper, as you’re trying to indicate, Mr. Minister. So is that your practice? Why 
don’t you invest the money to get a rate of return? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think if you understand that retained earnings is not necessarily cash, 
it can be used for the ongoing operation of any business, and that’s the case here. And I 
turn you to page 14 of the annual report, ‘88-89, and if you wanted to know the cash that 
we have on hand, it’s shown on page 14 under the heading of cash, of $809,000. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, in other businesses as well, if you pride yourself in operating as a 
business and in making profit, inventory shows up as a separate item on the balance sheet. 
So I don’t know how you can tell us that your retained earnings all went into investment 
in inventory. 
 



Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think you misinterpreted what I said when you thought that 
everything was an inventory. If you look on page 16 of the report, and I see you have it 
now, and you just go down that column for 1989, the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation’s statement of cash flow, and that’s how we use the cash that 
we have. If you can see, there’s operating activities, there’s the dividend I talked about 
previously, there’s investing activities, there’s financial activities, there’s an increase or 
decrease of cash over last year, and the cash at the end of the year of $809,000 that I told 
you earlier. So really, as how that money is used, is explained in that column there. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well maybe it does explain it, but it doesn’t explain it adequately, and you 
certainly don’t explain it adequately, sir. 
 
On page 12 you have the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation’s statement of 
financial position. Under the assets, there’s an “other” listed, and says, “note 5.” Well if 
you go to note 5, note 5 includes inventories in note 5 - at the bottom of the page - 
inventories, $5,235,000. Sir, are you listening? If you go back to this statement of 
financial position, and you have retained earnings of $22 million.. 
 
So you can’t say that the retained earnings are all invested in inventory. That’s just 
absolutely not the facts. I ask you again, sir: of the retained earnings that you have, what’s 
happened to them? You said they’re invested in inventory. I want to give you an 
opportunity to correct the statement that you made in this legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well I think the problem is you just don’t understand the operation of 
a corporation of this size or magnitude. Certainly . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . Well the 
member from Regina Centre doesn’t understand an . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. I would ask the member from Regina Centre to allow the 
minister to respond to the questions, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’ve seen over the years that the 
member from Regina Centre doesn’t understand an awful lot of things in this province. 
 
Certainly I’ll take you back through this again, and you see that there were retained 
earnings of $22 million that there was a $20 million dividend paid to the government, 
which left retained earnings of $2,821 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: - What page are you on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I’m on page 15. And I’ve told you some of that is in inventory and in 
various other things, as is the case in equipment in any corporation of this size. And then I 
told you to look on the next page and you’d see all the disbursements and how the cash 
flow took place, ending up with the cash on hand - which you asked me about the cash - 
of $809,000. 
 



Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, I’m on a different year, I’m sorry. You have a different 
annual report than I do. What year annual report have you got? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - The report that I have is the annual report of ‘88-89. 
 
An Hon. Member: - Are you two years late . . . 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well the member from Regina South says, two years late. That’s like your 
public accounting. If you did adequate public accounting, we wouldn’t be into this 
argument we’re in here today. 
 
An Hon. Member: - Don’t get so defensive. Use the new stuff when you ask questions. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well new stuff, Mr. Minister, your Public Accounts are still two years old. 
 
Mr. Minister, what do you plan on doing with the retained earnings in the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation? What’s your intention? Are you going to invest in 
inventories until you’ve bought up all the paper in the world and own every piece of real 
estate in Saskatchewan, to have a complete monopoly in the province? Or do you plan at 
some point in investing it in treasury bills or investing in GigaText scams? What do you 
plan on doing with the retained earnings of the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well I think if you look at the total figures and realize that the 
property management corporation is about a billion dollar corporation, a billion dollar 
corporation, it would seem quite logical that 2 million, little over 2 million of retained 
earnings could easily be used in ongoing operation. By that I mean some inventory, I 
mean some equipment, I mean some supplies, purchases, various things. I think it would 
be quite reasonable, and I think to you too, Mr. Member, that of a billion dollar 
corporation, $2 million of retained earnings to be used in operation would be reasonable 
and logical. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - That’s not what I asked you. What do you plan on doing in the future as 
you gain this great profitability in property management corporation by drawing more 
money from government departments and agencies? What do you plan on doing with the 
retained earnings? Are you building a slush fund for PC re-election, 1991, when you run 
to the end of your mandate? Or do you plan on investing it to try and get optimum return 
on investment rates? Do you plan on buying more real estate? Do you plan on buying 
paper, because you know the price of paper is going down, and you own the pulp mill in 
Saskatoon now, or you want to help Weyerhaeuser with it? What do you plan on doing in 
the future with your retained earnings? 
 
(1000) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think this speaks for itself. It shows right here in the annual report - 
anyone in the province can have access to this - that in the last year we paid a dividend of 



$20 million to the Government of Saskatchewan. And I said earlier, we operate on a 
profit, and we have every intention to do that. And as we attain profits and bring in 
profits, we will pay them to the Government of Saskatchewan as we have in the past. And 
it will all be there, and that’s not type of a slush fund or anything. 
 
That’s right there, black and white, showing to the people of Saskatchewan how the use 
of their property, their property, as is the case with the federal government, as in the case 
with the B.C. government, is used and how the benefits from this accrue in a dividend to 
departments and as payment to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, obviously, you don’t want to tell us what you’re going 
to do in the future with retained earnings. I just asked you what investment vehicles you 
would be using with the retained earnings of the property management corporation, and 
you either don’t know or won’t tell us, one or the other. So if you won’t give us that 
information, or can’t give us that information, I’d ask you something else that deals with 
your accountability. You stated in this House today that you’re far more accountable than 
the department of supply and service used to be in their dealings with public funds. I ask 
you today, will you give us a list of the inventories, items list of the inventories that you 
purchased with the retained earnings of the property management corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well once again I fail to see your line of reasoning. I’ve explained to 
you from the last year’s operation that there was $22 million, and $20 million went to the 
government. And I’ve explained to you that in future years, profits will go back to the 
government. There are some retained earnings, retained earnings of roughly $2 million in 
a billion dollars corporation. Those are being used for operating, for equipment, for some 
that may go into inventory, various operational things. 
 
Now I can get you a list. I can’t provide it for you today, and I think you will realize and 
understand that. But I can give you a list of where that $2 million could be spent in real 
estate and in various equipment and so on. I really don’t know, and I’m asking you to 
reconsider, because I really don’t know if that’s best serving the interests of the time in 
this legislature and the time of the department to put that list together. I’ll do it for you, 
but I ask you to reconsider and think this through. 
 
I mean, what is the benefit by listing a whole bunch of equipment, desks, you know, 
there’s a hundred and one things. Now if you want that, we’ll provide it for you. But 
again I ask you to give that serious thought because I think that is a rather foolish 
question. When you look at a billion dollar asset to say . . . and I told you it’s in 
inventory, it’s in operating, and it’s in supplies. Now if you want that, fine. But again I 
ask you to just think that through a bit. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I’ll consider withdrawing the request. I’ll consider it and we’ll deal with 
that before we’re done the estimates. But the point I make to you, sir, is that when the 
department of supply and service was around, if they spent $2 million and you were in 
opposition sitting in the Public Account Committee, you’d want to know where every 



cent of that $2 million was spent, and you’d get it, and the officials that would be there 
could tell you where the $2 million was spent. They could tell you right in public 
accounts. But you see, sir, you and your officials don’t appear before public accounts to 
that extent to give that information. I’m sorry. I withdraw that - you do appear, and you 
have been in public accounts. But you don’t give the detail of information that supply and 
service used to give. 
 
Mr. Minister, there is one list I’d like to get from you that I’m sure you’d be happy to 
provide as well. Would you give us the list of properties that you own and lease, and 
which department you lease them to, and what the amount is that you charge for each of 
those properties? You surely have that list. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - We can provide you with a list of each department and the buildings. 
We don’t give out the lease figures because, as you know, we’re in competition with the 
private sector, and we certainly don’t want to put out our figures out there so that we’re 
not in a competitive position, or shall I say, playing poker with your card up on the table - 
we don’t intend to do that. That’s all. 
 
But certainly we will provide you with a list of all the buildings and which department 
has the various buildings and the aggregate of how much each department pays in total. 
We’ll give those to you now. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Will you also give me a list, Mr. Minister, of the departments which 
received a participation credit and the amount of the participation credit they received? 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m taking about if we could go to the ‘87-88 fiscal year, for both those 
years, if you could give us the amount of participation credit that was paid to each 
government department and agency, if you could itemize it please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Just so we’re clear on that, you want ‘87-88 and ‘88-89? 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - The list that I mentioned that I’d send over to you, I only have one 
copy, so I’ll get it copies and send you a copy of that. And the latest request, I think we’ll 
probably be on again this afternoon, and we will work over the noon hour and see if we 
can provide it for you if you want it that quickly, or if a little more leeway is fine, that 
would be . . . You’ll get the list. Now if you want it this afternoon, I’ll have to have them 
work right through their lunch hour on it, but if you say at a little later date is fine, and 
when I say later date, that’s before the House closes for sure. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well I appreciate getting those lists, the sooner the better. I certainly 
wouldn’t want to take food out of someone’s mouth over the lunch hour to get the 
detailed breakdown, but it would very nice if we could have it when we resume estimates 
this afternoon if there’s somebody in the department. 



 
Mr. Minister, I have the ‘88-89 annual report, so we’re both talking about the same 
annual report now. And you mentioned that there was a dividend paid to the Government 
of Saskatchewan for $20 million. Is that correct, sir? I see you answer in the affirmative. 
 
Well on page 18 of the same annual report under item 6, says promissory notes. And I’ll 
quote you from that: 
 
The Corporation has a non-interest bearing promissory note of $20,000,000 (1988 - nil) 
from the province of Saskatchewan which is due on March 31, 1990. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, what that tells me is that you gave a dividend to the Saskatchewan 
government, what you call a dividend, and we see here in your own annual report that by 
March 31, 1990, they have to pay you back that $20 million. Am I not interpreting this 
correct, Mr. Minister? Could you give me an explanation of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well I’m informed, you know, that it’s not unusual for the province to 
loan money to corporations, and that we have an interest-free loan for one year of $20 
million that will be paid back at the end of each year. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, that’s misleading. That is absolutely misleading. You stood 
in this House this morning and said oh, that we didn’t have all these retained earnings 
because we gave a dividend of $20 million to the province of Saskatchewan. But then 
when I get the annual report and look at it, I find that it’s just a juggling of figures 
because you got back a $20 million loan from the province of Saskatchewan. So there 
was not $20 million dividend in reality. It might have been a paper transaction, but 
regardless, you maintained the $20 million in property management corporation. 
 
So don’t say that you only used 2 million to buy up inventories. You had at your disposal 
$22 million. What did you do with that $22 million? I would have a hard time believing 
you spent $22 million in inventory - you might have spent 2 million, but I’d have a very 
hard time, Mr. Minister, believing you spent 22 million on inventories. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well we paid a dividend of $20 million to the Crown, and we have an 
interest-free loan of $20 million that we use in part of our hundred million dollar 
expenditures. Payments for schools and hospitals, capital construction around the 
province - they’re all financed through the property management corporation, and that’s 
where that $20 million would be spent. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well it’s not a good business practice if you’re there to make profit, and 
it’s not good in terms of deceiving the public. You gave a $20 million dividend and you 
got back a $20 million loan. I think that’s misleading to people, and I don’t care how you 
try and explain that. You cooked up an annual report that says that you did so well you 
give it a $20 million dividend to the government, but then in return, you got an interest-
free loan back from the government for $20 million. That’s not sound business practice. 



That’s deceitful. That misleads and misrepresents the position of the property 
management corporation, because likely nothing happened. Did you send a cheque over, 
Mr. Minister, to the Government of Saskatchewan? Can you show us, Mr. Minister, 
today, the cancelled cheque from property management corporation to the Government of 
Saskatchewan for $20 million? Will you show us the cancelled cheque? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, we can provide you with the cancelled cheque. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - And so then you have another cheque. Can you give us a copy of the 
deposit slip for the $20 million you got from the provincial government? 
 
(1015) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, we could. You mean the deposit slip in our account. I told you 
we have the cancelled cheque for what we paid the government. You’re not wanting to 
see their deposit slips. You want to see the deposit slip that we would have for the $20 
million loan. Is that correct? 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I want to see . . . like, I don’t understand the transaction that took place 
there when you can stand up and tell us that you gave a $20 million dividend to the 
province, but the province turns around and gives you an interest free loan for the same 
amount of money for $20 million. 
 
So what I want to see is I want to see the cancelled cheque that you issued as the 
dividend, and I want to see the deposit slip that you received the 20 million back from the 
government. I find it just an amazing transaction. Why wouldn’t you just keep your $20 
million, the government keep their $20 million and save the extra paperwork because 
you’d be in the same position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Certainly we have more than the $20 million of borrowing. If you’d 
look on page 14 - I’ll refer you to that - and you’ll see liabilities and equity, promissory 
notes, long-term debt, capital lease obligation, and accounts payable. You’ll see that with 
promissory notes and long-term debt, we have a considerable amount of money 
borrowed, and that’s all done through the Department of Finance. 
 
So I guess the simple explanation is - and let’s look at one’s own business - if say you had 
a debt and it was for, in our terms, maybe $2,000 or something, and you paid that off to 
your bank, and then for some reason you decided that you needed another $2,000 for an 
acquisition in your business and you look out a loan that day, that’s the kind of 
transaction that took place. I mean, you paid one thing and you’ve taken out another loan. 
 
We paid a dividend to the government. We got another loan of the same amount from the 
government, non-interest bearing loan, for, as I say, part of this bigger figures of $400 -
and-some million, and that money is used for the construction of hospitals, schools, 



nursing homes, the various capital things, buildings we may build for the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well I can understand it in some situations. I have an insurance agency, 
and suppose at the end of the month, I owe Saskatchewan Mutual $2,000 in premiums, 
and Saskatchewan Mutual owes the company $2,000 in commissions that have carried 
over from different period of time. They wouldn’t send me a cheque and I send them back 
a cheque. It would be a paper transaction. So I don’t understand why you would go 
through the extra work in your streamlined corporation of property management to give 
$20 million to the government and then get the $20 million back from them, other than to 
look good because we’re doing a good job, and I’m a great general manager, so we’re 
going to give the province $20 million this year. In fact, you’d be better off just doing the 
paper transaction. 
 
Actually, Mr. Minister, I was quite surprised to find that there was a cancelled cheque and 
a deposit slip equalling the same amount. I expected a different answer from you, but I 
respect the answer you gave, and I respect the fact that you’re going to give us the 
cancelled cheque and the deposit slip. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned that you would give us a list of the participation credits 
broken down by department over the two fiscal years. And I tried to get out of you earlier 
what the formula was. There must be some kind of formula as to how you determine that. 
I’m wondering if you wouldn’t endeavour to provide us with the formula as to how you 
determine exactly what amount of participation credit a department or agency would 
receive from property management corporation. Do you think you could provide that to 
us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - We’ll provide you with a general statement of how we come to those 
figures, yes. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to leave the participation credit and 
the accountability aspect right now. And I’m wondering if you could tell us today in this 
House, at this time, whether or not you could tell us how many staff you have employed 
with the security section of property management. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - We don’t have an exact number here for you, but looking at all the 
commissionaires and all the properties that we have and so on, probably around a hundred 
in security of buildings. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, I don’t want to know just the ones that are in security of 
buildings. I’m not sure what you mean by that, whether they’re secured because they’re 
inside of the building, or they’re responsible for the security of the building itself. But I 
don’t want to just know those that are in security of buildings. I want to know what the 
total staff component is of the security section of property management corporation. 
 



Hon. Mr. Taylor: - It fluctuates, as you can understand, you know. Commissionaires 
come on and change, and so on, but roughly, the total number of people involved in that 
security would be around a hundred, very close to a hundred. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well some of those must be temporary. I have here a list that happened to 
come to me entitled, Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, Telephone and 
Address Directory, and it gives the computerized codings for each of the different 
divisions in property management. And I notice the security service is coded as SS, and 
it’s in the CA division which would be . . . oh that would be minister’s office, no, sorry, 
corporate affairs. I don’t find anywhere close to 100 people in here coded as SS. 
 
So those that are coded as SS in this directory, Mr. Minister, specifically assigned to the 
SS, the security services, how many people are on the permanent staff? I’m not talking 
about commissionaires and people you’d hire on a temporary or part-time basis; I want to 
know the permanent staff, the complement of the property management corporation’s 
security service division. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - We can get you the information on the permanent ones. Again, why 
you would see the discrepancy between the phone book or the list that you have may have 
there and the figure I gave you is that I think you realize that not all these people would 
be in the directory. They don’t all have a phone. Certainly there are a number of them that 
are permanent, permanent security, and there are some that are temporary. I can’t give 
you that figure right now. We can provide it for you. But I said the total amount is around 
100 people, but some of those are temporary and some come and go, and the figure 
changes from time to time. 
 
But certainly we can give you the total of permanent commissionaires and permanent 
people in security and so on. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Could you provide us with the names and salary levels of each person in 
the security services? 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I might leave of the committee members 
to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Maxwell: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 
Minister, are two young people I’d like to introduce to you. But before I do that, I’d like 
to give you a brief explanation of why they’re here today. 
 



In the 1987 Remembrance Day service in the village of Enniskillen in Northern Ireland, a 
bomb exploded, killing a number of residents. Relatives of the victims publicly forgave 
the perpetrators of the crime. Canada’s High Commissioner was in Belfast the day after 
the bomb exploded, and the plan to bring young people from Enniskillen to Canada 
originated. 
 
And today I am pleased to introduce to you, Michelle MacEntee, aged 16 from Newton 
Butler, Fermanagh; and Peter Ferguson from Churchill, Enniskillen, Fermanagh. 
Welcome to the Assembly, Enjoy your visit to Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure -Vote 53 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - In answer to your question, as you know, the custom is usually to give 
a bulk figures for the top executives, and some of these people in the securities would be 
vice-presidents of the corporation. And I don’t think it is the practice to give out the exact 
salary of corporate officials. I would give you a bulk figure of those people. If you wanted 
to know the total salary for all of the people in the unit, I would give you that. But I don’t 
think you’re asking me to give the vice-presidents’ salaries in this forum. I don’t imagine 
that’s what your asking. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I want to know the salary levels and their qualifications, if possible. The 
salary levels, qualifications of those people that work in the security service of property 
management corporation. Can you provide that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - In keeping with that, I’ll certainly give you the qualifications of the top 
people, but I would keep the age-old tradition of bulking the top executives together. But 
I would provide you that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Can you also provide us with your . . . You just said you won’t give it for 
the top executives, but I’d like you to give us a bulk figures, at least, and what their 
benefits packages are, whether or net they get a vehicle, whether or not they are provided 
with special travel. I’d like to know what’s happening because certainly if you’re talking 
about accountability, under the supply and service, you knew everyone’s salary and what 
they were making, and you’d find out their qualifications for the job which they hold. 
And if you want to be as accountable, or you said you’re more accountable than supply 
and service, I’m wondering if you could provide us with that information as well after 
lunch, sir. 



 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I don’t know if I can have all that for you after lunch, but I will 
provide you in accordance with what we’ve done in past tradition here in the Assembly, 
the bulk figure for the salaries. I’ll certainly give you . . . and I imagine you’re just 
concerned about the top echelons, their qualifications, and I will provide you with that. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Do you have it here with you now? Can you provide it with us now? 
 
What’s the overall budget of the security unit? 
 
(1030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - We anticipate a budget for ‘89-90 for the securities division, and that’s 
the total of it as I was talking to you previously, is 1.9 million - 1.9. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Can you provide us with the list of the equipment, the specialized 
equipment that was purchased by the security services division of property management? 
I’m not talking about the desks and pens and pencils. I want to now any specialized 
equipment that they would use in the performance of their duties. Can you provide us 
with a list of that type of equipment, and who the supplier was, and what the purchased 
amount was? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I think, Mr. Minister, what you’re asking would be better provided by 
myself to the Leader of the Opposition or to you on an individual basis, rather than in the 
forum that we’re in right now. If you can understand, some of this is used for the 
protection of people, the members and so on. And I think I’m not wanting to withhold 
anything from you - I think you understand that - but this type of answer would be better 
provided on a confidential basis, you and I in my office, or something of that nature. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, this bring up an interesting point which we talked 
about in this Legislative Assembly during question period. And you admit to me there’s 
sensitivity of information, such as this looking at purchases and equipment that they 
would have . . . that other government departments wouldn’t necessarily have. 
 
And the point that I brought up to you that time, when CSIS (Canadian Security 
Intelligence Service) was set up in Ottawa there was an all-party parliamentary group 
established to oversee CSIS so they would not run astray and build their own little 
kingdom out there, and no one knew what they were doing. In fact I think at the current 
time there’s something like tow Liberals, two Conservatives, and one New Democrat, a 
committee of five that oversees the operations of CSIS because of sensitive information 
like that that you don’t want to get out in some political harangue that might happen in 
the legislature outside of the legislature. 
 



So I put this question to you: have you given any reflection on the request that I made of 
you to set up a committee that would deal with sensitive information and oversee the 
activities of the Saskatchewan security service? 
 
The Minister of Justice said that day outside the House that day that I questioned you that 
he would consider it. I’m asking you now, sir, since that time, have you considered it? 
Have you talked to the Minister of Justice, and can you give us some assurance in the 
legislative today that you will set up an all-party legislative committee to deal with the 
confidentiality of the security service and the overseeing of their operations so that we 
make sure that they’re accountable and working in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 
citizens? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - No, I’m not looking at setting up that type of a committee. I will do 
the same as I offered last year in estimates and each year since I’ve been the minister in 
charge of the property management; they certainly you or the member from Riversdale, or 
any member of your caucus who wants to come and talk to me personally about these 
issues in the confines of my office in a private conversation, I’m most willing to do that 
with you. I’ve offered that each year. It’s never been taken up by a member, but the offer 
stands goods, and I think we can certainly share information. That way I don’t see the 
necessity of the committee. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, there is a great necessity for a committee. There’s a 
great necessity for a committee, because what you’ve got here is you’ve got your own 
private police force, and you’re asking people to take your word. You may be an 
honourable individual. I believe you’re an honourable individual, but who says that 
you’re going to be in that office for ever. What about some other government in the 
future? Would you settle for taking the word of the cabinet minister as opposed to sitting 
on a committee? It’s not you that we’re concerned about. You can be kicked out of office. 
What we’re concerned about is a police force that’s set aside from all other police forces, 
that’s answerable to Mr. Cutts and yourself. 
 
And so there is a great need for a legislative committee, sir. If there was a legislative 
committee, I wouldn’t be asking you for the equipment that’s been purchased, the 
equipment list and the suppliers, and you would be saying, well come to my office and 
we’ll have coffee and I’ll tell you what it is, because it’s confidential. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I can’t believe that the Minister of Justice would say that he would 
consider setting up such a legislative committee of senior members of the legislature, and 
you say no, you won’t consider, you don’t see any need for it. Well I’d ask you this 
question, sir, concerning the security service: how many members from the security 
service of property management corporation have assisted in or conducted criminal 
investigations in the province of Saskatchewan since the security service was set up? 
How many criminal investigations have they either conducted themselves or participated 
in, sir? 
 



Hon. Mr. Taylor: - No, we don’t do criminal investigations. If there’s something that 
would pertain to that, it’s turned over to the RCMP immediately. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, further to your comment that 
you don’t do criminal investigations, let me refer you to a newspaper clipping from the 
Prince Albert Daily Herald dated August 19, ’89, in which the northern adviser to the 
Premier of this province indicated that he asked the police force in our community to . . . 
that he was withdrawing the charges and that it would be handled by the security division 
of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, this was an alleged break-in in the office of the Premier. The police force 
were asked to withdraw by the northern adviser to this Premier and brought in your 
security division. It’s a break-in, sir; it’s a criminal act, and you’re securities division is 
investigating. Would you care to comment on that investigation and what the results of 
that investigation might be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - It was turned over to the RCM Police and there was no criminal 
content to it; so the investigation was dropped. Now our people are looking at it from a 
physical security aspect within the building. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well, Mr. Minister, let me again refer you to this clipping, and that 
certainly is not the words of the northern adviser to the Premier of this province. There 
was an alleged break-in, and I should quote from this for you. He said: 
 
Dobrowolsky filed a complaint with the city police (it wasn’t with the RCMP) August 2, 
after he discovered a file cabinet in the Central Avenue office had been broken into. He 
later requested the complaint be dropped, and it has been handled by the security division 
of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation since that time. 
 
Would you care to comment further on that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well, as I said before, the police were brought in - and you’re correct; 
it was the city police, I guess, in Prince Albert that were brought in - and there was no 
indication of any criminal break-in and that was dropped, and our fellows are just looking 
at the security of the office, and so they’re not really investigating any type of a criminal 
act at all. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Minister, don’t try and twist this around. And I’m going to quote 
again to you from the words of the northern adviser to the Premier. He said, and I quote: 
 
He later requested the complaint be dropped and it has been handled by the security 
division of the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation . . . 
 
Mr. Minister, what this gentleman, Mr. Dobrowolsky, from the Premier’s office in Prince 
Albert says, is that he asked the police to drop their investigation and that he would bring 



in security officials from the property management corporation. Can you explain that? 
What are they investigating? Indicated that there was a locked filing cabinet broken into - 
clearly a criminal act. He indicated that there were some - what were his words here, I 
guess - some confidential documents that may be missing. If that’s not a criminal act, 
then I don’t know what is. 
 
But sit, I would like to know why the security division of the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation would be investigating and the police were asked to withdraw - 
the city police in Prince Albert were asked to withdraw. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - No, all our fellows would be doing there in that investigation would be 
looking at, as I say, the internal operation and to see what types of security should be put 
in place, that there wouldn’t be any filing cabinet broke open or anything of this nature. 
So there’s no criminal investigation on that part. They’re just looking at a way in which 
any type of situation in the future could be avoided. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Minister, was the filing cabinet broken into or was it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Yes, I understand that the filing cabinet was broke in. Someone broke 
into the filing cabinet. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Well then, sir, would it not be that if the filing cabinet was broken 
into, there was forcible entry that . . . was there forcible entry? Can you answer that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Forcible entry into what? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Into the filing cabinet, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - It seems to be that if it was broken open, there would be forcible entry. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - If there’s forcible entry, would it not be a criminal act, sir. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Not necessarily. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Was there a forcible entry into the office, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - No, there was no evidence of that. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Then, Mr. Minister, perhaps what we have here is an inside job. 
Maybe you’d better scrutinize some of your staff up there. Or could it be that maybe one 
of the staff accidentally knocked a hammer off a filing cabinet and broke the lock off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Do you have a question? 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, I didn’t hear your comment. 



 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I’m asking you if you have a question. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - My question is: would you be willing to have the security service 
investigate the integrity of the staff in the Premier’s office in Prince Albert, if it looks like 
an inside job? You might want to include the Minister of Finance who was involved in a 
little trickery down here at about the same time, trying to get some headlines that were 
totally phoney. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well as I said five minutes ago, the security unit are looking at the 
operation of the office and to try and avoid anything like that in the future. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: - Mr. Minister, are they investigating then a criminal act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I’ve said that no, they’re not. 
 
(1045) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister just one quick question on 
these break-ins that everyone has been talking about and have been reported in the paper 
that the Minister of Finance has been so concerned about, which there isn’t a shred of 
evidence that any break-in occurred. 
 
I want to refer you back to the last election in 1986. In the period leading to that election 
there was a Van Johnson who running the campaign for the individual running against 
Allan Blakeney in Elphinstone, and there was a similar big break-in during the campaign. 
And the TV camera went out there and they filmed the break-in, and in the end there was 
no break-in at all. What had happened is that in order to get press for the campaign, they 
arranged a little inside job there as well. 
 
I wonder when you people on that side are going to get tired of using the justice system of 
this province and the press. Every time there’s an issue you want to side-track, you cause 
a break-in, and this is what has happened in this case. You know it and so do the people 
of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Well, you can say it outside the House or not, but the simply fact is, it 
was in the newspaper. All these break-ins . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: - Go say it anywhere. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Well we will say it anywhere. But the simple fact is that the credibility 
of your department is at stake here. This is three or four breaks-ins that you’ve announced 
to the press and got press on when there was no break-in, and I think the people of the 



province really wonder about a Premier of a province who would allow this kind of 
jiggery-pokery with the press and with statements about break-ins in order to cover up 
political tracks. 
 
What you do every time you get caught with your finger in the cookie jar is you arrange 
some sort of a crime. And the Minister of Finance is involved in these little escapades of 
talking to the press about them. Well there’s a break-in; there’s documents mission. And 
this happens in the by-election . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. I ask the member to apologize. He made an allegation 
against the Minister of Finance and I’d ask him to apologize. That’s not parliamentary, 
and I would ask him to apologize for that remark. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Chairman, I want to just repeat what I said so that you can make a 
ruling on it. What is said is the Minister of Finance is involved in speaking to the press 
about the break-ins. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. Your last statement was okay, but that’s not what you said 
the first time, and I will certain check it in Hansard. 
 
An Hon. Member: - Yes it is. It is. No, I’ll check Hansard, but that is what I said. 
 
Mr. Chairman: - No, you did not. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: - Mr. Chairman, if I said something different, I apologize for it. What I 
believe I said and what I repeat, is that the Minister of Finance has spoken to the press 
about these break-ins which are phoney. And I think the Minister of Finance should be 
very careful when go goes to the press talking about break-ins that have not occurred 
when he knows full well that it’s simply a matter of detracting from the issue at hand. 
That’s the only point I want to make. 
 
This is the third or fourth time we’ve had to deal with those phoney break-ins in this 
Assembly, and I think the people of the province are tires of it, and I wish the minister, if 
he’s serious about it, would go through the investigation and tell us what the results are. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, I submit to you that the reason that the northern 
adviser to the Premier called off the investigation is because you were afraid that it would 
be exposed that there was no break and entry into the building because there was no sign 
of forcible entry into the location of the office, and therefore it was something that was 
cooked up. And so before the city police in Prince Albert could make a report that was 
embarrassing to your government, the northern adviser to the Premiers calls of the 
criminal investigation, because break and entry is a Criminal Code offence, whether it’s 
the filing cabinet or whether it’s into the building, and turned it over to the security 
service to do the investigation to save your government embarrassment. Is that not in fact 
what happened, Mr. Minister, in this particular case? 



 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well, Mr. Chairman, I think in plain and simple terms, anyone would 
realize that if you came into an office and there was a filing cabinet that had been opened, 
you would probably phone the police. Most people would do that, would phone the city 
policy. You phone the city police and you find no evidence of any entry, forcible into the 
building. You probably say, well look, there is no criminal aspect from outside; therefore 
we don’t have to have an investigation. Well, there’s no . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order. Allow the minister to make his comments without interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - So therefore the next logical thing is to ask the security group within 
the government to see if there are ways that we can ensure that filing cabinets would not 
be tampered in any way, shape, or form, and that’s what’s taking place. I see no problem 
with it. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Has your security service determined what person or persons in fact broke 
into the filing cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I’m informed that it was an employee that didn’t have a key, and 
opened up the filing cabinet when the manager was away, and that’s simply what 
happened. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - I would think any employee that broke into a filing cabinet and then left 
would advise their superior they had to do this, because they would know, as you 
described, when the key was put in the door and the door was opened, the filing cabinet 
was broken into, whoever entered the building would think, well there’s been a break and 
entry. So wouldn’t it be logical to assume that the employee would have informed a 
superior? And if that superior was informed, why were the city police call in; and if a 
superior wasn’t informed, what disciplinary action has been taken against the employee 
who broke into the filing cabinet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Again, you know, I think you’re trying to make a mountain out of a 
molehill here. So a person comes in and didn’t have his key, so he pries open the filing 
cabinet to get whatever he wanted to see there, and he didn’t tell the supervisor. The 
supervisor or the boss comes in, hasn’t been informed of this, sees an open filing cabinet, 
informs the police. I think that’s what you’d probably do, or any reasonable person would 
He finds there’s been no forcible entry from outside, says to the police, well look at, 
there’s no need for an investigation here, and then says to the security division of the 
property management, which he should do, saying look at, this has happened, we want 
you to make sure that the filing cabinets can be secured in such a way that is cannot 
happen in the future. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well, Mr. Minister, I think you’re flying by the seat of your pants because 
the story gets more interesting as you go on trying to answer for the break-in. Can you tell 
us, Mr. Minister, who was the employee who broke in to the filing cabinet, and who was 



the employee who discovered the supposed break and entry that turns out not to be a 
break and entry after all? Can you tell us who those two employees were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - You have already put forth the name of the individual that found it. It 
was Mr. Dobrowolsky, who we all know. I think, I would give you the name of the 
employee in confidence. I don’t think I want some innocent young fellow to be bantered 
around the province, but I will tell you in confidence outside the Chamber . . .(inaudible 
interjection) . . . No. I will deal with the critic and I think he appreciates that. I will tell 
him on a confidential basis. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well I find this a little interesting. We’re going to move on to another 
activity right now . . . and I do want that name from you. Maybe at the same time, you can 
tell us the instrument that was used to break into the filing cabinet. I mean, if a filing 
cabinet is locked, you can’t use your long fingernail on your pinkie to pry the filing 
cabinet open; you have to have a hammer, a crowbar, a screwdriver or something like 
that. 
 
In your opinion, Mr. Minister, you’ve likely skirted the issue very well of whether or not 
any employee of the security services has participated in or conducted a criminal 
investigation. And so you think you’ve likely skirted that very well with the alleged 
break-in to the Premier’s office in Prince Albert. 
 
I have her a memo from the security service. It’s to a John Baker at the Department of 
Justice, sir, and the details are by Doug - I don’t know who that is - and the person 
detailed is Gerry. I don’t know who that is either. But I imagine they only use their first 
names because of confidentiality in the matter in the event that someone like myself 
would get a hold of such a memo and use it against them. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, if you think this would not be a matter more 
appropriately handed by the RCMP, who are very adequately equipped to conduct such 
investigations. And I’ll read you just the first line, and the person who’s being 
investigated, I will refer to as Mr. X because I neither want to disclose his name and drag 
him through a harangue by the government and by the public for something which he may 
not be guilty. But I quote: 
 
John advised that he has received information that an (Mr. X) is a potential threat to Bob 
Andrew, the Minister of Justice. 
 
Now could you tell me, sir, why would people at the security service of property 
management corporation be doing an investigation into an individual who is viewed as a 
potential threat to the Minister of Justice in the province of Saskatchewan? Would you 
not think, sir, that think would be a job more adequately performed by the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police, or possibly the Regina city police? But I would think the first 
would likely be logical, that the RCMP should be doing investigations into a potential 
criminal matter. 



 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Well, that’s a good case in point, and whether it be the Minister of 
Justice or the member from Battlefords, that the security unit would hear via various 
methods that there would be some type of threat of danger, then that would be turned over 
to the RCM Police ; whether it be the Minister of Justice, whether it be myself, yourself, 
the member from Quill Lakes, or any other member of this Assembly. So an investigation 
wouldn’t take place; they would just turn that then over to the RCM Police. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Well it seems to me that there is some evidence here that they’re doing, if 
not a criminal investigation, they’re doing surveillance on an individual in the province of 
Saskatchewan because they view him as a potential threat. That’s what this report is 
about. It’s 1, 2, 3, 4 pages long, 5 pages long, on this individual that they view as a 
security risk to the bodily harm of a cabinet minister in the province of Saskatchewan. 
This is an investigation. This is surveillance of an individual. Again I submit to you, sir, 
because of the long established credibility of the RCMP, it should be the RCMP doing 
each surveillance and not some people that you hire in property management corporation 
in the security service. 
 
So if this isn’t on the verge of having a private little police force off to the side, I don’t 
what is. And I think you should be accountable for that in this legislature, and I want to 
know why the security service is conducting surveillance on Saskatchewan individuals, a 
job that would be more appropriately performed by the RCMP, if in fact it was necessary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - I don’t know what document the member is quoting from, and maybe 
he’d be hind enough to share it with me, but certainly we don’t conduct surveillance. If 
there’s any idea of where surveillance needs to take place, it’s turned over to the RCM 
Police. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, when we have out meeting that you can’t reveal confidential 
information in this House, but you can to me as an individual, I’ll maybe go over this 
report with you as well because it is surveillance by property management security 
services on an individual. And I think that that is not a proper responsibility for the 
provincial government to be involved in. I think you have no business involved in that 
area. Surveillance or criminal investigation is beyond the scope of what a provincial 
government should be doing, sir. 
 
(1100) 
 
I would ask you this question then, phrasing it a little different. How many people do you 
have at the security services branch of the property management corporation who do 
surveillance or this type of investigative work? Now I’m not talking about vital points, 
security of buildings; I’m not talking about commissionaires. I’m wondering how many 



people do you have and what are their names, of people who do this type of investigative 
work for the security service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: - Again, what you have there, and I would like to see it, but it’s 
probably just some background information from a threat that may have come to a 
minister’s office, and the individuals may have made a few phone calls, and that’s just the 
background that would immediately be turned over to the RCM Police. 
 
If you’re thinking of surveillance, of watching people or anything of that nature, none of 
that goes on within the unit. It’s there basically for, as you’ll well aware, the vital points 
program. It’s there for VIP protection. It’s there for the physical guarding of the 
properties of the government, the buildings and the assets of the government. But if 
you’re trying to say that there’s some type of surveillance or spying on people, that’s 
absolutely incorrect. 
 
Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Minister, how many . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: - Order, order. Being 11 o’clock, the committee will rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 
 


