


















































April 12, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 12, 1989 
 

749 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you today and members of the Assembly, a special 
guest, the president of the New Democratic Women, Marg 
Morrissette, who is with us today in our gallery. I wonder if all 
members would join with me in welcoming her here today, with 
her daughter. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure 
today to introduce a lady seated beside Marg Morrissette — 
Bessie Ellis, who is a former school teacher; indeed she taught 
one of my sons. Mrs. Ellis is a long-time political activist, a 
lady of a great deal of enthusiasm and drive, and does a lot of 
volunteer work in and around the community. Mrs. Ellis is a 
resident of my constituency, Regina North. And I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Mrs. Ellis to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Inquiry into Rafferty-Alameda Project 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
question to direct to the Minister of the Environment. It deals 
with the fiasco of what’s happened over at the Rafferty project 
in the Premier’s riding. Mr. Minister, today the federal Minister 
of the Environment, Mr. Bouchard, has announced that he is 
going to call for a full-scale inquiry into the Rafferty-Alameda 
project. The Minister of Natural Resources from Manitoba — 
and I have a copy of the letter here which I want to read part of 
it to you — has said to Mr. Lucien Bouchard that, and I quote: 
 

. . . to strongly urge your government not only to adhere to 
the requirements of the judgement but to ensure that no 
licence is re-issued until Manitoba’s long-standing request 
for an extended environmental impact study (is carried 
out), including a full study of Souris River water quality, 
downstream from Darling Lake, is fulfilled. 
 

Mr. Minister, it appears that you stand alone here, and so my 
question to you is: will you now put the weight of your office 
behind this inquiry, which should have been done in the first 
place, support it whole-heartedly, or are you going to succumb 
to the meddling that continues to take place by your deputy 
leader? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I once more recognize the 
Deputy Premier, if the hon. members will give me the  

opportunity to do so. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — A couple of things that members 
opposite refuse to recognize, Mr. Speaker. The first thing that 
they refuse to recognize is that all times, Mr. Speaker, at all 
times the Rafferty project operated under a valid licence — at 
all times. Number one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the court, the Federal 
Court of Canada has ruled that the federal minister acted 
beyond his authority. We respect that ruling, and, Mr. Speaker, 
we also know and we have every confidence that that project 
will stand the scrutiny of any environmental test, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other point that those people refuse to acknowledge, Mr. 
Speaker, is that that project is important to not only the 
south-east of the province, but to this province, Mr. Speaker. 
They are no more interested in protecting the environment than 
flying to the moon. They want to stop the project, plain and 
simple! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I am really 
sorry and shocked that the Minister of Environment continues 
still to allow that member to meddle in the affairs of the 
environment and not stand up for himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — I quote, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 
the Environment, from a letter which his official Mr. Walker 
wrote, which sets out the facts as to where this thing began and 
why this licence was issued illegally in the first place, and the 
responsibility lies over there. And here’s the quote: 
 

Our strategy has been, and will continue to be, to take the 
project as far as we possibly can on our own and build as 
much momentum behind it before we open the process up 
to other governments. 
 

There can be no doubt that this government set out to proceed 
without adequate studies so that others would not — including 
the federal government — would not have a choice but to go 
ahead. Thankfully the court had the choice and made the 
decision that it did. 
 
So I ask the minister again. Stand up as the Minister of the 
Environment and take a position in this House, and tell us and 
tell the people of Saskatchewan: will you whole-heartedly 
support a public inquiry and environmental impact study as is 
now been agreed to by the federal government, and requested 
by the Manitoba government, or will you continue to shirk your 
responsibilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, what this province does 
not need, is another dose of hypocrisy from that  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

750 
 

party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the Poplar River dam that 
is the coolant for the Coronach power station did not receive 
one page of federal environmental impact assessment. The 
Boundary dam at Estevan, on the Souris River, Mr. Speaker, 
did not receive a federal environmental impact assessment, and 
it didn’t even get a provincial one — five hours of hearings one 
afternoon, that’s all it got. Tell me they’re interested in 
environment. Mr. Speaker, they want to shut down this project 
for their own cheap, political reasons, plain and simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — The applause has obviously been very 
well rehearsed because it’s not very sincere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Another question to the Minister of the 
Environment. Mr. Minister, this project was ill-conceived. This 
project was the use of cover-up so that the public wouldn’t 
know what the problems are, were to take place there. This 
project isn’t one in which, from its initiation, you took no 
responsibility as the Minister of the Environment. I now give 
you the opportunity to come clean and do your responsibility. 
Get up in this House and respond to my question, which I ask 
you for the third time: will you now stand up and give full 
support to the public inquiry and the environmental impact 
study, Mr. Minister, as the other governments have done, or 
will you continue to shirk your responsibility and ignore the 
law, which you’ve done for . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, he is suggesting, Mr. 
Speaker, that there has been no environmental impact study. 
Mr. Speaker, we have five feet, five feet of volumes, Mr. 
Speaker, that show about the environmental impact study as 
compared to two or three pages on Boundary, zip on Poplar 
River. Mr. Speaker, yesterday that very member talked about 
this being a political pork-barrel and a boondoggle. Today he’s 
talking about it being an environmental problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the critic for the Rafferty, 
he calls himself, the critic for the Rafferty project — that’s what 
he calls himself in the paper — he says, oh, happy day; oh, 
happy day, the project is delayed for three years. Not a mention 
of the environment, the project is delayed for three years. That’s 
his only concern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the Minister of the 
Environment. Mr. Minister, this was a political pork-barrel 
project. And as has been recorded in the Leader-Post today, the 
political strategy was about as subtle as onions on an ice cream 
cone. 
 

Now Mr. Minister, I’m going to give you one more chance to 
show the kind of a minister you really are. Stand up and defend 
the requirements of the environmental laws of this country and 
this province, or if you’re not prepared to do that, at least do the 
honourable thing and submit your resignation so that we can get 
a minister who is responsible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes a lot 
of noise. He hollers that we haven’t done the environmentally 
proper things in this particular project. 
 
I think if the hon. member will go back over the history of this 
project and take a look at the environmental impact assessment 
that was done; take a look at the public review opportunities 
that were offered by this government — and we offered not 30 
days but 60 days; take a look at the board of inquiry that was 
established and the number of meetings that that board held; 
take a look at all of the meetings that were held with the United 
States and with the federal government and with the 
government in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, there was very adequate 
environmental impact assessment done on this project. 
 
I make no apologies for the work that we did, and I make no 
apologies for licensing the project. It’s a project that is good, a 
project that our people need, and a project that should go ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, now that the Minister of 
Environment has been flushed out, I will ask him the question 
again. 
 
Mr. Minister, since the federal Minister of the Environment is 
acting on his responsibility and has called for a full-scale 
inquiry; since the Government of Manitoba, also a Conservative 
government, is now saying that there ought to be a full inquiry, 
public hearings, and that there not should be a reissuing of the 
licence, will you stand up in this House and assure the public of 
Saskatchewan that you will put the force, the full force of your 
office behind that kind of study and support it, instead of 
succumbing to the member, the deputy leader, who is saying 
that he is yet going to launch another appeal and not have this 
public inquiry? Will you take that position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member makes some 
accusations in the House today that are not factual accusations, 
and the member knows it. I don’t know what he would do if he 
were minister of Environment. He probably would pour 
concrete over the whole project as he did over the Federal 
Pioneer project . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Mr. Speaker, that’s not the way that we are 
involved in environmental matters. We have done  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

751 
 

a very thorough study. I am proud of the study and the review 
that my department staff have done. I believe that any 
government that had an environmental assessment staff do the 
amount of work that our staff did, and then approve the project, 
would feel confident that they had a good project. That’s where 
I sit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Compensation Payments 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question today is to the Deputy Premier. Mr. 
Deputy Premier, I noticed last night in a meeting in Estevan that 
you promised compensation to the contractors. I wonder, Mr. 
Deputy Premier, will you compensate the workers that were 
laid off due to your stupidity and your greed — yes or no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, that member, as is usually 
the case, brings information to this House and waves it around 
with great fanfare and passes or tries to pass it off as fact. And 
once again, Mr. Speaker, he has done the same thing. 
 
He said that last night in Estevan I promised compensation to 
the contractors. Last night in Estevan I made no such promise, 
nor was I even thinking of any such thing, Mr. Speaker. There 
may have been discussions gone on between certain contractors 
and officials at Sask Water or SaskPower. I have no knowledge 
of that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you start asking me, when that member 
starts asking me if I am going to compensate the workers, it is 
that member that put them out of work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Deputy 
Premier. Mr. Deputy Premier, the only people I’ll be putting out 
of work after the next election is George Hill and you, sir. 
That’s the only people I’ll be putting out of work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I asked you a question. If you want to cry 
crocodile tears about the workers that you laid off because of 
your stupidity, answer this question: will you make a 
commitment to those workers here in the House that you will 
compensate them? You fired them because of your own 
stupidity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, that member, not only 
does he not care about the environment, he doesn’t care about 
the workers, Mr. Speaker; he doesn’t care about our ability to 
diversify; he doesn’t care that there’s a possibility that Babcock 
& Wilcox will not be building a plant in Melville if this Shand 
project doesn’t go ahead; he doesn’t talk about the possibility of 
SK Turbines losing orders to that project if it doesn’t go ahead, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

That member, that member, him and the NDP, him and the 
NDP, Mr. Speaker, care nothing about the environment, nothing 
about the workers, and nothing about diversification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Before the hon. member begins to ask 
his next question, which he indicated he wishes to, I would just 
like to remind him that referring to other hon. members as 
stupid is not really becoming in this legislature, and you can 
certainly imagine what would happen in this legislature if 
people began to name call in that fashion. I just bring that to 
your attention. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, another question, new question to 
the Deputy Premier. 
 
Mr. Deputy Premier, I’ve asked you twice now, and I’m going 
to put it . . . rephrase the same question but in a different way. 
 
You can talk to me about the 400 dental technicians that you 
fired; you can talk to me about the 800 highway workers that 
you fired; you can talk to me about the thousands of people, 
including the Cory potash miners, that you fired, and the 
Cameco workers that you just put out of work. I’m asking you 
about the workers at Rafferty. You’re making compensation for 
the contractors. Will you, sir, stand in your place in this House 
and promise the same kind of compensation for the workers that 
you and your government’s greed have thrown out of work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I could spend quite a bit 
of time talking about the 700 construction jobs at the paper mill 
in Prince Albert and the 203 permanent jobs at the paper mill 
and paper cutter, Mr. Speaker; spend a lot of time talking about 
the 400 new jobs projected as a result of the project at Meadow 
Lake, and I could spend a lot of time going through that, Mr. 
Speaker. But instead of doing that, I just want to point out the 
sincerity, or lack of sincerity, that that particular member has 
relative to the workers at Rafferty, Mr. Speaker, relative to the 
workers at Rafferty. 
 
He’s not interested in compensation for those workers, Mr. 
Speaker. He said, oh, happy day. They’re gone for three years. 
Whoopee! That’s what he’s talking about. He doesn’t care 
about the workers at all, compensated or otherwise. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A question to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, just a little while ago you said that you did not commit 
compensation to the contractors involved with the Rafferty. 
 
I have here a newspaper story from the Leader-Post today with 
. . . headline says, “Rafferty work halted; appeal planned,” and 
that’s why I asked the minister the questions which he refused 
to answer, the Minister of the Environment. It’s an article 
written by Don Curren, provincial editor of the Leader-Post, 
and it is clearly stated  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

752 
 

in this newspaper article, I quote: 
 

Berntson said the government was discussing 
compensation with contractors on the project. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you deny, do you deny that you were 
discussing compensation as is reported in this article, or do you 
say that the writer of this article is not correct in what he’s 
saying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I deny it absolutely, Mr. Speaker, and 
the writer is right out to lunch if he says that I said that the 
government was discussing compensation because I did not. I 
have never, and I do hope, I do hope that the proponents of the 
project are, because you people, the NDP, in their opposition to 
this project, have literally bankrupt the people that were 
involved in the construction of that project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Concerns of Wildlife Federation 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my 
question to the Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture. Mr. 
Minister, your colleague from Souris-Cannington blames the 
wildlife federation for your government’s misfortune over your 
badly planned dams. Mr. Minister, do you agree with his 
assessment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, there’s only one outfit in 
this province that’s responsible for the debacle we’re facing 
today, and it’s those members sitting across the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Minister, to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, is it the contention of your government 
that the wildlife federation hasn’t the right to speak out on 
projects, wetlands, and wildlife habitat; that it can’t step in and 
do the job your Minister of Environment and his federal 
counterparts failed to do; that is, does not have legitimate 
concerns about the environment. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is: are you saying that the 
wildlife federation has not done years of good work for this 
province and is little more than a mouthpiece for the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, no political party in the 
history of Canada has had a better working relationship with 
both the Saskatchewan and Canadian wildlife federations than 
this party sitting on this side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m appalled that a  

member of the NDP would get up on his hind legs and even talk 
about wildlife issues in this province. Mr. Speaker, we, this 
government, brought in The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection 
Act that had been asked for years by the wildlife federation. Did 
they do anything? Not one thing. 
 
We’re the only the province that signed up on the North 
American water-fowl management plan. We’re the province 
that’s in the Prairie joint venture; we’re the province that’s in 
the Prairie pot-hole project. When it comes to habitat, when it 
comes to wildlife, we are the defenders of wildlife, not those 
hypocrites. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just like to 
remind members that perhaps if we eliminated the name calling, 
the questions and answers would be much better. Order. Order. 
Order. I’m bringing this to the attention of both sides of the 
House. There isn’t any point in members on either side of the 
House to point fingers. I believe that both sides of the House at 
times err, and that’s the substantial point, and I bring this to 
your attention. 
 

Press Releases by Joytec 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to 
the Minister of Science and Technology. The minister will 
know that Mr. Lawrence Nesis, president of Technigen, which 
is Joytec’s parent company, has been summoned to appear 
before the British Columbia Securities Commission to answer 
charges that between July of ’86 and December of ’87 he was 
issuing press releases which he “. . . knew, or ought to have 
known, were misrepresentations.” 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in July of ’87 when I first questioned you 
about Joytec’s lack of production and about the VSE 
(Vancouver Stock Exchange) itself halting trading in Technigen 
because of misrepresentations, you replied at that time that you 
had “. . . every confidence in Joytec.” And you also said, “I 
have no doubt but what that many of these machines will be 
manufactured in Saskatoon in the very near future, and we have 
no reason to be concerned at this point.” 
 
Mr. Minister, considering how badly you were suckered, do you 
have reason to be concerned at this point? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the plain and 
simple fact of the matter with Joytec is that it was the actions of 
this very member and some of his colleagues that are 
responsible for chasing Joytec out of the province. They 
sometimes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — In so far as Joytec is concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, they like to ask questions, but they never are very 
interested in hearing the answers. The fact of the matter is that 
Joytec met all of the requirements with regard to any type of 
venture capital money that they received. The fact of the matter 
is that Joytec was another  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

753 
 

opportunity for diversification in the province, and it’s also a 
very well known fact now, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite are not the least bit interested in diversification in this 
province because of the very fact that they are responsible for 
helping to chase Joytec out of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, I wondered if I could 
have leave to introduce some guests that are here, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, in the gallery opposite I 
would like to introduce to you, and through you to all members 
of the legislature, Dr. Leo Kristjanson, who is the president of 
the University of Saskatchewan. Dr. Kristjanson has had a long 
and illustrious career with the university extending back to 
1959. He is in town today relative to one of his pet projects, the 
new College of Agriculture building. He has also announced 
that he will be stepping down as president later on this year. It 
will be all of Saskatchewan’s loss. He has inspired many, many, 
including many of us in this House who took classes from him. 
 
I would like all members to welcome him to the Assembly here 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to welcome Dr. Kristjanson and Jean King to the 
Legislative Assembly as well. I’ve known Dr. Kristjanson for a 
good many years. I’ve probably known him since I was a small 
child. And I know that he has spent a lot of time working on 
behalf of Saskatchewan students and Saskatchewan citizens to 
ensure that we have one of the finest universities in Canada, 
that being the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I know that Dr. Kristjanson is leaving the presidency at the end 
of June. I want to congratulate him and thank him for all of the 
work that he’s done on behalf of Saskatchewan people, 
particularly young people, and wish him good health and lots of 
happiness in his retirement. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Change of Name Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I wish to table 
further information regarding the Electoral Boundaries 
Commission report which was tabled on March 10, 1989, as 
sessional paper no. 7. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, the rules 
of the Assembly, at least the tradition of the Assembly, is 
long-standing that the government has 48 hours to give answers 
to written questions. I wonder why it is that . . . I think this is 
the fourth or fifth day that we’ve had an opportunity for the 
government to reply to this question, but they have no answer to 
it. And I wonder whether we’re changing the rules here without 
any consultation with the House or the Speaker because it has 
been a long-standing rule of this Assembly that answers are 
given within 48 hours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In my unending desire to accommodate 
all members of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, rather than stand 
these, I’d like to convert them to orders for return (debatable). 
 
The Speaker: — I bring the following to the House’s attention. 
According to rule 35(4): 
 

If in the opinion of the Speaker a written question on the 
Order Paper put to a Minister of the Crown is of such a 
nature as to require a lengthy reply, he may, upon the 
request of the Government, direct the same to stand as a 
notice of Motion for Return (Debatable) . . . 
 

That is the rule that applies. The length of time is not 
applicable. 
 
The minister in effect asked that the motion be stood. It was not 
granted. Therefore I heard him stand up and clearly say that he 
wishes to now change it for order for return (debatable) . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s the decision. I’ve just given 
it. The decision is that I allow it. 
 
Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. Would all members 
please be silent. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — As we advised the opposition, these are the 
straight one-twelfths, without any exceptions. 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum 
of $336,400,300 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 

  



 
April 12, 1989 

754 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Before this motion that the minister has made is dealt with, I 
want to say a few remarks on this interim supply Bill, as I know 
one or two of the other of my colleagues do as well. 
 
It’s not just a routine interim supply Bill, Mr. Chairman. In the 
past, interim supply Bills have indeed been routine. There was a 
time when the minister came before this House and he asked the 
House for some interim money to pay the bills of the 
government for such things as roads and hospitals and schools 
and grants to municipalities and non-government organizations. 
That’s what ministers of finance used to come to this House to 
ask for interim supply of money for. 
 
Unfortunately that has changed. Now this Minister of Finance, 
as his predecessor, come to this House and they don’t ask for 
money for roads and hospitals and schools until later. The first 
thing that this Minister of Finance does is he asks for some 
money to pay the interest and the charges that this government 
has got to pay in taxpayers’ money for the debt and the deficit 
which they have accumulated. That is a very different kind of 
arrangement than we have seen in Saskatchewan in the past. 
And it’s the result of that, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister of 
Finance comes into this House for an interim supply Bill, 
knowing that even in his whole budget he does not have the 
kind of priority expenditures which are so sorely needed in 
Saskatchewan today because of the problems that the people 
who live here face. 
 
Why do we have this massive debt? Why do we have almost a 
$4 billion deficit on the fiscal side, the government side of the 
ledger. The reason is very clear. The reason we have this debt 
and this deficit is because of the gross mismanagement that has 
been imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, the gross 
mismanagement of the members opposite, the Premier and his 
two Finance ministers, which he has had since this government 
was elected in 1982. 
 
What this gross mismanagement has done, it has caused taxes to 
increase to record levels in Saskatchewan. Health care and 
education and social services have been continually 
underfunded, and again in this budget they’re underfunded. The 
minister comes for interim supply money, but it’s not enough to 
meet the need out there. 
 
Crown corporations which brought revenue to the people of this 
province have been sold out, and in some cases given away, but 
sold out at discount prices to friends of the Conservative party 
and to corporate interests everywhere else in this country, 
except in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have the fastest-growing deficit in all of North America, 
and we now are operating a deficit of $4 billion and the Crown 
corporation debt of $8 billion, for a total debt in this province 
that the people have to carry, and future generations will have to 
carry, of almost $13 billion. 
 
And so the Minister of Finance comes here today, first of all, 
for some money to pay the interest to the financial  

institutions of Montreal and Toronto and New York and, 
indeed, in Tokyo where he has borrowed money, before he even 
can begin to provide money for schools and for hospitals and 
for other kinds of needs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this increase in the debt of the province is an 
increase of 600 per cent since 1982, from $3 billion, which was 
more than manageable, and all of it income-earning debt and 
self-liquidating debt, to $13 billion, most of which is no longer 
self-liquidating debt and which will have to be paid for by 
taxing the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What a sorry situation we’re in because of that now. In seven 
short years — in seven short years — this government’s 
financial mismanagement has brought economic ruin to this 
province. 
 
(1445) 
 
Let’s look at the record: 1982, according to the financial report 
of the former minister of Finance, the member from Kindersley, 
a paper which he signed, this province had a surplus of $140 
million — that’s when this government took office — a surplus 
of $140 million. And our young people were working and our 
elderly were cared for and we didn’t have the kind of waiting 
lists in the hospitals we have today, and university students 
weren’t turned away from universities because there wasn’t 
enough space for them. 
 
Well, you know, that has changed, and so the Minister of 
Finance comes begging for more money to pay the interest on 
the debt, because in 1983 he started, or his predecessor started, 
with a deficit of $227 million. And he said that by the time that 
there comes the next election, there will be a balanced budget. 
 
Well what do we have? We have an accumulated deficit of $3.9 
billion, and that’s why we can’t — the minister can’t — come 
to this House and ask for sufficient funds to provide enough 
money for health care and education and the farm communities 
out there and the farm families who are hurting and every day 
are being foreclosed on by the Premier as the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
He plays some very interesting games. To hide the 
incompetence of his government, he cooks the books and he 
does not provide the true numbers about what the deficit is 
really about. Somehow, even though the price of oil has been 
increasing and continues to increase, he is showing revenues 
from oil of only something like $171 million. 
 
Last year he showed revenues projected to be something close 
to $300 million, and the oil prices were lower. What is going 
on? Is it because he is hiding something from the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, or is it because there are so many oil companies 
out there who are taking advantage of the oil royalty holiday 
that the minister’s revenues have dried up because of that 
give-away? 
 
And so when he comes to ask more money to pay for the 
interest charges that he has to pay because of the debt, he’s 
finding it even more difficult to get the revenues that he needs 
because some sectors of this society are  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

755 
 

favourites of this government — and they aren’t the common 
farm families and the common working people and the poor and 
the students. They’re not them; they haven’t benefitted. But 
those oil companies sure have, to the tune of billions of dollars 
which the people of Saskatchewan will never, ever again be 
able to have claim to, because it’s gone. The money is gone, 
invested somewhere else. The oil is gone; we can’t have it 
again. And unfortunately the jobs are gone too, because they’ve 
not employed the kind of people that they did at one time. 
 
Mismanagement, Mr. Chairman, is what’s caused the problem. 
No, the government blames the weather. They blame the world 
conditions. They blame previous governments. We heard all of 
that in question period today. It never looks to itself for its own 
economic mismanagement as the cause of the problem, but it is 
the cause of the problem. 
 
And what is the result? Sixteen hundred more people left this 
province than moved here in the month of January alone — 
1,600 net out-migration. Our population is going down, and 
they’re saying they’re creating jobs. At this rate we’re going to 
lose 20,000 people in 1989. In February alone, Mr. Chairman, 
this province lost 6,200 people, mostly young people, in net 
out-migration because this government has mismanaged the 
economy here, and there is no future for them here, and they 
have to go somewhere else to find it. 
 
Oh, they were lofty words of the Premier back in 1982 when he 
said, we’re going to bring the children home. That is still 
remembered in Saskatchewan — those great words about how 
we’re going to unite families, the Premier said. 
 
What happened to that promise? What’s happening to our 
families? I can go in my constituency, I can go in any 
constituency in Saskatchewan — and most of us in this side of 
the House have been in many — and everywhere we find 
people and families who say that a son or a daughter or an uncle 
or an aunt has had to go somewhere else because there is no job 
for them here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Does the Minister of Finance come with this interim supply Bill 
to ask for more money to create jobs? Of course not. His 
budget, which he presented just not too many days ago, slashed 
the funding for the creation of jobs for young people and 
students by 20 per cent. One thousand fewer jobs he’s going to 
create in this budget than he did in the last one. 
 
That flies in the face of all the reality. That flies in the face of 
the reality that people are finding by the thousands that they 
have to go to another province somewhere else to make a 
living. It’s hard to understand how any government of any 
political stripe could be so insensitive to those kinds of statistics 
and those kinds of realities. 
 
Oh, the Minister of Finance said, but there isn’t any money; 
there just isn’t any money; times are tough. Well if that’s the 
case, Mr. Speaker, then I ask the Minister of Finance to explain: 
why is there money for all kinds of former Conservative cabinet 
ministers and members of the legislature and members of 
parliament who have  

been defeated, but are now living off the payroll of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, which the taxpayer has to pay. 
 
If there isn’t enough money for our children and our students 
and those people who want jobs, why is there enough money to 
pay huge salaries in patronage payments to all of those 
Conservative politicians that the public in elections has 
rejected? What kind of priorities are those — what kind of 
priorities are those? 
 
Nobody can believe the arguments opposite from the minister 
or the government when there is those kinds of comparisons 
which can be made. If there is no money, Mr. Chairman, to 
fund adequately schools so that six schools in the Catholic 
system in Regina wouldn’t have to close, if there isn’t enough 
money to help farm families who are struggling and every day 
some of them are having to move off the farm and rural 
communities are being depopulated, why is there enough 
money for the minister to come to the House today and ask for 
an interim supply to pay Dome Advertising millions of dollars 
to do advertising for the government, political advertising to 
sell things like the privatization schemes which they have which 
the public is saying they don’t support? Why? 
 
Why is there enough money to have a $9 million birthday party 
in 1990? The Minister of Finance comes here without any 
credibility when those facts are there. They have wasted, they 
have squandered, and they have blown opportunities which 
Saskatchewan faced — and the latest example is what’s been 
happening this week — the travesty, the tragedy caused by 
mismanagement and incompetence which we see happening at 
the Rafferty-Alameda dam. 
 
There was money for that project; there was money for that 
project. The government claims, the Deputy Premier claims that 
he has spent in excess of $30 million without first making sure 
that all of the legal requirements that were required for that 
project to proceed were met. 
 
Oh, he will say, ah, but there was a licence. The province issued 
a licence. The federal government issued a licence. But the fact 
is that the federal government’s licence was manipulated. It was 
manipulated by this Conservative government and by the 
Premier because he wanted that project in his constituency 
regardless of the costs. And so the federal court has ruled that 
that licence was issued illegally, and now this government, 
because it tried to railroad that project through, thinking if it 
went far enough nobody would dare challenge it, has now put at 
risk and at jeopardy, tens of millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money, all because of the desire for political pork-barrel*. 
Money wasted, lay-offs have now happened, environment has 
been put at risk, and the Minister of Finance comes now to the 
House with his interim supply Bill to help to pay for some of 
those costs. 
 
And the deputy leader complains about the jobs lost. Well 
where was he, where was the Minster of Finance, where was the 
Premier when they jointly decided that over 400 dental nurses 
would be fired and a profession destroyed, all because they 
wanted to privatize the children’s dental plan? Why didn’t the 
Minister of  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

756 
 

Finance come to this House and ask for money to continue that 
program? 
 
Where was he when 400 highway workers were fired, all for the 
sake of this misguided madness that they call privatization? 
Where was he when a hundred workers were laid off by 
Cameco, all in the name of privatization? Or when families of 
workers who used to work at Cory were losing their homes 
because they couldn’t meet the mortgage payments, because 
this government caused many of them to be laid off, why didn’t 
the Minister of Finance come and meet those needs and those 
requirements? 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, the reason that we face the kind of 
economic problems we face today is because of this 
mismanagement, because of corruption, and because of 
patronage. And it’s so obvious. Everyone in Saskatchewan 
knows it, and everywhere you go people are talking about it. 
 
And I think that the reporter who wrote in the Leader-Post 
today captured it very well when he wrote on the story of 
Rafferty, and the headline said, “A pointed lesson on the 
politics of expediency,” and then went on to say: 
 

. . . the political strategy for the construction of two dams 
in the Souris River Basin was about as subtle as onions on 
ice cream. 
 

That’s how subtle it was. But they thought they could get away 
with it. Well they are not getting away with it, Mr. Chairman. 
You cannot continue to get away with it without the people and 
the voters knowing it, and that’s why all over Saskatchewan 
more and more and more people — and it’s a majority now — 
are saying, it’s time for a change. And they’re determined to 
have it. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance doesn’t come to the House today 
to ask for interim supply money to create jobs where you can 
really create them, in the small-business sector. He comes 
because he’s got to provide money for Dome Advertising, $45 
million in Public Accounts is recorded; $30-some million for 
the fiasco in Rafferty. At one time he came for $20-plus million 
for Peter Pocklington, but in his budget he has nothing for the 
small-business community which is struggling out there. 
 
And did you know, Mr. Chairman, because I know that all over 
Saskatchewan it is known by the small-business people, and I 
want to quote you a statistic here from the Canadian Federation 
of Independent Business. It was a pre-budget submission to the 
Government of Saskatchewan in January of 1987 in which they 
said that today over 75 per cent of new jobs are coming from 
small business. That being the case, Mr. Chairman, why did not 
the minister come forward in his budget, and therefore today in 
his interim supply Bill, with some measures to support and 
assist the small-business community so that they could survive 
and thrive and grow and create these 75 per cent of the jobs 
which they do in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The budget is inadequate, and therefore the minister’s requests 
here are inadequate. All that they can think about, and they are 
obsessed by it even though they know  

the public is rejecting it, is privatization. They want to take the 
power corporation and they want to get rid of it. They are 
ignoring all of the facts of history, all of the traditions of this 
province which say that the reason we have a power corporation 
headquartered in Saskatchewan, the reason we have electricity 
to farms even in isolated parts of Saskatchewan is because we 
had a Crown corporation that did it. 
 
Now they want to discard all of that and give it away and give 
up on those traditions and let some people who will not be 
residents in Saskatchewan tell us how it ought to be done. And 
we reject that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I could say an awful lot more about what 
is lacking in this budget and therefore what is lacking in this 
interim supply Bill. And the opportunity I know will present 
itself on many occasions in estimates and in the consideration 
of the minister’s own estimates, but I wanted to make these 
points here today because I believe, and the people of 
Saskatchewan believe, that in many of the things that this 
government is so ideologically committed to, they have gone 
too far. 
 
And I know that simply making speeches by myself and my 
colleagues, it may not stop them because they’re dug in and 
they’re blinded and they’re blinkered and they’re going right 
ahead in spite of the damage that they may cause. But 
hopefully, if enough people stand up in this House and in the 
public, it may at least slow them down till the public has an 
opportunity to boot them out and elect a government that cares. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A government that cares about 
Saskatchewan; a government that cares about good 
management; a government that cares about young people and 
making sure that they have a future here in this province and 
don’t have to go somewhere else; a government that cares about 
farmers and farm families every year, and not just in election 
year. 
 
And I wanted to make those points, and I’m sure that there are 
other members on this side of the House which will make other 
points on this. And therefore at this time I will take my seat and 
let them speak as they wish to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to take 
part today in the debate on the interim supply Bill. The minister 
has brought forward this Bill asking for one-twelfth of the 
budget, and I want to point out just where this one-twelfth of 
our budget is going. 
 
It wouldn’t be too bad, Mr. Chairman, if we were in here and 
passing a supply Bill for one-twelfth of $4 billion if it was 
going for a good use, if it was going to build roads and to create 
jobs and things like that. 
 
But let’s just take a look at where most of this money is going, 
Mr. Chairman. We now have a debt in this province, an 
accumulated debt of $4 billion. We have  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

757 
 

accumulated a long-term debt that is now up to $13 billion, and 
when you take a look at the amount of money that we are 
putting in on interest rates, you can just see where this money is 
going. It’s not going to create jobs, and it’s not going to build 
hospitals and schools. It’s driving the province backwards. 
 
When you take a look at the fact that we’re paying over $381 
million a year, that, Mr. Chairman, is over a million dollars a 
day just on interest on the money that we owe in this province. 
Just imagine what we could do with a million dollars a day if 
we were to take and put 10 days of that into northern 
Saskatchewan where I live, and into the constituency that I 
represent. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Or five days of that into university. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Right. We are paying over a million dollars 
a day in interest on the debt that has been created by the 
mismanagement of the Tory government. 
 
When I take a look at the high unemployment rates in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, some of the communities that we 
have, with local residents the unemployment rate is running up 
to 90 per cent. Now you just stop and think of that. Ninety per 
cent of the individuals who are unemployed up there and can’t 
get work because of the mismanagement of the Conservative 
government — a Conservative government that is spending 
$100 million a day just on interest. 
 
Now if we were to take a few of those days and put that money 
into building roads up in Saskatchewan . . . but here’s the 
difference between a Conservative philosophy and a philosophy 
that the New Democrats had. We had the Department of 
Highways, and they built highways and they built roads in 
northern Saskatchewan, and they hired individuals from all over 
this province. But in your wisdom, in your government’s 
wisdom, Mr. Chairman, they decided that they were going to 
get rid of the Department of Highways. They were going to fire 
off all the workers and put them out in the private sector. Now 
they’re starting to build a road — they call it a road — and 
that’s going from La Loche to McMurray, and we could get lots 
of publicity. We have a report that’s put out by the minister who 
is charge of northern affairs and she talks about, the member for 
Maple Creek, she talks about the construction of the La Loche 
road towards McMurray. And she goes on in other places in this 
document and she talks about that road. 
 
Well if you look in the highway array, Mr. Chairman, you will 
not see anything mentioned in the highway’s array that there is 
ever such a road that’s being built. And how are they building 
it? Well they’re not really building a highway. And if you’re 
going to put a major artery between Alberta an Saskatchewan, 
especially been Fort McMurray and La Loche, then you most 
certainly shouldn’t be building a road, you should be building a 
highway, and it should have a highway top and it should be 
paved. 
 
Nothing in the Highway’s plans, nothing in the array. But what 
do they do? They put some more money . . . this is why they’re 
in here today asking for another twelfth of the budget so that 
can provide welfare jobs. Some of those  

workers will work for seven weeks, some of them will work for 
20 weeks. And what are they doing? They’re cleaning brush, 
putting in the so-called road that the minister talks about in 
here. 
 
The La Loche road — she goes on again: 
 

The road for La Loche is under construction by the people 
of La Loche themselves. I will be announcing more on this 
project, and I guarantee that this road will benefit the 
people of La Loche more than another social program will. 
 

They’re proud of the fact, Mr. Chairman, the Conservatives are 
proud of the fact that they provide these welfare jobs. They’re 
not up there trying to give any security to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. What they are doing, they are going out . . . sure 
they talk about building an artery between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan and they’re doing it on the backs of the social 
program with welfare recipients. 
 
Regional development. The Premier of our province went down 
to Ottawa and he said, we have to recognize that there are 
regional differences in Canada and regional differences in our 
province. Well I say that is right, and northern Saskatchewan is 
a region that is different than the rest of this province and 
different than the rest of Canada. It’s isolated. It’s a long ways 
from services, and we have to treat it that way. But that’s not 
being done by this government. They are creating the welfare 
jobs so that they can get enough stamps to go on UIC 
(Unemployment Insurance Commission). They go on UIC, back 
to welfare. Well what security is there in that? Absolutely 
nothing. 
 
Another item I want to touch on, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, 
and that is the gas tax that has been announced in this budget. 
And now you’re asking for more money, and I’ll tell you, 
you’re taking a lot of money from the citizens of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Minister of Finance, and you’re not returning the money as 
you indicated it would. Some of the outlets in this province 
indicate that up to 90 per cent of individuals who come in for 
gas do not pick up their receipts. 
 
Now you got elected on a campaign that you were going to 
eliminate the gas taxes in this province. Then you reintroduced 
the gas tax and you create this bureaucratic nightmare where 
you have to keep your receipts and turn them in at the end of 
the year and get a refund. And as I indicated, a lot of drivers in 
this province are not saving their receipts and are not collecting 
that refund. Now what you do, you add another 3 cents on, and 
to go even further, you add 5 cents to regular gas and only 3 
cents of that is refundable. And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and 
through you to the Minister of Finance, that this most certainly 
is another tax that is geared to individuals who drive older 
vehicles. That’s who this tax is geared at. 
 
And they call it a surtax, an environmental surtax. I say that it’s 
not an environmental surtax but it’s a tax on individuals who 
drive older vehicles in our province. That’s what I say this is. 
And this is a real nightmare. And you go up into northern 
Saskatchewan where you’re paying 60 cents a litre, Mr. 
Chairman, in many of those  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

758 
 

communities — 58, 60 cents a litre for gasoline — that counts 
up. And now they’ve just thrown up their hands, so many of the 
citizens of this province. And this is another tax grab. 
Absolutely, that’s all you can say; it’s another tax grab. 
 
And I think that this has to come to a stop. We have to put a 
stop to the tremendous deficit that we have in this province. 
Wherever I go in this province, individuals are saying, when is 
this going to come to an end? When are we going to see a stop 
to the taxes on gasoline and cigarettes, on liquor? You just 
name it, and those taxes are going up, and individuals are upset 
about this. And I just say to the people, well, we’re just going to 
have to wait until the Conservative government decides to call 
an election. And every one of them says, the sooner the better. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, in all fairness, that when that 
election is called, I’ll tell you, there is not going to be very 
many members from that side of the House that are going to 
come back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You might think that this gas tax that 
you’ve been putting on is not impacting on the voters out in 
Saskatchewan. But coupled with the deficit that we have and 
the way that you are taking rights away from individuals — and 
I could go on, especially in northern Saskatchewan, the way the 
minister in charge of Parks and Culture and Recreation is taking 
away those rights — the citizens of this province are saying that 
they are going to turf you guys out just as soon as they get the 
opportunity. 
 
But I say in all sincerity to you, Mr. Chairman, that you’ve got 
about 23 members on that side that won’t be running again in 
the next provincial election. And what those 23 members are 
doing, especially the few members in the cabinet front benches, 
they are the ones that are taking members like yourself, Mr. 
Chairman, down the garden path. 
 
And I think that it’s time for you to stand up and the member 
from Nipawin to stand up and the member from Redberry to 
stand up and put a stop to this. There has to be a stop to what’s 
taking place, because maybe they don’t have a political future 
in this province. And I know that and so do you. I’m not saying 
this about you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, but the rest of the 
citizens in this province, they know that there’s no future for the 
Conservative Party. 
 
And I say that to some of the back-benchers who are on their 
first term, it’s time to stand up and speak out against the 
individuals like the Minister of Finance, who will never be 
running again in another election in this province. And that’s a 
fact of life. You just watch what’s going to happen. At least 21 
to 23 of those front-bench members and scattered in the back 
will never be running again in the next election because they 
know full well what’s going to happen. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and I say to those 
back-benchers, and I say to the member from Thunder  

Creek, in all sincerity, that it’s time to stand up and to start 
fighting for the citizens of this province and not continue down 
this path of destruction as we see in the budget that we have 
seen this year and the way this government has operated in the 
province. 
 
I have some other of my colleagues that want to speak on this 
Bill, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll turn it over to them. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I thought I’d just wait for a minute to see if any of the hon. 
members on the other side would want to get up and defend 
some of the spending actions, but I see they don’t, so I will take 
my turn. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I just want to go through some of the things that 
have happened in this province, that are happening and have 
been happening over a period of time, just to illustrate how the 
funds appropriated by this government are not being used. 
 
In the agricultural sector, during 1988 there were 1,245 notices 
of foreclosure filed by the Saskatchewan Farm Land Security 
Board — double the rate in the previous two years. And the 
Farm Land Security Board predicts 1,500 this year. The number 
of bankruptcies then, in the whole province’s economy last 
year, was 1,236, the highest since 1971, the last year of Ross 
Thatcher. 
 
And many of these bankruptcies, Mr. Chairman, were in small 
towns, the small towns who are so heavily dependent on the 
rural economy, the agricultural economy in Saskatchewan. 
Twenty-four rural hotels were either closed or repossessed in 
Saskatchewan during 1988 — 24 rural hotels. In many cases, 
these were hotels were the hub of activity, of the social activity 
in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
(1515) 
 
In 1988 the number of farm bankruptcies was six times that of 
1981 — six times 1981. 
 
And then we see how this converts into the holding of land in 
Saskatchewan. For example, the Royal Bank tripled its holdings 
of farm land in Saskatchewan in the 12 months prior to the end 
of October 1988 — tripled it’s holdings in 12 months. It now 
holds 120,000 acres in this province, and the Farm Credit 
Corporation admits to holding about 420,000 acres of Canadian 
farm land, and says it’ll be getting another 200,000 by the end 
of March, that we’ve just passed. 
 
And then there’s the whole question of interest payments, 
which this government has not been defending in Ottawa. We 
recently had the eighth jump in the prime rate in less than a 
year. The increase amounts to almost a 4 per cent increase since 
the spring of 1988. And if a farmer was going out to buy a 
half-ton truck, that would mean an increase of about a thousand 
dollars on that new half-ton truck. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1989 

759 
 

So the land values are declining, the institutions are taking land, 
the foreclosures are increasing, the bankruptcies are increasing 
— that is providing for a pretty depressed rural economy. And 
it is the fault of this government that that has happened. 
 
The provincial economy, most dependent on agriculture, shrank 
by 4.3 per cent in 1988. The number of people migrating out of 
this province, compared to the number of people coming in, is a 
negative number — about 16,000 last year and, as we know, 
this year many thousand . . . over 6,000 in the month of 
February alone. 
 
So what’s happening? In 1981, 23 per cent of farmers were 
under the age of 35. In 1986, this level had dropped. There were 
67,000 farmers in Saskatchewan by 1986, and we’re losing 
them at a rate of about a thousand a year. That’s because this 
government is not acting like it is talking. They say they’re 
going to defend, go to the wall for farmers, but they are not 
doing it. 
 
Family farms in Saskatchewan have declined, but — this is 
interesting — the corporate farms have increased. Under a 
government who’s saying, the family farm is the most 
important thing; we have to look after it, the number of family 
farms are declining, but the number of corporate farms are 
increasing. Isn’t that an interesting phenomena for someone 
who says that the upstanding citizens looking after their family 
farm. 
 
Since January 1985, 36 smaller rural post offices in 
Saskatchewan have been closed, another 22 downgraded to the 
retail postal outlets, and also another 46 post offices are 
presently under review, and we all know that they are going to 
be downgraded or closed as well. 
 
And here’s another interesting little fact that has taken place 
because of the misspending, the mismanagement, the misplaced 
priorities of this government. During the past five years 
approximately two and a half million acres of land have 
changed from that of ownership to rented status. That amount is 
two and a half times what there ever was under the land bank 
program. The amount of rented land has increased 2.5 million 
acres from a government who’s big push is that we’re going to 
have privatization and we’re going to have individuals do it. 
 
And under their scheme, despite the words they’re saying, we 
are losing that ownership of our land. We’re losing it to the 
institutions and the government agencies who are foreclosing, 
led by the Premier of this province, the biggest forecloser, to a 
state where we see the number of rented acres going way up. 
Farmers who would like to own their land are not being able to 
own it because of the misplaced priorities, the lack of spending, 
the lack of direction, the lack of communication, and the lack of 
effort by this government to save them. 
 
As was being said earlier, Mr. Chairman, this budget shows that 
we are spending over a million dollars a day to pay the interest 
on the debt — over a million dollars a day. Can you feature that 
every family, when they sit down in the morning and when they 
go to their breakfast table, has to throw a dollar in the pocket of 
the Finance minister.  

Every person has to throw a dollar into the pocket of the 
Finance minister every day because he’s doing such a 
wonderful job of managing this province, such a wonderful job 
of keeping the economic affairs in order for the people of this 
province, that a million dollars a day — a dollar for every 
person in this province — has to be ante’d up every day of the 
year in order to pay for the person’s mistake who they honestly 
elected to do a good job for them. 
 
And you think they don’t feel betrayed, Mr. Chairman? You 
don’t think they feel betrayed by the Minister of Finance and 
the Premier of this province, who they in good faith put in to 
manage the affairs? And now every day every man, woman and 
child in this province — and add a few extra dollars — have to 
put in a dollar, 365 days of the year. 
 
Another interesting thing. The amount of money spent on 
interest charges because of the deficit this province is in is equal 
to about twice the dollars they’re spending in agriculture. 
They’re spending twice the amount of money servicing the 
interest on their debt that they have accumulated through poor 
judgement, poor management and, I would say, personal gain in 
many cases. They’re spending twice as much money on that as 
they are in the Department of Agriculture. 
 
And we wonder why we got foreclosures; we wonder why we 
have bankruptcies; we wonder why we have land going from 
owned to rented status. Is there any question, Mr. Chairman? 
Because this government through mismanagement has to spend 
twice as much money on servicing the interest debt as they do 
on agriculture. An interesting phenomenon coming from a 
government who was going to the wall for farmers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, between 1982 and ’87 the provincial gross 
domestic product increased 26, between ’82 and ’87. But 
between 1977 and 1982, that same gross domestic product 
increased 83 per cent, or five times that of the Tory 
government. And they blame us for the problems they’re in. 
Isn’t that a little ironic. 
 
Between 1977 and 1982, total personal income in Saskatchewan 
jumped 98 per cent. But between 1982 and ’87 it went up only 
35 per cent. And they say they’re the management of this 
province, doing a great job. 
 
Between 1977, Mr. Chairman, and 1982, Saskatchewan’s 
exports rose 95 per cent; our Saskatchewan exports between ’77 
and ’82 rose 95 per cent. In 1987 Saskatchewan’s exports were 
only 3 per cent greater than 1982. In the five years previous 
they rose 98 per cent, 95 per cent, and a year later at ’87 they 
were only 3 per cent. This comes from a government who is 
saying that they were open for business; they’re going to make 
things thrive in this province because of the way they manage 
the economy, because of the way they spend their money. 
 
In the previous five years before 1982, Mr. Chairman, the gross 
domestic product for agriculture at a factor cost rose from 1.3 
billion to 2.2 billion. Between ’82 and ’87 the level of 
manufacturing increased. The previous five-year interval, when 
we were government, the level of  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

760 
 

manufacturing increased even greater. 
 
We talk about who can manage. From 1977 to ’82 investment 
income rose 244 per cent, Mr. Chairman — in the five years 
previous to ’82. But between 1982 and 1987 investment income 
increased only 17 per cent. So in the five years previous, when 
we were government, 244 per cent increase in investment; and 
between ’82 and ’87 when the Tories were in government, a 17 
per cent increase. These are the guys who were going to open us 
up for business. 
 
In 1982 there were 2,800 unemployed people in Saskatchewan, 
and by 1987 it had risen to 3,600. For 1988 Saskatchewan’s 
employment level is down 2,000 from the previous year. That’s 
the people who are actually working. 
 
In employment opportunities there has been a decrease in the 
rural areas. In the rural areas that these people are supposedly 
representing, there has been a decrease in employment. 
Between 1986 and 1988 the number of new business 
incorporations declined. The number of new business 
registrations decreased. At the same time, the number of 
bankruptcies rose to 453. And according to the report from the 
National Council on Welfare, Saskatchewan had the 
second-highest poverty rate among the provinces, the 
second-highest poverty rate in Saskatchewan. 
 
The family poverty rate for Saskatchewan was 16.4 per cent. 
This was exceeded only by Newfoundland at 21.2 per cent. For 
individuals, Saskatchewan’s poverty level was 19.8 per cent. 
This was exceeded only by Newfoundland at 22.8 per cent. So, 
Mr. Chairman, I have pointed out some of the numbers as a 
comparison between . . . before 1982 and after 1982. 
 
And the reason that this government, one of the reasons they 
say they got elected was because they were going to manage the 
economy in such a way that we’d benefit, the people of this 
province benefit. And we see all the negative impact that has 
resulted from that. And I say they deceived, they betrayed, they 
did not tell the truth to the people of this province. 
 
And they have the audacity, after all this is said and done, to 
turn around and spend $9 million on a birthday party. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A farewell party. 
 
Mr. Upshall: — A farewell party. I wish it was, and I’m sure it 
will be. 
 
And just today, earlier today, the government was blaming our 
side of the House, the NDP, for everything that ever happened. 
But the only thing that I will take the blame for is defeating this 
Tory government, because that is what has to happen in order 
that that Minister of Finance and that Premier of this province 
are stopped in their tracks with their unwillingness or 
incapability to manage the affairs of this province in such a way 
that the people prosper. 
 
They’re hidebound on privatization, which will take more 
money out of the coffers, from the corporations that  

put money into the treasury of this province in order that we can 
keep the taxes down. They’re going to get rid of those, 
especially the profitable ones. So the people are going to lose 
again. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I think that this appropriations Bill has to be 
used in order to turn around the economy in ways that benefit 
the people. Not in ways that benefit the Tory party. Not in ways 
that benefit the Premier and his riding of Estevan. Not a way 
that benefits the Deputy Premier in his riding. But that’s what 
they’re doing, the self-preservation tactics, and let everyone else 
go. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will close by saying, on behalf of the people 
of this province, I would challenge this government to try to 
turn around its arrogance, try to turn around its incompetence, 
try to turn around its mismanagement. It’s a tough thing to do to 
say I was wrong; I made a mistake. But on behalf of the people 
of this province, I would ask you to say yes, we were wrong and 
we will change some of those things. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1530) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Chairman, I had not intended in 
taking part in this debate on interim supply, and as a matter of 
fact, Mr. Chairman, I held my seat, I held my seat as long as 
possible to allow a member from the government side to rise 
and defend the record of this government. 
 
The Minister of Finance introduced these resolutions with brief 
cursory remarks, only the remarks necessary to get the 
resolutions before us. No defence of his position. Since that 
time two or three members on this side of the House have 
spoken on the interim supply resolutions that are before the 
House. Not one member, not one member on the government 
side has risen to defend this deplorable record of this 
government, which culminates in this budget for which the 
Minister of Finance is asking for interim supply at this time. 
 
This government over the years has been wrong, wrong, wrong. 
And further, they’re masochistic. Every time interim supply 
comes in, this government has to take a beating, because they 
deserve a beating on how they’ve handled the finances of this 
province. 
 
There is a time-honoured tradition in the British parliamentary 
system which we follow — hundreds of years old. This 
tradition is called “grievance before supply.” In days gone by 
when the monarch wanted more money to conduct the affairs of 
state, he called the commoners together, and the commoners 
had such strength that they made their monarch listen to their 
grievances before they would supply the monarch with more 
taxation by which the monarch would fight the wars and spend 
in whatever way he saw fit. 
 
This is the stage we’re in now with this minister. He has 
demanded more money; he’s demanded money to run the 
affairs of the province of Saskatchewan. It is our  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

761 
 

opportunity to bring forward any grievances we might have 
before we supply that minister with money. Obviously, if we’re 
going to supply the minister with money, we should have 
reason to supply him with further funds, or we should state the 
reasons why we can’t supply him with further funds, and that’s 
what we’re doing now. 
 
First, let me deal with the broken promises of this government. 
This government said, we will remove the sales tax; we will 
remove the sales tax in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 
they’ve had seven years to do that, Mr. Chairman, and they 
haven’t done it. As a matter of fact, they’ve increased the sales 
tax by two percentage points — two percentage points — which 
bears on all the families of Saskatchewan, all the municipalities 
of Saskatchewan, all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
They said they would remove the sales tax. The revenue that 
they’re raising is an extra $27 million this year in sales tax. 
They said they’d remove it. It’s reached a high in this budget of 
$503 million — this is just the sales tax, Mr. Chairman. An 
increase of 27 million to a high of $503 million this year — a 
broken promise. 
 
This government said solemnly to the people of Saskatchewan, 
we will lower income tax by 10 per cent. Have they carried out 
their promise? The answer is, clearly, no. 
 
They have added a new flat tax. Now one of the members on 
the other side wants to get into the debate. He’s had four 
opportunities to get into the debate, but he’s debating from his 
seat. He’s debating from his seat, Mr. Chairman, because that’s 
the only place this government dare debate from on this issue, is 
when they’re sitting on their seats in the legislature where they 
can’t be recorded. We want to hear these members get up and 
defend themselves, defend this Minster of Finance and this 
Premier against this budget. They dare not rise; they dare not 
rise. 
 
What this government has done, rather than lower income tax 
by 10 per cent, has added a brand-new flat tax — the brand-new 
flat tax. Sales tax and individual income tax have risen since 
1982. Understand, Mr. Chairman, this is by a government that 
has said it would lower income tax. Sales tax and individual 
income tax since 1982 has risen $560 million — $560 million. 
At the same time, corporations in Saskatchewan on January 1 of 
this year had their corporation tax lowered from 17 per cent to 
15 per cent. Gives a clear indication of where the priorities of 
this government lie in Saskatchewan. 
 
The greatest promise this government made is that they will 
never put on a gasoline tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, they have. They try to fudge the 
issue. They say, oh, no, no, we’re not putting on a gasoline tax, 
you know, it’s all refundable — it’s all refundable. Well 
they’ve put on the gasoline tax, and of this gasoline tax which 
they said they would never put on — never put on — this 
budget plans to take in $204 million on a tax that they would 
never put on. 
 
Since they said they would never put this tax on, by their very 
own devices they have taken in an aggregate amount of $390 
million on a gasoline tax which they said they  

would never put on. 
 
How does this gasoline tax, Mr. Chairman, affect the people of 
Saskatchewan? Well it affects them in many ways. Take the 
city of Saskatoon, which I have the honour to represent in this 
Chamber, the price of fuel will cost Saskatoon an additional, 
unaccounted-for $170,000 in its 1989 operating budget — 
$170,000 more shifted from this government on to the people of 
Saskatoon because this government would never bring in a 
gasoline tax. Never do that; they solemnly promised that. 
 
In addition to that, the amount that the city initially expected 
from the provincial budget is down by about 300,000. It’s down 
$120,000 in a smaller grant from the revenue for the 
revenue-sharing pool than was expected. So this government 
has managed to give the city of Saskatoon the triple financial 
whammy in this budget. And I would admit openly that the city 
of Saskatoon is probably in pretty good economic state, and at 
least, compared to this Government of Saskatchewan, it 
certainly is. It’s one of the bulwarks of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Well another anomaly in this budget is that the gasoline tax 
shows a $56 million increase this year in revenue, in a tax they 
said they would never put on — a $56 million increase in 
revenue. But the Department of Highways budget is only 
increased 13.5 million. They’re taking in $56 million, but 
they’re only putting out 13.5 into the Department of Highways. 
And Heaven knows, the people know what condition the 
highways of Saskatchewan are in. You only need to travel 
between Saskatoon and Regina to find that out in spades. 
 
City of Saskatoon, as a consequence of this triple whammy 
budget from the province of Saskatchewan, is just going about 
setting their mill rate, and the city of Saskatoon is going to 
present their ratepayers with about a $60 package increase on 
taxes. Public school: $32, I understand, is the figure just 
announced the other day. And an official of the city of 
Saskatoon, when asked, why is this increase here? he said, it’s 
due to the budget. 
 
And the consequences of this is that the public school board 
will hire less teachers than it planned to hire. So you see here 
how the economic mismanagement of this government is 
cutting into the education system of the city of Saskatoon and, I 
suspect, educations systems all over the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The city of Saskatoon will slow walk repairs and maintenance 
that are warranted and justified; they’ll just slow down on them. 
So every ratepayer in Saskatoon, on average, will get an 
increase of $60 in their taxes due to this government’s 
economic mismanagement of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The consequences of the economic mismanagement of this 
government show itself in other areas as well. The 
unemployment rate is climbing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Unemployment is probably the number one 
issue on the minds of people of Saskatchewan. I think if you go 
out and ask the people, by and large the first thing they mention 
will be unemployment. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1989 

762 
 

And this is not foreign to the city of Saskatoon, although their 
statistics are reasonably good, but the city of Saskatoon jobless 
rate is again crested at over 10.9 per cent. This is the . . . I’m 
reading from a news release of April 11: 
 

Saskatoon’s unemployment rate rose to 10.9 per cent in 
March, up one percentage point from the February rate of 
9.8, according to the latest figures from Stats Canada. 
 

So the unemployment . . . Saskatoon has to cope with the higher 
unemployment rate due to the economic mismanagement and 
missed opportunities by this Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The overall effect of the economic mismanagement of this 
government in the labour scene is that Saskatchewan’s labour 
force has decreased by 6,000. This is 10,000 lower, this is in 
February 1989, and this is 10,000 lower than in February 1988. 
 
The number of persons employed in the province of 
Saskatchewan is 12,000 less than the number employed in 
February 1988, just one year ago. The number of persons 
employed is down by 12,000. 
 
There were 43,000 people unemployed in Saskatchewan in 
February 1988-1989 — 43,000 unemployed. That is 2,000 
higher than the number unemployed in February of ’88. So the 
number of persons unemployed has gone up by 2,000 people 
under this economic mismanagement of this government. 
 
This is a sorry state of affairs for which this government in due 
course will have to answer to the people of Saskatchewan. For 
the time being, there is little that we can do except offer our 
grievance to the government before they are supplied with the 
finances to carry on the necessary commitments of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am concerned because some of the fall-out from this kind of 
economic mismanagement will have a serious social effect in 
the province of Saskatchewan. I’m referring now to, “A 
dramatic drop in housing starts forecast in city,” and this is an 
article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 
 

Residential construction starts in Saskatoon will fall 29 per 
cent this year, compared with 1988, says Canada Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation. Starts are forecast to decline to 
1,050 units, says the spring report. 
 

The record of this government overall has been very spotty in 
the area of housing. The highest housing starts in Saskatchewan 
under this government occurred in 1983, and I dare say that it 
will never reach that peak again under this government. In 1983 
there were 7,269 housing starts. Now this doesn’t compare 
favourably with pretty well any year you pick under a New 
Democratic government which preceded this one. You know, 
the housing starts in 1974 were 7,684; in ’75 they were 10,505; 
in ’76 they were 13,143; in ’77 they were 12,825 — all higher 
than the highest this government has had  

which has been 7,269. 
 
There’s another year there, the housing starts were over 9,000; 
another year over 11,000, another year over 6,000. 
 
But this government has gone steadily down, which is a key 
indicator, a key indicator of how the economy is going in 
Saskatchewan. It dropped from 7,200 to 5,000 — 5,000, 5,000, 
4,800 — 3,902 in 1988, which is a preliminary figure, and the 
housing industry is predicting it’s going to be a bad year. 
Interest rates tell us it’s going to be a bad year. This 
government’s performance tells us it’s going to be a bad year. 
 
You can measure how well Saskatchewan was doing by the 
kind of equalization money they get from the federal 
government. It took a CCF and New Democratic government 
many years to pull this government out of the financial 
mismanagement hole that a Liberal government got it in. We 
finally got into the position, through careful and prudent 
management of the taxpayers’ dollar, where we were out of the 
hole. We were not a have-not province; we weren’t receiving 
equalization transfers, but in fact we were contributing to the 
equalization pot. 
 
Those were good days in Saskatchewan. The people of 
Saskatchewan held their head up high. They were proud to be 
part of Saskatchewan. But here we have this government, in the 
last three years, what are the equalization payments from the 
federal government? Well this year, 440 million; last year 360 
million. That’s an increase from last year to this year of about 
$85 million, indicating that we’re on Canada welfare. This 
government has us on Canada welfare. The year before that it 
was 303 million. 
 
So this government, through its actions, its mismanagement and 
direction, and the economy and the direction of it in 
Saskatchewan, has put us in the position that we are now 
beggars to Ottawa. We are now beggars to Ottawa. 
 
It caused me some concern today, and it must have taken a lot 
of courage from the member opposite to rise in this Chamber 
and introduce president Leo Kristjanson from the University of 
Saskatchewan. I’ve known Mr. Kristjanson for many years, and 
perhaps all of us have — a person who struggled through 
difficult times with this government in its budgeting to attempt 
to keep this university, the University of Saskatchewan, as a 
first-rate university in Saskatchewan, in Canada. It’s been 
difficult. And it was a sorry day when president Kristjanson 
visited this Chamber the day when interim supply is being 
granted, when we’re discussing the estimates of this 
government. 
 
It’s interesting to note what president Kristjanson’s feelings are 
about this government. Quoting from the Star-Phoenix, April 1, 
’89, “U of S woes said ignored in budget.” This is a headline. 
 

Thursday’s provincial budget did little to ease the 
University of Saskatchewan’s funding crisis, says Leo 
Kristjanson. 
 

  



 
April 12, 1989 

763 
 

“Even with the maximum funding suggested by the budget, 
we continue to face significant shortages of resources,” 
Kristjanson, U of S president, said in a press release 
Friday. 
 
“Moreover, we will not be able to undertake any new 
programs or to respond to the needs of the students denied 
admission because of enrolment quotas.” 
 

Another indication of how this government is running the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Under a New Democratic government, the people . . . the 
families of Saskatchewan could send their sons and daughters to 
the university, if they were qualified, and that’s always been the 
case. If they are qualified, they could go to the University of 
Saskatchewan, or the University of Regina in later days. That’s 
not the case these days. 
 
The people . . . the school systems in Saskatchewan — and it’s 
probably even worse in rural parts of Saskatchewan than it is in 
urban Saskatchewan, cities like Saskatoon — the education 
system is under the thumb of the Minister of Education and the 
Minister of Finance as regards financing. 
 
The quality of education must be suffering in rural 
Saskatchewan as it is in urban Saskatchewan. And when 
they’ve completed their education up to grade 12, they have to 
look at the possibilities of going to the University of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. The chances are, 
the chances are that they’re less likely to be attending either of 
those universities because of the direct actions of this 
government — starving the education system, starving the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina. 
 
And the president of the university says it right here. Another 
article that appeared back in March: “U of S woefully 
underfunded.” That’s a statement from the faculty of the 
university. And it reiterates some of the comments that were 
made in the previous article. But it says quite clearly what this 
government has not done for the universities of Saskatchewan. 
 
What about the University of Regina? Well an article appeared 
April 7 in the Leader-Post: “University of Regina’s cupboard is 
bare, president warns in his report.” 
 

“We’re spending money we haven’t got,” Lloyd Barber 
said this week. 
 

No more testimony is necessary, Mr. Chairman. And to top it 
all off, to top it all off, this government has reduced the funds 
for student employment. 
 
Because of their mismanagement of the economy of this 
province, their inability to change, their inability to cope with 
what’s here, they have to cut back on programs such as student 
employment. 
 

Provincial money available for summer student job 
creation has been cut by almost $1 million this year, 
according to figures released by the  

government. 
 

And these are government statistics I’m quoting, these are not 
something that I dreamed up to present in this debate. They’re 
government statistics. I quoted statistics prior to this which 
were directly . . . and this is on unemployment and the labour 
force, this is directly from Stats Saskatchewan, the 
government’s own statistics gathering branch, bureau of 
statistics. It’s their own figures. They stand condemned by the 
public. They stand condemned by their own figures. 
 
The member for Humboldt in his comments mentioned about 
rural Saskatchewan, as he should, and a good indicator of 
what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan is what’s happening to 
small hotels. Well the member mentioned there were 23 or 24 
hotels either closed or repossessed in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In Saskatchewan the headlines blare out at this government, but 
they continue on with their special plans for Saskatchewan 
which don’t include a lot of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the headlines that sings out to the government, but they 
fail to acknowledge, is this one here, April 3, ’89: “Economic 
exiles fleeing province.” Economic exiles fleeing province: 
 

When salesman Jim Walden received an offer to transfer to 
Calgary from Saskatoon late last year, he and his wife 
Valerie jumped at the chance. 
 
“There just weren’t the opportunities any more for a senior 
salesman like myself in Saskatoon,” said Walden, who 
works for an electrical manufacturing firm. 
 
If a farmer . . . 
 

And Mr. Walden understands this situation, as this government 
doesn’t, because they’re not doing anything about getting these 
farmers of Saskatchewan their drought payments. They’re not 
doing a thing about that. Their federal Tory cousins in Ottawa 
promised drought payments early in the new year, or just right 
up to seeding time — no indication of what’s going to happen. 
 
Mr. Walden’s figured it out. He’s ahead of this government and 
he’s heading for Calgary; he’s heading for Calgary. I quote him: 
 

“If the farmer is not making a buck, he’s not going to 
invest. Then I can’t sell electrical products to an 
engineering firm or a contractor because they haven’t got 
any work. 
 
And if the potash industry can’t sell fertilizer, then I can’t 
sell products to the potash mines. I couldn’t see any change 
in the next year or year and a half.” 
 
The Waldens are not alone — almost 33,000 Saskatchewan 
residents opted to leave (the province) last year in pursuit 
of better job, schooling and retirement opportunities in 
other provinces, according to (statistics compiled by  

  



 
April 12, 1989 

764 
 

the) bureau in British Columbia. 
 
Saskatchewan suffered a net loss of more than 16,000 
residents to other provinces last year — the largest loss in 
the country and the equivalent to losing a city larger than 
Swift Current. 
 

I don’t want to read any more of this article because it’s very 
depressing. This government is not affected by depression. It’s 
not affected by the mental depression of the people of 
Saskatchewan, because it is not responding to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you take the business bankruptcies — and the source is the 
Government of Canada Consumer and Corporate Affairs — if 
you take the business bankruptcies from ’87 to ’88, they 
increase from 361 to 456. Consumer bankruptcies increased 
from 633 to 780. The total bankruptcies in Saskatchewan 
increased from 944 to 1,236. The writing’s on the wall; this 
government is mismanaging the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
The headline that caught my eye, and it’s caught a lot of 
people’s eye. It’s like the headline in the Star-Phoenix about 
hunger. The Star-Phoenix, a year or so ago, did a special feature 
on hunger in Saskatchewan. This government hasn’t caught on 
to that issue yet. Maybe they’ll catch on to this one: “Province’s 
fastest-growing export: its people.” 
 
Its people. That’s the fastest-growing export in this province. 
There’s some local growth industries like food banks and 
liquidations. They’re all growth industries in Saskatchewan, and 
that’s unfortunate for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a former premier of this province — and I sat 
here and listened to him — in his first term of office, Mr. Ross 
Thatcher, premier of this province, stood in this House and 
stood on platforms all around Saskatchewan, and he said, the 
acid test is population — the acid test. He took great delight in 
saying that. And the reason he did was that in that first term of 
office he was riding the crest of the economy, the buoyant 
economy of Saskatchewan, and we rose up very close to a 
million people. In his second term of office, that became the 
millstone around his neck. Acid test is population. 
 
This government, in its first term of office, rode the crest, rode 
the buoyant economic crest of this province. The population 
was rising and hit a million. Yes, but that same test is going to 
be a millstone around this government’s neck because the 
population of Saskatchewan has now dropped below a million 
people, below a million people. 
 
(1600) 
 
I am concerned, when I give this government money, for a 
variety of reasons which I’ve already expressed, but I have one 
that concerns me more than any others, and it’s this, Mr. 
Chairman: that this government is overtaxing the people of 
Saskatchewan to build up a kitty for the next election. You need 
only look, you need only look in the blue book — you know the 
book, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Take Highways and Transportation, for example. I  

looked, and I couldn’t believe my arithmetic. Payments to 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation in the 
Department of Highways. This is what we pay for rent of 
buildings around the province, and equipment. You know, 
they’re not doing much on highways — and I’ll deal with that 
when we get to the Highways budget — but the rise in 
payments to the property management corporation, ’88-89 to 
’89-90, which is the current year we’re in, was an increase of 
$582,100 — over a half a million dollar increase in the rent. 
 
Now I thought to myself, well maybe they’ve been suppressing 
the rent and it hadn’t gone up before and they were . . . this is 
catch-up. So I went back one year, checked the figures again, 
and between last year and the previous year, do you know, Mr. 
Chairman, what the increase was in payments to the property 
management corporation? This would astound the Minister of 
Finance, if he was listening — the increase was $787,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — One point two million in two years. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You’re right, $1.369 million increase in 
payments to the property management corporation in two years. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sounds like somebody’s building a slush 
fund. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, that’s what it is. This is where 
they’re hiding the money for the next election campaign. It’s 
not only the birthday party that’s costing the people — the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan — $9 million, it’s these slush funds. 
The birthday party is just to take our attention off the budget, 
hoping that we’ll concentrate on the birthday party. 
 
But we intend to dig into these slush funds that this 
government’s building up in the Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation. How are they hiding it? It’s quite 
simple. They changed the department of supply and services 
into a Crown corporation, which they abhor. They abhor Crown 
corporations. They said they wouldn’t create any more, but 
they’re creating them all the time. 
 
They changed it into a Crown corporation so that we can’t 
examine the estimates of that department here. You don’t get to 
examine the estimates of a Crown corporation. You don’t get to 
question the minister. You don’t get figures like this. 
 
But each department has to pay its dues to the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. Those dues, I suggest to 
you, Mr. Chairman, will go into a . . . a good portion of them 
will go into a slush fund which will help to try and get this 
government elected. 
 
There will be other . . . There are other slush funds too. Any 
government that pays $46.6 million to two advertising firms in 
four years is building a private slush fund. It’s clear, that’s 
exactly what they’re doing. That is an exorbitant amount of 
cash to pay for advertising in a four-year period — $46.6 
million in four years to two advertising firms. 
 
That’s why I cannot support this Minister of Finance and  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

765 
 

this Premier. They don’t deserve my support. I’m not here to 
award Brownie points to this government. I’m here to grieve 
before supply. And I hope I’ve put my grievances before you 
today, Mr. Chairman, because I can’t support this Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to take part in this interim supply debate. And my 
major concern, as expressed by my colleagues, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that much of this money is going to pay the interest 
on the debt that we know now is the third-largest expenditure in 
this budget. This is hard to believe that we’re in such a financial 
mess after just seven years. It’s hard to comprehend, and the 
people of Saskatchewan are quite upset about this. 
 
I guess the first thing that must be noted about this budget is 
that it’s a sorry attempt to make us believe that the government 
has understood what it means to be a responsible manager of 
public funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I said, in just seven 
years, and over eight budgets, this government has incurred 
over a $12 billion debt. It has been a case of mistaken priorities, 
physical incompetence, and falsehoods wreaking havoc on the 
well-being of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, in 1989, we have the unique situation where a 
government, which claims to be pursuing a policy of 
partnership with the people, is telling them that this is the 
third-largest expenditure in the fiscal year, with interest on this 
debt. No new money for health care, basically, after inflation is 
taken into account. No new money for education. The president 
of the University of Regina says that the cupboard is bare in 
education. No new money to assist farmers. No new money for 
our universities. This is not new money to assist small 
businesses. As we know, we’ve got a record number of small 
business bankruptcies in 1988 and little hope for the future. 
 
I just did a survey in Saskatoon Eastview recently and found out 
that 85 per cent of the small businesses there did less business 
volume in 1988 than they did in 1987. Furthermore, less than 10 
per cent of them anticipate hiring any new staff this year. So 
this is clearly not a budget designed to deal with the problems 
of small business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the deficit is soaring, the taxes are sky-rocketing, 
unemployment is up, government services are cut back, 
children are going to school hungry, out-migration at record 
numbers, farms and small businesses are going under with 
increasing frequency. And I might add that this government is 
involved in initiating over some 3,000 farm foreclosures. This is 
a sorry record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and a sad commentary on 
the priorities of this government which completely failed to 
respond to the dreams and the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
In the short time available to me I would like to talk a little bit 
about how this budget impacts on families. I agree, Mr. 
Speaker, with members opposite when they say that a 
supportive family life-style is important to the well-being of 
Saskatchewan citizens; however, when I examine the  

policies and actions of this government, I am overwhelmed by 
the insensitivities and the empty rhetoric. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if supportive family life-style is manifested by 
family members being supportive to one another and accepting 
the differing needs and the capabilities of each family member, 
and in addition, Mr. Speaker, it is a question of equality within 
the family unit — all of these things are things we strive for and 
desire within our own family units, and within our entire 
provincial family, I might add. This is precisely where a 
government can help. They help the family by ensuring that 
there are adequate support structures and opportunities within 
the society that can be accessed equally by all families and all 
family members. 
 
But what did we find in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This 
is a government that’s taking away the access to essential 
family services. They are creating an economic climate that is 
destroying the employment opportunities of our young people 
— some 6,000 job losses for young people in the last three 
years, over 1,000 in this budget alone. They are making it more 
difficult for those who need the services the most to access 
them and be treated fairly and with sensitivity. 
 
Let me give you a couple of examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Not long ago this government cut back on grants to third 
parties. This action placed in serious jeopardy the work being 
carried out by a number of family community groups providing 
assistance to, and shelter to, women and children in abusive 
relationships. 
 
So they cut back on supports to agencies that help families. 
Then what do they do? They realize that families in the 
province are in crisis so they decide to study the problem by 
announcing a symposium. Now I’m not opposed to a family 
symposium where we look at the challenges facing families in 
the 1990s. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s the height of hypocrisy 
in the face to have a symposium, to show-case the symposium 
when this government has cut back, for example, on the native 
family support programs across the province, to family 
counselling agencies with waiting lists, when it cut back on 
needed dental services, and people can’t get in the hospitals. 
 
So they erode the supports to families. Their failed economic 
policies are putting more families in crisis. And then they 
decided they were going to study the problem by having a 
symposium. I think that’s the height of hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
My second point I’d like to raise is again about the school 
dental program. And I raise it because it gives an indication of 
the kind of logic that is demonstrated by our Premier. Not long 
ago he was asked by the Globe and Mail why he cancelled this 
important service for Saskatchewan children. And our Premier 
responded by saying that he didn’t believe that the government 
should ignore moral issues, whatever that means in terms of 
responding to this question. 
 
And what kind of morality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would dictate 
a decision to cancel the children’s school-based  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

766 
 

dental program with a 92 per cent utilization rate? What kind of 
morality promotes profit-centred day care? What kind of 
morality promotes private adoption services? What kind of 
morality would suggest that people on social assistance cannot 
be trusted? What kind of morality allows children to go to 
school hungry? What kind of morality continues to eliminate 
summer employment opportunities for our young people, 
particularly at a time when the need is greatest? 
 
I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is not a 
morality shared by the people of Saskatchewan. The people of 
this province believe in fairness, in justice, in co-operation, and 
in equality. They know that they can no longer expect these 
attributes from this PC government. 
 
One of the most significant needs of all families, no matter what 
their size, location, make-up, and circumstances, is economic 
security. This need is a source of growing concern to all 
families in Saskatchewan. And it is the economic security of 
families that is put at risk by this government; put at risk by an 
increasing tax burden; put at risk by a failure to deal with the 
farm debt crisis throughout this province; put at risk by a blind, 
misplaced faith in 19th century concept of the open market 
system; put at risk by a deficit that threatens the economic 
future of our province; put at risk by a policy of privatization 
that removes the engines of economic growth and opportunity 
from control of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s exactly what privatization has meant to this point in the 
province of Saskatchewan by this government; that’s exactly 
what privatization would mean for the future. However, this is a 
battle that is going to be won on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, and we’re going to ensure that. 
 
It’s sad indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to hear young families say 
to me that they are moving out of the province because there is 
nothing here for them any more. And as youth critic for the 
official opposition, I get many of these calls from all over the 
province. It’s discouraging, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to receive 
phone calls from students wanting to know how they are 
supposed to be able to continue their education and make a 
contribution to the province when they can’t get a summer job, 
can’t get into the university because of the quotas, and simply 
can’t afford the increased tuition fees and the burden that’s 
being shifted to the students. 
 
It is also sad, Mr. Speaker, to attend meetings in communities 
— which we have done because the government certainly has 
not taken the time to listen to people in terms of the issues of 
poverty — but to attend these meetings across the province and 
hear of children going to school hungry. Surely, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, any responsible government that submits a budget for 
the next year and fails to recognize that thousands and 
thousands of children are going to school hungry every day 
should be condemned. 
 
(1615) 
 
When governments provide assistance . . . When this 
government provides assistance to individuals, families,  

or single parents in legitimate need, it is called welfare, and the 
recipients are labelled as lazy, dishonest, and poor parents. I 
was amazed yesterday to hear that the Minister of Social 
Services welcomes the new UIC changes so we can jump on the 
abusers of UIC just like he jumped on the poor people on the 
welfare reform measures. I was amazed to see that the Minister 
of Social Services, who’s charged with the responsibility to 
help reduce and eliminate poverty in this province, would 
support another attack on poor people — attacking poor people 
who are poor and who are unemployed because of the failed 
economic policies of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we believe that 
assistance to people should be an incentive and supportive to 
family life, ensuring fairness, honesty, dignity, and equality. We 
believe that assistance to farmers should be there to ensure that 
the Saskatchewan farm family can continue to be vibrant, 
sound, and in effect a producer of food for the world. 
 
We believe that assistance to industry should be there to ensure 
employment, create new employment opportunities, and that all 
businesses in Saskatchewan, not just big corporate friends, that 
all businesses in Saskatchewan should contribute to our 
economic wealth, our economic health, and our economic 
security. 
 
These, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the priorities not contained in 
the budget that has been presented by this Minister of Finance, 
this eighth consecutive deficit budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So 
we see no money for youth; we see no money for families; no 
money for education; no money for farmers; no money, no hope 
for small businesses. But we see money for big friends; we see 
money for a birthday party that nobody wants. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a failed strategy on the part of this 
government. It’s a strategy based on a desperate government. 
And I urge the Minister of Finance to get his act together so that 
we can turn around the situation that we find ourselves in. 
 
And I just simply . . . Obviously we need money to operate; 
third parties need money so they can provide supports to 
families; small-business people need money; municipalities 
need money. But I simply find myself having difficulty 
supporting this kind of request where the majority of money is 
going to pay interest charges on a debt of this government’s 
own making, and much of it going to large friends like Dome 
Advertising. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few 
questions I’d like to ask of the minister, and I direct him to page 
10 of the little blue book here for ’89-90. And in that book it 
summarizes the budgetary revenue that is stating where the 
government is going to get its money from. And on that page it 
indicates here . . . there’s a new item that indicates that there’s 
going to be a receipt of some $200 million in the Crown 
investments corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1989 

767 
 

I wonder if the minister could advise us — and I think it would 
be of considerable help to the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan if they got an understanding — is this money as a 
result of sales, of sell-offs of Crowns; is it money that has been 
borrowed; or is it money that’s as a result of profits? I wonder if 
you could clarify that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The moneys are not from sales or 
privatizations; two, the moneys are not borrowed; and three, 
they are moneys from incomes earned from the Crown 
corporations. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — If they’re moneys that are earned from the 
Crowns, could you indicate to me for what year, what Crown 
years it was earned from? Is it money earned in the ’89 year, the 
current year, or the previous year ’88? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I don’t have that information, but I 
can tell the hon. member that it is income earned from the 
Crown corporations. What year it may be paid out from time to 
time is a matter of the operations of the Crown corporations, but 
dividends from the Crowns being paid to the Consolidated Fund 
is not new. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Would it be correct to say that you expect 
that to be paid in sometime between now and the end of the 
next . . . the end of the time you bring in the next budget? Is that 
when it’s going to be paid in? 
 
I have one more question, and in view of the fact that you’ve 
indicated that it’s money coming from profits, from Crowns, 
how do you square that with the indication on page 55 from 
your budget address here which indicates the capital financing 
program and the estimations that are going to . . . the estimates 
that are going to be needed to borrow. And here it says that the 
Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan will be 
borrowing $176 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, like any other company, it is standard 
practice. You can earn income in a year; you may decide to 
borrow for your long-term capital projects, amortize them over 
a longer period of time. That is traditionally the way, I think, 
that most companies operate, and certainly the way the Crown 
corporations. 
 
For example, historically SaskTel has paid a dividend to the 
Crown Management Board, Crown investments corporation, at 
the same time it would be borrowing for things like their capital 
projects — new switching equipment. And that has been the 
long-standing practice and a normal business corporate practice. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I’d like to bring it to the attention of 
the member that these are really main estimates questions, and 
the question before the committee is the motion for interim 
supply, and these questions should be addressed to the minister 
in the main estimates. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I would thank the minister very much for 
the information that he provided, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $336,400,300 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 1990. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: —  
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum 
of $53,675,000 be granted out of the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $53,675,000 be granted 
to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 1990. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I move the resolutions be now read the first 
and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the resolutions 
read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 18, An Act Granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal year 
Ending Respectively on March 31, 1990, be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — By leave of the Assembly and under rule 
48(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask the minister to introduce  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

768 
 

his guests, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my right, 
Mr. Little, the president; behind him, Ron Styles, vice-president 
of program operations; behind me, Larry Boys, the 
vice-president of financial and administrative services; and Ron 
Sotski, the executive director of property management and field 
services. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to enter this discussion on the 
estimates of Sask Housing Corporation. As everybody knows, 
we are presently in the midst of one of the most popular 
programs ever devised by any government in the history of our 
province, and that is the home program. It’s a program that we 
are all familiar with, because I’m sure that all members on both 
sides of the House have enjoyed being in partnership with the 
government as they improve our most important investment, 
that is our home. 
 
(1630) 
 
The program, of course, on the grant side is designed to match 
dollar for dollar, up to $3,000, any improvements that are put 
into the home. It’s a big, big improvement on what used to exist 
in the olden days in another department, the property 
improvement grant. That was strictly a cash grant to the people, 
and little was done for economic value. With this one, Mr. 
Chairman, there is no question that the economic value is there. 
It creates all kinds of jobs, and the economy, at least the sector 
of the housing renovation industry, is flourishing. It’s almost 
triple what the normal renovation industry is doing in business, 
and it’s rapidly approaching $1 billion. Having said that, it’ll be 
interesting to see what my critic has to ask. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
in your comments to the throne speech, you referred to your 
very effective working relationship that you have with all 
sectors of the business community in our province, but certainly 
with all of the home builders, not only in Regina, but in 
Saskatchewan. And you also made reference to the fact that you 
are in favour of reduced taxes and that you criticized the New 
Democrats for having a program of perhaps more taxes on 
industry than you say you support. 
 
Given those comments, Mr. Minister, I would like to first of all 
take this opportunity to question you and to ask you about 
something that’s coming up in the very near future, and that’s 
the federal government’s budget and the proposal federally for a 
national sales tax. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that the Saskatchewan Home 
Builders’ Association has made representation . . . Mr. Speaker, 
it’s difficult for me to address the minister when he is not 
attending to my remarks because I’m talking about an issue 
that’s serious to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, if 
it’s not serious to you. And that’s the question of the national 
sales tax, Mr. Minister. 
 
You will have received representation from the Saskatchewan 
Home Builders’ Association regarding their concern about the 
national sales tax as it will affect the building of new homes in 
the province of Saskatchewan. The home builders in 
Saskatchewan, the  

new home builders, are already suffering from a decreased 
number of new homes being built in the province. The number 
has decreased over the last two years, and we are, as we all 
recognize, in a depressed economy. 
 
Home building creates jobs in the province of Saskatchewan as 
well as creating assets for the people and the opportunity for 
many people in the province to own their own homes, and that 
is still a very important value for the people in this province, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
The Minister of Finance has recently come back from a 
discussion with the federal government, and I’m really 
surprised to see that he is still not able to tell us anything 
specific about what your government has said to the federal 
government regarding the national sales tax, particularly as it 
affects home builders. 
 
And for people who are listening to this discussion, Mr. 
Minister, I want to just share with them some of the information 
that you’ve received already from the home builders’ 
association regarding this issue, because it’s one that I’m very 
interested in seeing what you will say in response to it. 
 
The home builders were asking the Minister of Finance, and 
you as the minister in charge of housing in this province will 
certainly be involved in this because you were asked to address 
the home builders’ association at their meeting, they were 
asking that the government represent them, the provincial 
government represent them in these national sales tax 
discussions, and to make a point of letting people know how 
much a national sales tax on the building . . . on the home 
construction industry is going to hurt the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Under the proposed reforms the uniform sales tax rate would be 
applied to the purchase price of new housing, but the sale of 
existing housing and rents would be exempt from taxation. So 
there’s already a discrimination there. 
 
The impacts of the proposed sales tax and the reform of the new 
housing sector according to the Canadian figures, the proposed 
tax on the purchase price of housing would be extremely 
detrimental to the new housing sector, as I’ve already said, both 
to the producers and the consumers. It would immediately 
increase the average purchase price of a new home by 
approximately $10,000, Mr. Minister. It would reduce the 
accessibility of new home ownership housing for about 60,000 
potential first-time home buyers. 
 
Now that’s the figures for all of Canada. But that represents a 
decrease of about a quarter of the people who have been able to 
buy new housing in this country. And I’m assuming those 
figures are somewhat comparable here in Saskatchewan 
because the home builders would not be sending you this brief 
if it did not apply here as well. 
 
To maintain the mortgage payment to income ratio for an 
average priced new home at its pre-tax reform level, annual 
household increases would have to rise by an estimated $4,700, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
  



 
April 12, 1989 

769 
 

Now we have here in this province many people already forced 
out of work. And one of my concerns in the constituency of 
Saskatoon . . . the minister is laughing at my comments when I 
am trying to tell him that one of my concerns in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Centre are the people who are losing 
their jobs, Mr. Minister. The people in the canning industry, for 
example; the people in the mining industry, for example; the 
people in SED Systems, for example; those people your 
government is prescribing retraining programs for, for jobs that 
will not exist because your budget did not create any job 
programs — simply a prescription that people retrain. People 
will be retrained for jobs where they get lower incomes. And 
yet here, with this national sales tax, the cost of a new home for 
a first-time home buyer will be going up by a . . . and people 
will have to have an income increase of around $4,700. 
 
This national sales tax that’s proposed on the housing industry 
would reduce the accessibility of new rental housing for about 
200,000 renters. It would result in a sharp decline in new 
housing construction. It would produce a sizeable windfall gain 
to existing home owners. The exemption of the sale of existing 
residential properties from the proposed sales tax would shift 
demand to existing housing and away from new housing. With 
the supply of existing housing fixed, this would cause their 
values to rise. The eventual increase in existing home prices 
could amount to several thousand dollars for an average home. 
 
This rise in existing house prices would affect the affordability 
of home ownership for first-time buyers in the same way as the 
rise in new house prices, and it could reduce the market 
penetration of energy efficient new homes, Mr. Minister. And 
that’s a concept that’s easy to understand, if there’s a national 
sales tax on the products that people need to add to their homes 
to make them energy efficient. 
 
By taxing the purchase price of new housing, this brief said to 
you, the tax is largely a tax on future shelter services rather than 
current consumption. 
 
In response to our questions already about the positions taken 
regarding the national sales tax in Ottawa to the federal Tory 
government, the Minister of Finance has said, well these taxes 
aren’t going to come into place until 1991. We don’t know any 
of the details of this tax, and yet you’re going forward 
discussing the national sales tax with your PC cohorts in Ottawa 
without any understanding or any discussion or any of the 
details about how this national sales tax is going to be applied. 
 
And the Home Builders’ Association is concerned as you know, 
because they’ve questioned you about this and written to you 
about this increase in the sales tax. What we’re looking at, if 
you add the national sales tax to the provincial sales tax, is an 
increase of some 16 per cent for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And obviously it’s going to have an impact on the new home 
buyers, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I particularly want to know what you have said to the home 
builders’ association in response to their concerns. You have 
indicated in the throne speech that you’ve been talking to 
people. I wonder if you could let me know what  

your response has been publicly to this concern of the home 
builders’ association. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that’s a very 
interesting question and I thank her for it. Unfortunately, it’s 
about eight or nine months too late. But none the less, I’ll take 
the time to explain it to her again. 
 
I represented the interests of the Saskatchewan home builders 
very well at our national housing ministers’ conference, and 
they know that and they appreciate that because it was this 
minister that brought that very issue to the table. Interestingly 
enough, it was this minister that also met with the Canadian 
home builders during this same conference, and I believe that I 
was the only housing minister from the country that took the 
opportunity to do that while I was there. 
 
But in any event, Mr. Chairman, I responded February 6, I 
believe was the date that we were in Crown corporations with 
Sask Housing Corporation, and I responded for about 45 
minutes to various members of my critic’s caucus on this very 
same question, the issue of national sales tax. 
 
And it was interesting, and I went along with the questions in 
the Crown corporation hearings for that length of time for one 
very reason. Mr. Chairman, interestingly enough, it was the day 
before, the day before the Crown corporation hearings that it 
was reported in the press — matter of fact on the front page of 
the Regina Leader-Post; I don’t know what page it might have 
been on in the Saskatoon paper — that the federal Minister of 
Finance had agreed to not allow the national sales tax to affect 
affordable housing. 
 
That is the position that I understand is still in place at this very 
moment. I have not read nor heard any other press releases to 
the contrary. The press release that was issued by the Minister 
of Finance and the reports prior to you people asking me this 
question two months ago, I find it difficult to believe that you 
still don’t have that in your possession, or that the home 
builders, if you’re so close to them, haven’t indeed told you 
that, because it’s not even a concern of theirs any longer. It’s 
finished until the actual tax is announced. And unless if it 
contains a surprise, we are under the impression, we, all of us, 
that affordable housing will not be affected. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure the arrogance of your 
patronizing style of responding to me is not going to be lost on 
the people who are watching this program, even though it may 
be lost on the members of your government opposite. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to define then what you mean by 
affordable housing, and give me the specifics of what your 
reply has been to the home builders’ association in regard to 
their concern about the national sales tax affecting the cost of 
housing in Saskatchewan — the definition of affordable 
housing. And do you agree with their estimate that the cost of 
housing, if the national sales tax does go through, the cost of 
housing will go up by $10,000? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I obviously can’t  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

770 
 

do that. You know, the definition of affordable housing that the 
federal minister indicated, I can’t tell you that. Whether he has 
made a deal with the Canadian home builders, I can’t tell you 
that either, because I’m not privy to what they talked about. 
 
I can tell you that the Saskatchewan home builders don’t appear 
that it’s a problem. So if they’re not concerned and the federal 
government isn’t concerned, why do you raise this issue now? 
 
Ms. Smart: — I raise it because I’m concerned and because the 
people of Saskatchewan are concerned, Mr. Minister, about the 
cost of affordable housing in this province. And if you stand 
there and say that you can’t define affordable housing and that 
you have no details about this plan and this sales tax, that’s 
exactly my point. 
 
You don’t know what you’re talking about; you don’t have any 
details. You’re under the impression that you have somehow 
reassured the home builders’ association that nothing’s going to 
happen with this sales tax, and it’s going to come in in 1991 so 
you’re not prepared to work on it at this point in time anyway, 
which you should be doing. Because you need to have a 
planned approach to this issue and you should be opposing sales 
tax on essentials like housing. 
 
Housing is an essential need in this province for people, and 
many people in Saskatchewan, many young people want to be 
first-time home buyers in this province. They want to have 
access to their own homes. Have you opposed the national sales 
tax then on the housing? Have you told the federal government 
and did the Minister of Finance, on your behalf, lobby the 
federal Progressive Conservative government about this sales 
tax? 
 
And will you answer my question also, Mr. Minister, as to 
whether, if the sales tax goes through, you agree that the cost of 
housing will go up? 
 
(1645) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that I could be 
any more clear. Certainly we have opposed it. Certainly we 
have lobbied Ottawa. We like to believe that in the event 
housing is excluded, as Mr. Wilson, the federal minister, has 
announced and has assured the Canadian home builders that in 
some small measure our government, along with . . . working in 
conjunction with the home builders, as we always do, working 
together with the private sector, which is something that we’re 
totally familiar with doing, have indeed won a battle on behalf 
of all of the people of this province to keep housing affordable. 
 
Now, having said that, you’ve asked, have we . . . or were you 
working on a plan for this tax? What tax? There is no tax. So 
how can you work on a plan? I mean, that’s an impossible 
situation. 
 
I can tell you, however, that the home builders and I have had 
several discussions that in the event that this tax would be 
applied, that there would be some alternate method of whatever 
that we would have to look at. We recognize that. And once the 
tax is announced, indeed if  

there is a problem, discussions have already been under way. 
 
I don’t believe there will be a problem, the home builders don’t 
believe that there will be a problem, and I don’t believe that the 
people of Saskatchewan have to believe that there is any 
problem. And you don’t have to unnecessarily try to scare and 
threaten them, because you would probably be the last person in 
the world to give the federal government any credit in the event 
that that tax was not on. 
 
So I don’t know why you’re wasting this Assembly’s time by 
talking about something that is non-existent, and something that 
has already been addressed by this government, and something 
that there is no problem on between this government and the 
home builders, and something that the people of this province 
have no need to fear. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, you have already told me that you 
have no definition of affordable housing. You have already told 
me that you have made very little lobbying to the federal 
government regarding this issue, because if you had a plan 
where you were lobbying — and I’m not saying a plan in terms 
of the tax coming in, but a systematic understanding of what 
this tax means — and having communicated to the federal 
government very specifically the concerns here in 
Saskatchewan, you would be able to submit that in writing, if 
you have that communication, or you would be able to tell me 
in detail what you’re talking about. 
 
I don’t trust you when you talk about the federal government 
exempting affordable housing and you saying you have no idea 
what affordable housing is in Saskatchewan. That is something 
that you, as the minister responsible for the housing 
corporation, should have at your fingertips, what your definition 
of affordable housing is, and it should be related to the income 
that people have here in the province. 
 
I don’t trust you to define affordable housing, Mr. Minister, 
because I think that you have a very inflated idea of what 
Saskatchewan people can bear in terms of costs, Mr. Minister, 
because your government has been piling and piling on top of 
the people of Saskatchewan, increases in utility rates, increases 
in costs of goods and services, increases in gas taxes, increases 
in all sorts of taxes that are on the people of Saskatchewan that 
really hurt the ordinary people of this province, the people on 
low incomes and the people on middle incomes. 
 
And not only have you been supporting increases in their cost 
of living here in this province, but you’ve also contributed very 
much to the unemployment in this province, and to the fact that 
many people are falling below the poverty line in terms of their 
income. And those are serious issues, Mr. Minister, and I will 
have some more to talk about in terms of the kind of housing 
that your corporation has been providing to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to pin you down, please, Mr. Minister, to your 
understanding of the term “affordable housing,” which you say 
the federal minister has exempted from the  
  



 
April 12, 1989 

771 
 

national sales tax, and what your assurance is that this is 
actually going to happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — You know, Mr. Chairman, let’s get 
something straight. I have said from the outset I can’t give you 
the federal Minister of Finance’s definition of affordable 
housing. How can I? Now you’re asking for the impossible. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I’ll tell you why not if you can’t 
figure it out. What’s an affordable house in Toronto versus an 
affordable house in Saskatoon versus an affordable house in 
northern Saskatchewan. Come on, get with it. I was just talking 
to my young son who lives in Toronto. His definition of 
affordable housing is different than mine, right off the snuff. 
 
So how can you expect the federal Minister of Finance to give 
you a definition of affordable housing when you’re talking 
about a tax that is non-existent, that he says isn’t going to apply. 
You’re asking a bunch of meaningless, simple questions. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I am asking an essential question, Mr. Minister, 
and I want you to answer it as the minister responsible for the 
housing corporation in Saskatchewan. You can pass the buck if 
you want to; you can say that you don’t know what the 
minister’s definition, federally, is of affordable housing. But 
what is your definition in Saskatchewan? What have you 
presented to the minister, the federal minister, in terms of the 
level of affordable housing here in this province? What have 
you done to define that term and to put pressure on the federal 
government regarding that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I think, Mr. Chairman, after I’ve been 
talking to my officials, it’s fair to say that there is probably no 
definition of affordable housing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
well the opposition House Leader says oh, come on. If you’re 
so smart, why didn’t you define it, because you never did define 
it either. We’ve got partners in this business, and they’re called 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. 
 
And affordable housing, particularly when you’re relating to 
market value, there’s a big variance of earning power amongst 
all the people in this country because of the divergence and the 
size of our country. So that what we do have is one standard 
that we live by, if you want to get into that — but it really 
doesn’t apply into market — the market price of housing, as the 
tax would. And that’s where it’s related to public housing. 
 
Now in public housing it’s 25 per cent of your income and it’s 
subsidized on that basis. Now that’s a standard that goes across 
Canada. So obviously even there, surely you must recognize, as 
a result of that, what I’m trying to explain to you, because what 
does a person earn in Toronto versus a person in La Ronge, and 
it’s 25 per cent of what they earn. Obviously somebody in La 
Ronge, Canada, is not going to have the same earning power as 
somebody in Toronto, Canada. 
 
Therefore their definition of affordable housing is going to  

be totally different. And people, as they listen to my argument 
on this, are going to accept that, because what’s affordable to 
one segment of the country is certainly different from that 
portion of another one. And you’re still trying to relate this to a 
tax that doesn’t apply to anything. So this whole area of 
questioning makes no sense at all, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well just because you can’t answer my 
questions doesn’t mean to say it doesn’t make sense, Mr. 
Minister. The Saskatchewan Home Builders’ Association have 
made representation to you regarding the implications of the 
national sales tax. You’re saying that you still don’t know 
whether the national sales tax is coming in or not, but that you 
haven’t said very much to the federal government regarding it 
except that you accept the PC government federally saying that 
they will not tax affordable housing. But you have no idea what 
that cost means in Saskatchewan; you have no definition of 
affordable housing for Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand perfectly clearly the cost of housing is higher in 
Toronto than it is in La Ronge, Mr. Minister, but that is not 
acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan in terms of what you 
think affordable housing . . . If you say to the home builders in 
Saskatchewan that affordable housing will not be subjected to 
the national sales tax, and you have no definition of affordable 
housing, that’s just another example of the kind of smoke and 
mirrors that your government is presenting to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that is unacceptable. In fact, behind that is a 
lot of deceit, Mr. Minister, because you won’t level with us, and 
you won’t level with the home builders exactly what your 
intentions are regarding this national sales tax and the impact 
that it’s going to have on the new home construction in this 
province. 
 
New home construction creates jobs and it’s important to the 
consumers of Saskatchewan, and yet you have not even 
bothered to come up with a definition of affordable housing for 
the province of Saskatchewan, taking into account the income 
levels across this province and the concerns of the home 
builders’ association and the concerns of the consumers who I 
want to represent in questioning you, because of housing being 
an essential need for the people in this province. 
 
And given that that’s an essential need, Mr. Minister, and given 
that you’ve already mentioned the housing in La Ronge and 
you’re prepared to talk about housing in northern 
Saskatchewan, I would like to ask my colleague, the member 
from Athabasca, to give you some questions regarding the 
home builders’ program in northern Saskatchewan and the cost 
of housing there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, before we continue with 
northern housing, you know, I’m going to try to put my critic at 
ease so that she can understand. 
 
I meet regularly with the home builders. If they had a problem 
defining affordable housing, they would tell me. What if we put 
a definition on affordable housing now — and the member for 
Moose Jaw says, ah — only to find out that that definition is 
wrong when Ottawa puts a different definition on it? 
 
  



 
April 12, 1989 

772 
 

And we may not even need a definition for it, because there is 
no tax. If the tax is put on, if affordable is included — if, if, if 
— we will define it in conjunction with the home builders at 
that time. 
 
This kind of reminds me of my kids asking me questions. They 
say, “Daddy, how high is up?” 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
want to ask you a few questions about northern housing. I 
wonder if you could indicate, Mr. Minister, how many of the 
old DNS (department of northern Saskatchewan) houses or 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation houses that have been 
vacated in the northern area in 1988. Would you have those 
figures, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Chairman, while the minister is looking up those figures, I 
wonder if he could also have his officials indicate to him if 
there has been a study carried out into northern housing. I mean, 
all aspects of northern housing, in northern Saskatchewan also. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, we manage somewhere 
between 1400 and 1,500 units in northern Saskatchewan, and I 
suppose that at any given time there’s . . . my officials advise 
me that there’s between 90 to 120 vacant on a rotating business 
. . . or on a rotating basis. 
 
Regarding the study, there is a major study under way now. I 
have been meeting with the northern communities about this 
study. We have pressed our federal partner, CMHC (Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation), into the matter. They are 
conducting a very, very extensive study. They were originally 
going to have quite a long, lengthy time frame that was not 
satisfactory to us. We have been able to push that ahead and, in 
consultation with most of the northern communities, they’re 
pleased with the progress that we’re making on it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Minister. When you 
consider the fact that you have 120 vacancies in northern 
Saskatchewan at any given time, that indicates to me, and I’m 
sure that would indicate to you and your officials, that there is a 
serious problem in northern Saskatchewan. And I suggest to 
you, Mr. Minister, that the study that is taking place right now 
should be completed very quickly to alleviate the type of 
problems that we have with northern housing. 
 
As you’re aware, many of the individuals who have moved out 
of these houses, it’s just got to a point where they could not 
afford, they could not afford to stay in the houses. The rents just 
got too high. And this is why I’ve always said that the policy 
was unfair in northern Saskatchewan. You charge 25 per cent of 
their income, and when you take a look at the houses that you 
provide for civil servants — and I give you an example of an 
RCMP officer who lives in northern Saskatchewan, or I can 
give you an example — and they are cost-shared between the 
federal and provincial, so I’ll use that. They get those houses 
and they don’t have to do . . . There’s no upkeep to the house, 
no cost for upkeep. They don’t have to look after the lawns — 
that’s all put in. Fences are put up. That’s not done with public 
housing in northern  

Saskatchewan. 
 
(1700) 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that this is why we have a large 
amount of vacancies up there. Individuals just cannot afford 
these payments. And you have the double standard, because you 
take the individual who is working for the government, not only 
is he getting free housing up North — he pays a certain amount, 
but he doesn’t pay . . . he or she does not pay 25 per cent of 
their income. This just doesn’t take place. 
 
But as you have it now in northern Saskatchewan, individuals 
have to pay 25 per cent of their income. And there are some 
individuals who in the last few years, who have had these 
homes, have moved into a good position, wherever they’re 
working — up at Cluff Lake or at Key Lake or whatever it may 
be — they have good jobs. Then all of a sudden you tag them 
with 25 per cent of their income and they just can’t afford those 
payments. Some of them are running . . . you’re asking them for 
8, $900 a month, living in northern Saskatchewan where 
everything costs more, and you know that, because they’re a 
long way from services. 
 
But that doesn’t apply to the civil servant. It applies to the 
individuals who are living in the North. Added to that, those 
civil servants also are getting northern allowances over and 
above that for living in the North. 
 
And what you are doing with the policy, and I say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that that has to be changed and you have to take a 
realistic look at it and consider the fact that those residents 
living in northern Saskatchewan, it costs them a lot more to live 
than it does anybody in the South or your civil servants who are 
living in the North. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I urge you to bring out that report as soon as 
possible and take into consideration the fact that those houses 
are in northern Saskatchewan and those payments are just too 
high. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to note that 
it sounds to me like the NDP is favouring that our northern 
employees pay a much higher rent than they do, and I’ll carry 
that message back to all of the staff in the North. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:04 p.m. 


