


















































March 17, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 17, 1989 
 

217 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure today to introduce to you, and to introduce to all 
members of this Assembly, two groups of students from the city 
of Prince Albert. Both groups of students have come to visit the 
legislature to have a tour of the legislature. I will be meeting 
them for photos after this question period and for drinks. These 
students are taking part in the Regina Optimist Band (and Vocal 
Jazz) Festival. The festival started yesterday and will continue 
through today and into Saturday. Along with the students from 
Vikar School who are seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
are their teachers, Dave Monette and Kathy Spilchuk. 
 
On behalf of the member from Prince Albert-Duck Lake, I 
would also like to welcome students from Vincent Massey 
School and from King George School, who are part of the band. 
These are both schools in Prince Albert. They are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. There are 34 of them, and along with 
them are their teachers, Richard Smith and Florence Secele, as 
well as chaperons Don Thorsen, Gerry Straf and June Kudel. I 
wish you all a good day today, a good performance in the 
festival, and a safe trip home. And I ask the members to greet 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Attracting Enterprises to Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is directed to the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and it pertains to a newspaper clipping in the 
Moose Jaw Times-Herald last Saturday, the headline of which 
reads as follows: “Devine yens for Asian funds.” And the first 
paragraph states . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d like to remind the 
hon. member that we don’t use members’ names in the House. 
And I know sometimes these names are in quotes and headlines 
and that sort of thing, but we have been trying to follow the 
practice of not using names at all. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I abide by your ruling. I guess 
I will start the question fresh by saying, the headline would 
read, “(Blank) yens for Asian funds.” And the first paragraph 
says: 
 

Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. 
free trade pact . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, you should note this very carefully. 
 

Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. 
free trade pact could be lured to Saskatchewan with 
promises of cheap land and  

cheap labour, Premier Grant (Blank) said Friday. 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I believe that we 
should not only abide by the rule, but the spirit of the rule, the 
spirit of the rule. I think hon. members will agree with that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I fully intend to comply with 
your rule, sir. Perhaps on orders of the day you might give me a 
clarification on this. I understood the rules of the House to be 
clearly not to use the names of members in the course of debate 
or speeches. I’ve always honoured that. But if there’s a 
newspaper clipping or some other quotation in which the names 
are referred, how else does it relate? Nevertheless, I’ll abide by 
that, and if you’ll give me some time to speak at 10:30 I’ll do 
so. 
 
May I start then, with your permission, just to put the quotation 
into context and give the Premier some time to think of his 
answer? 
 
The quotation says, quote: 
 

Asian entrepreneurs hoping to cash in on the Canada-U.S. 
free trade pact could be lured to Saskatchewan with 
promises of cheap land and cheap labour, the Premier said 
Friday. 
 

End quote, it’s not a direct quote. 
 
My question therefore to the Premier is as follows: isn’t it 
correct that in this one statement to the Moose Jaw Progressive 
Conservatives which you made a few days ago is embodied the 
very heart of this government’s, your government’s economic 
policy which is a policy to try to build prosperity on the backs 
of cheap labour, cheap working people, and cheap farm land, 
cheap land in the province of Saskatchewan, that that is the 
ultimate goal of free trade and privatization? Is that so? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, that is not correct. I will say 
at the outset, happy St. Patrick’s Day to the members opposite. 
It is the 17th of Ireland, and being of Irish descent I want to 
wish everybody happy St. Pat’s. 
 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of a North American 
free trade agreement between Canada and the United States, 
more and more people are looking at investing, manufacturing, 
and processing in Saskatchewan. Let me give you a couple of 
examples so the hon. member would know. Both of them would 
be, for example, and more, in Saskatoon. 
 
If I could say, Mr. Speaker, the manufacture of turbines in 
Saskatoon by Marubeni-Hitachi, offshore Pacific Rim people, is 
going very well. They told me, Mr. Speaker, that they have 
never had better productivity in any of their production any 
place in the world; productivity, Mr. Speaker, labour 
productivity in those turbine manufacturing places in 
Saskatoon. That’s number one productivity that they’ve found 
any place, including Japan. 
 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

218 
 

Secondly, I note this morning that Canada’s leading garment 
manufacturer, Peter Nygard, said that he is going to 
manufacture, now, clothing in the city of Saskatoon for the 
complete North American market with up to 300 new people 
employed in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now he said that, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the productivity of labour. He knows we have a very high 
wage rate, one of the highest levels of minimum wage any place 
in North America, and at the same time he knows that there’s 
access to that North American market. 
 
Now with respect to prices, Mr. Speaker, the price of real estate 
is lower here than it is in New York or it is in Chicago or it is in 
Los Angeles. This is a good place to invest because of 
productivity, because of the price of real estate, because, Mr. 
Speaker, we have access to raw material. 
 
We just saw Weyerhaeuser just announce another $23 million 
expansion as a result of free trade with North America. 
Everybody in the world is excited about manufacturing and 
processing in Saskatchewan because of productivity and access 
to the United States market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier. Mr. Premier, in the light of such legislative enactments 
as The Employment Benefits Act, your proposed equity 
financing proposal schemes which, as I understand it, will move 
farmers from owners to tenants, in the light of other initiatives 
which this government has enacted, namely such things with 
respect to the minimum wage, these are the actual embodiments 
of a cheap labour, cheap land policy. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, 
that the reality is that this government has embarked upon a 
cheap labour, cheap land policy in the hopes of attracting 
industry and trade to the province of Saskatchewan, and in 
doing so is determined to drive down the standard of living of 
our workers and our business people. And that’s wrong. Would 
you admit that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, a couple more examples of 
increased trade and productivity and prosperity as a result of 
free trade. Intercontinental Packers is expanding, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the Pacific Rim. Intercontinental Packers in 
Saskatoon is the first Canadian packing plant to have a long-run 
contract to supply beef to Korea, Mr. Speaker. As a result of 
that, they’re expanding. Flexi-Coil packers, Mr. Speaker, are 
now manufacturing air seeders for the North American market 
— they have a contract with John Deere — manufacture in 
Saskatoon air seeders and cultivators for all of North America. 
Why, Mr. Speaker? As a result of the free trade agreement. 
 

Let me just point out, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member knows 
that as we develop, diversify, process, and manufacture the 
products we have here, Canadians and Saskatchewan people 
prosper. I just say to the hon. member, the more we can 
manufacture and process here, the better we will be. 
 
And finally with respect to the land, Mr. Speaker: even Mikhail 
Gorbachev in the Soviet Union is getting rid of land bank in the 
Soviet Union — even Mikhail Gorbachev is doing that. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s about time we allow Saskatchewan and 
Canadian people to prosper as a result of investment and not cut 
them off as the previous administration did with land bank. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier 
who is so well versed on Premier Mikhail Gorbachev. I wish he 
was as well versed on the needs and the problems of the people 
of Saskatchewan as he is on Russia. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Premier, my question to you is very 
simple. This article gives a quotation which you have not 
denied. And the quotation is that you’re going to lure Asian 
capital and outside capital on “promises of cheap land and 
cheap labour.” Those are your promises of cheap land and 
cheap labour. 
 
Specifically, tell us how you’re going to deliver on those 
promises of cheap land and cheap labour, other than what 
you’ve all ready done with respect to the question of farm 
foreclosures, equity financing, and everything else that this 
government has introduced. What additionally do you offer by 
way of cheap land and cheap labour? Tell us the details of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I said at the outset that that 
is not true. I said we are encouraging people to invest here 
because of our productivity. People know that we can process, 
manufacture, and we have complete access to the North 
American market. And you’re going to see more and more 
people come in to the province of Saskatchewan and invest. 
 
And one day, Mr. Speaker, he’s complaining because people 
are leaving rural areas. The next day he stands up and says, well 
you don’t want to encourage people to build and invest and 
prosper in Saskatchewan. Well he can’t have it both ways, Mr. 
Speaker. I encourage people to process, manufacture, invest in 
the province of Saskatchewan so in fact we can prosper. At the 
same time, I encourage people to invest in Power bonds, in 
telephone bonds, in energy corporations and in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Well he’s against that too, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Just let me say this. He comes part way, then he slips back. He 
comes part way and says, well it’s a pretty good idea, and then 
he slips back because the radicals on the other side say, no, we 
can’t let people invest in Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

219 
 

Mr. Speaker, we are from all over the world, that immigrated 
here. The Irish, the Ukrainians, the Germans, the Japanese 
people world-wide came to Saskatchewan to build. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not going to go back on that tradition. We are an 
open society. We are a democratic society. We are a free 
society. This country of Canada and the province of 
Saskatchewan will encourage immigrants . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a new question to the Premier, and I don’t think I need too 
much of a lecture from the Premier. I don’t think he was 
lecturing me today about how new Canadians come to build this 
country. My father came from the Soviet Union, the Ukraine, to 
build a home for himself and his family and for us here. And we 
know all about that. No one objects to that. 
 
I’m for attracting investment. I’m for attracting private 
entrepreneurial activity in Saskatchewan. No one is against that 
on this side. But what we are against is doing it at the expense 
of our farmers and our working people who are here, because 
we’re not going to promise them cheap labour and cheap land 
as he promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And when my father came over here he 
didn’t come over here to displace some other Canadian to get 
lower prices for his labour. 
 
Now my question is this, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Premier is, with respect to this article — and this will be the last 
question that I have on this matter — still under this same 
headline, there’s another quotation which needs one question, 
and one answer from the Premier. 
 
The quotation says this: 
 

The people of this province want economic development, 
and they don’t care whose money is behind it, said the 
Premier in Moose Jaw to attend a PC fund raising meeting. 
 

“They don’t care whose money is behind it,” is the quotation. I 
want to ask the Premier, is that an accurate quotation? And if 
it’s an accurate quotation, is the Premier of this province telling 
the people of this province that he doesn’t care where the 
money comes from, including if the money comes from foreign 
countries, to take over vital public resources such as potash or 
vital public utilities as SaskEnergy, or farm land? Is that the 
position of his government, that he doesn’t care where the 
money comes from as long as cheap land and cheap labour is 
achieved? Is that your approach? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is on pretty thin ice when he says that he doesn’t 
want to see the French investing here, the Germans investing 
here, Americans investing here, Japanese, Chinese. 

Mr. Speaker, let me just put a couple of points to the hon. 
member. We are encouraging people to invest and build in 
Canada and invest and build in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, under the previous administration I believe 
it’s fair to say that the Koreans invested here. They invested in 
uranium. I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that the French 
invested in Saskatchewan under the NDP, in uranium. I think 
it’s fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Americans invested here, 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As a result, we saw economic development, we saw processing 
and manufacturing. Now when he’s in the opposition, he said, 
well we can’t have Hong Kong people invest here. He didn’t 
say, oh, you don’t want Chinese now; we don’t want more 
Koreans. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what is he saying? He’s just saying, as he 
does with respect to the land bank, as he does with respect to 
public participation, as he does with all kinds of programs with 
respect to trade, he’s on one side when he’s in on government, 
and he’s on the other side when he isn’t. 
 
He says he’s an immigrant and his parents immigrated here, but 
he’s against people coming from China or other places to 
immigrate to the province of Saskatchewan. This province and 
this country was settled by immigrants, Mr. Speaker — Irish, 
Ukrainian, Chinese, German, Americans and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are an open society, and I say to the hon. 
member, this province will stay open to people from all over the 
world as long as I’m Premier of the province in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I believe it’s . . . Order, order! Order, order. I 
believe it’s an appropriate time to just remind the House that 
question period shouldn’t be a time for debate, and we should 
remember that and try to abide by that rule for the good of 
question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I don’t think it’s the hon. 
members in their seat who decides who speaks next. The 
Minister of Health was on his feet; I saw him on his feet . . . he 
may have been on his feet first, but I didn’t see him on his feet 
first. Those are the rules of this House, and I don’t think hon. 
members from their seats holler and decide who speaks next. 
 

Wait For Surgery 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, as you will recall, I attempted to bring this answer 
back to the House yesterday at my first opportunity. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m answering a question that the Premier took notice 
of on my behalf a week ago — I believe it was last Friday — 
and I just want to quote very briefly from Hansard of March 
10; page 30 of Hansard,  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

220 
 

Mr. Speaker, where the hon. member from Regina Lakeview, 
the health critic, said in part: 
 

(A gentleman) . . . died of a heart failure while he was 
waiting for a bed in Saskatoon — for a hospital bed, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask the Premier how he explains this case? 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is to set out the facts 
of the case, just very briefly the facts of the case, and then make 
a point that we all should be carrying our own responsibilities in 
here in whatever way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the facts of the case are as follows. The facts of 
the case are as follows. While the hon. member suggested that 
the person was waiting for a bed in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, the 
facts are these. This information was received from the late 
gentleman’s physician in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Batten had undergone by-pass surgery in Alberta in 
October of 1982; he was an Alberta resident at that time. In 
October of 1988 Mr. Batten was diagnosed as requiring further 
surgery. Mr. Batten asked to be referred to his former heart 
surgeon in Edmonton and received preparatory testing in 
October, there in Edmonton. He was placed on the waiting list 
for surgery in Alberta as an elective patient. 
 
I would like to point out that this type of surgery is done at the 
University Hospital in Saskatoon and at the Plains Health 
Centre in Regina. It has been confirmed by officials of the 
Department of Health that Mr. Batten was not on the waiting 
list at either of these facilities. University Hospital in Edmonton 
has confirmed that Mr. Batten was on the waiting list at their 
facility. 
 
Over the past five months waiting times for this type of surgery 
at University Hospital in Saskatoon averages about 55 days for 
elective . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member has 
already received quite a bit of time to give the answer and I will 
give him a few more seconds, but he can’t take three or four 
minutes to answer a question he’s taken notice of. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, respectfully, the 
question deserves attention. But in any case, Mr. Speaker, let 
me just finish by saying this. There’s a very key point to be 
made here, and it is that when we come to this House — all of 
us, whether we are in opposition or in government, Mr. 
Speaker, whether we are in opposition in government — we 
have a responsibility to seek out the facts before we deal with 
individuals, with individual families’ concerns and so on, in the 
lights of this building and through the public forum. There is a 
responsibility for us to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not the first time that that NDP opposition has done this. 
And I want to make it very clear that there is a responsibility 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, Leslie Tomporowski, the  

daughter, reported the facts to us, and that’s the way we 
reported them to this legislature. And what is so appalling in 
this case is the insensitive manner in which the Minister of 
Health has handled this matter. The daughter raised some 
concerns about long hospital waiting lists, and instead of 
addressing those concerns, Mr. Speaker, the minister chose to 
belittle the daughter. 
 
Now my question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister has to do with 
the real issue here. The real issue is long hospital waiting lists 
that are unprecedented in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And if we look at the figures, Mr. Speaker, 
from winter of ’89 and winter of ’88, there’s virtually no 
change — a very minimal change. Now my question to the 
minister is: what is he going to do about all these people who 
are suffering untold anguish waiting to get into hospitals for 
needed surgery? What is he going to do about that, Mr. 
Speaker? I’ve had three to four people phone me in the last two 
days about that matter. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, I make the point. I have 
not denied, nor will I ever, nor should the hon. member or 
anyone else, that there are people on waiting lists in Saskatoon, 
as there are in all places across this country. That’s not the 
question here. I have not denied that, nor will I deny that there 
are people who will wait longer than any of us would want. But 
I will say this, Mr. Speaker, I will say this clearly: the number 
of days, the length of time that individuals wait has been 
tracking down in Saskatoon — and that’s where our most 
serious problem is, is in Saskatoon — I’ll say that clearly. 
 
So I don’t deny that people in Saskatchewan wait for surgery, 
nor have I ever. Okay, that’s a serious problem in Canada. The 
point that I make here, Mr. Speaker, is not about the waiting 
lists that we have and the serious problem and the serious way 
that we all should be working to address it. What I question is 
the grandstanding tactics of that member and her colleagues 
over there who deal with serious matters for one day’s political 
headline, regardless of which family they want to drag through 
the mud of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Error in 1988 Income Tax Forms 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — My question is to the Minister of Finance. 
Mr. Minister, we have a rather sad situation. While the Premier 
is out trying to attract Asian investors with cheap land and 
cheap labour, we find that you are gouging the taxpayers 
unfairly in the province of Saskatchewan. For instance, Mr. 
Minister, will you confirm that the 1988 provincial tax form has 
a typing error, which was uncorrected, which states that the 
child tax reduction is available for children born in 1971 or 
later, when in fact it should read “1970 or later” in accordance 
with your own Income Tax Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

221 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I can neither confirm nor deny, Mr. 
Speaker, that there may be an error. I can confirm that the 
Minister of Finance does not print the forms, and the Minister 
of Finance does not do the detail of the tax reform. But I’ll take 
a look at the matter raised, Mr. Speaker. We do have the 
history, Mr. Speaker, of false material being tabled in the House 
by the opposition. I’ll take a look at it, and if it’s accurate we’ll 
correct it . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I have here an interoffice 
memo from H & R Block, which I will table after this question 
period, Mr. Speaker, and it states this, that: 
 

Saskatchewan Finance have confirmed in writing that the 
1988 Saskatchewan Child Tax Reduction will only be 
available for children born in 1971 or later, even though this 
is inconsistent with the federal deduction for dependent 
children. 
 

In a letter dated February 17, 1989, the taxation and economic 
policy of Saskatchewan Finance continued by indicating that: 
 

. . . it is not administratively feasible to correct this 
inconsistency for the taxation year. 
 

Doesn’t that mean, Mr. Minister, that an 18-year-old dependant 
can be a tax deduction for the federal government, but cannot be 
a tax deduction for the provincial government. And why are you 
unwilling to correct this mistake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I indicated, Mr. Speaker, that I would be 
prepared to take a look at that and see, first of all, if it’s accurate 
because, understand, Mr. Speaker, that the government has a 
great deal of difficulty on allegations being made by the 
opposition that time after time after time have found to be 
deliberately false, Mr. Speaker. So I said I would take a look at 
it. 
 
Secondly, I do find a bit of a humorous inconsistency with the 
hon. member’s question and the Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think this is a good 
opportunity to point out to the House what’s happening on the 
issue of members taking notice and then a supplementary after, 
because what really happens is you ask the original question, 
the member indicates he’ll take notice, then you ask another 
question on the same topic, and of course, you know, he’s 
expected to say, well I’ll take notice. 
 
So I believe that the proper way is to ask your question and then 
certainly ask him to come up with more information. There’s 
nothing wrong with that. 
 
I believe that the answer to the question is now complete. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Report on Health Symposium 
 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, in August of 1988 in 
Saskatoon the premiers and territorial leaders of Canada 
directed that four national symposia be held in 1989 to address 
areas of national importance in health and social policy. I want 
to report to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all members on the first of 
the symposia which was held in Victoria, British Columbia, 
earlier this week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan delegation to the Victoria 
conference on health promotion and disease prevention 
included representatives of the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses 
Association, the Saskatchewan cancer society, the heart 
foundation, the health departments of Regina and Saskatoon, 
and the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of Handicaps. 
These organizations all have a significant interest in health 
promotion, and their presence reflected the importance we place 
on working together for the health of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference was impressive for two reasons. 
First, the quality of discussion was excellent; it was attended by 
300 people from every province and territory, coming from a 
broad background of health interests and experience. Guest 
speakers included both national and international experts who 
stimulated challenging discussion about strategies and action 
plans for the future. Second, it confirmed for all of our 
delegation that we in Saskatchewan are on the right track with 
our health promotion programming. 
 
Saskatchewan’s Everyone Wins program was presented at the 
conference and proved to be one of the most broadly based of 
all provincial programs. Considerable interest was expressed in 
its progress to date and in its future directions. The activities of 
our own Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of Handicaps 
were also included in the program presentation. 
 
The symposium discussions led to the drafting of action plans 
in the following areas, Mr. Speaker: increasing the status of 
health promotion on the public and political agenda; secondly, 
developing opportunities for broad community participation in 
health promotion; thirdly, examining the current allocation of 
health spending and seeking the proper balance between health 
care and health promotion; fourthly, increasing our 
collaboration with health care institutions in the voluntary 
sector in promoting healthy life-styles; and fifth, pursuing other 
kinds of healthy public policy, particularly for the 
disadvantaged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to note the degree of unanimity 
from physicians, hospital representatives, and other health care 
providers, that such directions could attract broad support and 
need not come at the expense of treatment priorities. 
 
Saskatchewan is already well positioned on many of these 
issues. We have launched a broadly based program with a 
strong emphasis on community and on co-operation. We’ve 
established a health promotion advisory committee involving 
key stakeholder groups, and as one of its first objectives I’ve 
asked the committee to develop . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On a point of order. Mr. Speaker, I’ve  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

222 
 

talked to you in the past, and I know with previous Speakers, 
about the need for ministerial statements being brief and to the 
point, and also dealing with an issue that is new and relevant. 
 
We had one yesterday that I think was questionable. I believe 
we’re in the middle of another one today, where we see political 
grandstanding being done by members of the cabinet in order to 
announce programs that have been in place for a long time, or 
use it for political purposes, and I would ask you, having 
listened to half of what has gone on here, to rule against this as 
being a ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order and of 
course, you know, from time to time we seem to have this 
problem with ministerial statements and people thinking they 
are. 
 
The general rule for ministerial statements is that it should 
convey new information that the legislature has not had before, 
and it should be short, of course. And I ask the Minister of 
Health that if the information he has lives up to those 
guide-lines, he may continue. Otherwise, it’s not a ministerial 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I’ll be very brief in saying, and I’ll 
leave it. I recognize what the members are saying about the 
length, but I want to just say this point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the symposium that I am speaking of is one that 
was attended by representatives of World Health Organization, 
representatives of international organizations, and across this 
country. It’s important to this country, and it’s important to 
Saskatchewan and the health programming of Saskatchewan. 
 
So just having said that, and that’s what I was trying to portray 
here, Mr. Speaker, let me just finish by saying this. I invite all 
members of this House — all members, all sides — to join with 
the programming that’s in place here, not just the Department of 
Health programming, the prevention of handicaps and all those 
groups, to build a healthier future, a greater sense of well-being 
for all Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I want to have a ruling from you, sir, on 
whether or not this was a ministerial statement or political 
grandstanding, because if this is allowed, we could have 
ministers coming in and taking up the whole day talking about 
programs that have been in place over the past seven years. And 
I would like a ruling on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I hesitate to get into this 
because I have a very selfish motive here. I want to support the 
opposition House Leader in questioning whether or not this is a 
proper ministerial statement. I happen to, in my heart of hearts, 
believe that it is, but I believe that if you rule that it is not, that 
will deny them the opportunity to respond. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the ministerial  

statement section of the parliamentary day depends on the 
honour system. It’s up to the ministers to only bring forward 
statements that conform with the ministerial statement criteria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you’re checking the statement of the 
Minister of Health to see whether it is in fact conforming with 
the criteria for ministerial statements, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if 
you could examine the statement made by the Minister of 
Finance the other day, which was also put forward as a 
ministerial statement, and bring back a ruling to this Assembly 
on ministerial statements on those two, because I for one, and, I 
know, all members of this Assembly, would not want the 
ministerial section of this parliamentary day to run aground 
because ministers have been abusing the criteria. And I hope 
you would do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I’ll certainly check the point of order 
raised by the member for Regina Elphinstone today, and I will 
read the record carefully before I make this ruling because I 
don’t want to make any errors on it. And I will read the record, 
and I will bring back a ruling definitely to the House. 
 
Were you speaking to the point of order? 
 
An Hon. Member: — On a new point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member was on her feet, and if she gives 
her way to you, I will certainly allow it. I had recognized . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well a point of order is always in 
order, so I recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The point of order is simply this, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the point of order is simply this: until 
you have ruled whether or not the ministerial statement is . . . I 
believe that it’s a good one, but until you have made that ruling 
as to whether it is an appropriate and valid ministerial statement 
or not, how can the opposition respond to it if it’s ruled out of 
order and not appropriate? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I would just like to make 
this point that . . . Order, order, order, order. I haven’t ruled it 
out. I said that I would review it carefully and then bring in a 
ruling before . . . So if he wishes to respond, if they wish to 
respond . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do wish to respond 
to the minister’s statements, and what I’d like to say, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this minister and this government is all talk and 
no action. 
 
The government and the Minister of Health knows that they’re 
in trouble with respect to health care. They know that their 
health care policies, Mr. Speaker, have caused great deal of 
hardship to the people of Saskatchewan. The minister talks 
about the Everyone Wins program being such a fantastic 
program. Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that many health 
care professionals feel that the Everyone Wins program is 
simply an advertising gimmick of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

223 
 

While they put forward this advertising gimmick spending 
taxpayers’ dollars, they’re cutting back in public health workers 
in the province of Saskatchewan, the front line workers in the 
area of preventative health care. They’re cutting back on the 
best preventative health care, dental health care program, in the 
entire continent — the school-based children’s dental plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — They’ve cut back on community workers in 
Northern Saskatchewan who are front line workers in the area 
of preventative health care, Mr. Speaker, and then they say they 
believe in preventative health care. What hypocrisy, Mr. 
Speaker, what hypocrisy! 
 
This government has had a total lack . . . There’s been a total 
lack of commitment on the part of this government with respect 
to health care. Operating costs per patient day are well below 
the average in this province, Mr. Speaker. In every single 
category of hospital, except for long-term psychiatric, nursing 
staff paid hours per patient day are lower than the Canadian 
average, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s just a small example of this government’s lack of 
commitment and the fact that health care is not a priority with 
this government. The minister can go to all the fancy 
conferences he wants to on the taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
but what the people of Saskatchewan want to see the minister 
doing is putting that money into long, unprecedented hospital 
waiting lists in this province; into a school-based, school-based 
children’s dental plan; into public health nurses out in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Even a minister, one of their own ministers, in commenting on 
cut-backs in public health nurses, said to the health care 
commission that the travelling distances for these nurses was 
ridiculous. Even their own government realizes that these cuts 
have caused hardship for people working in the health care area 
and for people receiving the services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister standing up today and in glowing 
terms talking about his commitment to health care, is a farce, 
Mr. Speaker, and the province of Saskatchewan and the people 
in the province know it to be a farce, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to belabour this, 
but I promised that I would, at question period. If you’ve made 
a ruling on this that I’ve missed, I will certainly defer and 
honour it. But I wish to make the point simply that in my time 
in the legislature the rule that I always operated under was that 
in the course of the debate we do not refer to members by name 
but by constituency while referring to matters specifically 
before the Chamber, but that if there is a reference, such as a 
newspaper article or some other outside document outside the 
Chamber to which there has to be a point of reference, namely a 
name, upon which to launch the question or make the point, that 
that is permissible.  

Otherwise you get into the ridiculous circumstances of saying: I 
have a question to ask and I’m referring to this person but I’m 
not going to tell you who it is, it’s got to be the Premier. 
 
I think that this is really, if I may say so with respect, Mr. 
Speaker, an awkward rule. It leads to a variety of, perhaps even 
some irrational, results. And I’m not going to make a big issue 
of it. I’m prepared to live with the ruling that you gave me at 
question period if that’s what you decide. But if you’re of the 
mind to take another look at it, I would like to make my two 
cent pitch for you to reconsider it on the basis of the points that 
I’ve raised. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, as soon as I leave here, 
I’m going to have my temperature taken because this will be 
twice in a row that I’ve agreed with the opposition, and I must 
be . . . They may want to change their position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think part of the problem with . . . it’s not a problem . . . part 
of the way this place operates is that once a ruling is made it 
tends to become a precedent, and further rulings are based on 
the precedent that has been set. I think that there has been a very 
narrow view taken at some point in this House as it relates to 
the very point that’s been raised by the Leader of the 
Opposition. And I think it’s virtually impossible to deal with 
quotes without being given the kind of latitude that the Leader 
of the Opposition talks to. 
 
So I would recommend that in the Speaker’s review of this 
matter, that he does take a more liberal view of the 
interpretation of past rulings and allow the use of names of 
members of the legislature in direct quotes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1045) 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order raised and 
the response from the Government House Leader. And before 
making my ruling, I would just like to give some background as 
to why we have attempted — and I say attempted, because I 
know many members have tried to circumvent it one way or 
another — we have attempted to have hon. members refrain 
from using members’ names. And it goes back to approximately 
two years, approximately two years, when hon. members were 
in my opinion at that time, to be quite frank, abusing the 
privilege by bringing in long lists of members’ names and 
simply quoting long, long lists of names. And I don’t think that 
was ever meant by the rule, and therefore the rule was changed, 
and we have taken this rather narrow view. I thought I would 
just say that as some background for your information. 
 
However, having said that, if the opposition side and the 
government side are in agreement, in unanimity, and wish that 
names be allowed in quotations, well I am certainly willing to 
go along with that, and we will follow the wishes of the House 
in that regard. 
 
However, I just remind you that don’t come and use long, long 
lists of names and abuse the rule, or we’re going to have to 
tighten it up again. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps just one other  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

224 
 

consideration, and that is maybe some set of draft rules might 
be prepared by your office or by yourself as to where, in these 
circumstances, it can be raised, how can it be raised. 
 
I think the point that we want to avoid, I want to avoid, is in 
debate referring to that person by name. That, I think, is wrong. 
And I think even if it goes outside the House, that is wrong, 
because it’s slipping in through the back door what I think we 
want to avoid through the front door. But there are, on 
occasions, some points of reference which might be of merit, 
and I don’t know whether you can draw any guide-lines or not. 
 
The Speaker: — I appreciate and thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for his views, and I’ll certainly consider them. Quite 
frankly, I don’t know whether we’ll draw guide-lines for the 
very reason you just mentioned, but I’ll certainly give it serious 
thought. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe and the amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Trew. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I ended 
debate last night I indicated that I did have a few more words to 
say, and I would like to continue with that this morning. But I 
know that because of my Polish heritage I would like to, today, 
pay respect to those of Irish heritage. It is a big day for them. 
To all of the people of Irish descent, I wish them a happy St. 
Patrick’s Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, this morning, have a great deal of difficulty in 
putting together the words, the proper words to use as I ponder 
last night’s events. As our government had forecasted, I think 
primarily because of lack of leadership in the opposition 
benches, we forecast that this session could be kind of stormy 
and difficult to control. 
 
Last night, in my mind, the NDP displayed an ugly sense of 
arrogance with, in my mind, absolute total disregard to this 
House. And I guess that . . . and as again, they chide this about 
this from their chair, they fail to recognize . . . I recall, Mr. 
Speaker, very well my first day in this magnificent institution 
and what it meant to me and the respect that I had to show to 
this House, and I find myself in a awkward position, as a 
politician, of trying to gain respect, not only from my 
constituents but from the constituents around this province. 
 
And as we watch the school children leave this Assembly with 
utter dismay after some of the difficult times that occur in this 
legislature, and in my mind when I saw how Her Honour, last 
night, had to be ashamed of some of the goings-on, again, you 
know, I can only apologize to my constituents, and I suppose to 
the people of this province as they witnessed the spectacle. 
 

You know, it’s a difficult thing for politicians to deal with our 
salaries in this House; it’s public wash. And as we do that and 
go about the other business and then do what we do at other 
times, you can understand why people have a great deal of 
difficulty accepting politicians at all levels. 
 
Particularly disappointing to me is the leadership of the NDP, 
where the leader publicly admitted that he had a problem with 
unity in his caucus. And his behaviour . . . I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, that if you watch our Premier, or I suppose any 
Premier in the past in this Assembly, they always managed to 
contain themselves to some degree. And any person that 
believes that they will one day, or hope that one day they will 
be premier of this province, will certainly have to have a much 
better outlook and much better control than is presently being 
displayed if he ever hopes to assume that chair. 
 
I ended up, Mr. Speaker, touching on public participation, and I 
would like to continue for a moment in that regard. You know, 
entering the current session of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP said that they were preparing to launch a major offensive 
against the government’s plan to allow Saskatchewan people to 
participate in the ownership of Crown corporations. However, 
it’s a complete turn-about from the former NDP government’s 
plan to do exactly the same thing. And it begs the question, 
why. 
 
A quote from an editorial of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, dated 
March 6, 1989: 
 

The hidden New Democratic agenda tactically admitting 
Crown ownership wasn’t working, together with plans to list 
Crowns on the stock market under the Saskatchewan 
Holdings and Reinvestments incorporated banner, was 
laudable. So were proposals to move potash mines, uranium 
mines, and oil and gas exploration into the private sector. 
 

The editorial goes on: 
 

The only criticism due the NDP is in allowing MLAs like 
(the member from Saskatoon Nutana, the member from 
Regina Rosemont; they use the names, which I am not 
prepared to do right now, but those are the members) to 
make fools both of themselves and of opposition leader Roy 
. . . (I’m sorry) and of opposition leader . . . by attacking 
privatization and uranium development, both once 
admirable if unpublicized initiatives. 
 

Well again, last night I read into the records some items 
contained in minutes of a Crown, or CIC (Crown investments 
corporation of Saskatchewan) meeting at the time, in January of 
1982 regarding the NDP’s philosophy. I won’t repeat those, but 
there are some other interesting observations that can be made 
from the same meeting. 
 
The present member for Regina North East was a member of 
that committee, and the board reviewed a management paper 
which outlined a proposal for providing Saskatchewan residents 
with an opportunity to invest in provincial industrial 
development projects, and at the same time generate a new pool 
of capital which  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

225 
 

would allow the province to take advantage of large industrial 
projects in an era when capital rationing for Crown investments 
has become a reality. This is the NDP. 
 
These include the need to do an adequate selling job; for 
instance, making it clear to investors that share appreciation 
rather than large dividends is the main argument for the 
investment. The need to transfer some current investments with 
good prospects, and they used as an examples, Ipsco and 
PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company). And yet when our 
government involved ourselves with Weyerhaeuser, the big hue 
and cry. What hypocrisy this appears to be. And although that 
such a step would reduce the control of CIC — has in these two 
companies — the difficulty of meeting the two objectives at the 
same time, and so on. 
 
Following the discussion, which as I mentioned earlier the 
member for Regina North East was present, the board agreed to 
approve in principle a program to provide Saskatchewan 
residents an opportunity to make equity investments in 
Saskatchewan enterprises through Saskatchewan Holdings and 
Reinvestment incorporated, a company they called SHAR. 
 
What’s happened to that philosophy since then? I wonder why 
they so strongly argue something that they once themselves 
were prepared to promote. Their guiding principles at the time 
were to provide a mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan 
to invest in their own province. The NDP guide-lines: to 
provide an alternate source of capital for major new investments 
and resource enterprises and industrial projects. The NDP 
guiding principles: to reinforce the identification of a 
partnership between the government and the people of the 
province in the development of our economy. 
 
It’s almost astounding for me to see, if that was their guiding 
principle, why they so strenuously will oppose our plans. They 
go on, “Our Saskatchewan political parties will undoubtedly 
take similar proposals in the future.” So was that, was that their 
underlying motive — fear that knowing that one day the Tories 
would be in power and they would do this, and they better get 
on the bandwagon and get in step with the people of our 
province? I think so. I think that they fully understood, way 
back in 1982, how much out of line they were with the people 
of this province. And in April of that same year, in no uncertain 
terms, the NDP was indeed shown how badly out of step they 
were with the people. 
 
It goes on that the government would be able to take advantage 
of large industrial project opportunities without requiring a 
reduction in investment by the utility or commercial Crown 
corporations, or if the private equity infusion is substantial, the 
province could be in a better position to avoid long-term debt 
for the Consolidated Fund with consequent reductions in 
interest funds. 
 
Why now, why change? What’s different? Why argue? You 
agreed with it. The SHAR proposal, investment projects that 
have current dramatic interest, a heavy oil upgrader. Imagine 
that. They had interest in that, maybe not with the co-op, 
interested in selling shares in the potash mine. Isn’t that 
interesting? Right here, the potash  

mine, uranium mine, natural gas exploration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder what happened. I wonder why they 
changed their mind. Is it simply because we’re in tune with the 
public and they’re trying to get on the bandwagon. What is it? 
 
There should be no surprises, and the member from Regina 
Centre again chides from his chair; he was part of it. He was 
part of that proposal. There should be no surprises in that 
approach, none at all, because socialist government world-wide 
have been treating and taking that trend; includes countries like 
New Zealand, Sweden, France, and now even Communist 
countries such as the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of 
China are working hard on loosening government control. And 
yet our Saskatchewan NDP still firmly indicate that they will 
not go along with a trend that is presently world-wide. They’re 
not only out of step with the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps with people of the entire universe. 
 
Their leader, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, and the 
NDP, now find themselves trapped. Their stand against greater 
participation is reactionary, out of step with modern living; out 
of step with modern thinking. They’re back in the old days with 
their head in the sand, as the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount in his speech debate last night offered nothing for 
the future, offered no criticism of what was in the speech, but 
indeed chose to take an attack on a piece of legislation a year 
old, history. 
 
Public participation is a means by which we can build and 
diversify our province, and that all Saskatchewan people can 
benefit in, directly and indirectly. I think that we could move 
along with the job much easier in this session if they simply 
agreed with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll turn to a moment on the issue of store hours, 
which involves the people of this province. There seem to be 
two groups only that seem to have any real concern with the 
so-called issue of store hours. Those two groups are elected 
municipal officials and a few retailers. Now we have some 
union intervention coming along. 
 
(1100) 
 
But what about the people, what about the people? In our 
government we hear from the Leader of the Opposition that we 
should do this or we should do that or whatever. They don’t 
seem to have a policy. They don’t seem to take a stand on it. 
They try to make a few ripples here and there, but their 
position, as in agriculture; their policy, as in agriculture, there is 
none. Clearly, they don’t have one. 
 
I’ll share a little story with you, Mr. Speaker, that as I explain 
the issue of store hours kind of makes a lot of sense, because we 
hear a lot of requests for a common day of pause. Is there such a 
thing really? 
 
I describe a typical family that has a day off that decide that 
they would perhaps like to go and visit one of our provincial 
parks. So they jump in their car, they turn their radio on. Of 
course the radio stations are working Sunday; they’re supposed 
to; it’s that family’s day off. They drive down to the service 
station and get fuel.  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

226 
 

They’re open; well they’re supposed to be because it’s the 
family’s day off. They stop at a restaurant. They’re open; it’s 
the family’s day off, but those people can work. They see the 
police department as they’re rushing some place. They’re 
working. But it’s this family’s day off. And eventually they get 
to the provincial park. Lo and behold!, the people are working. 
Well they should be because it’s this family’s day off. 
Following what they do, they tune in the television set — well 
that works because it’s this family’s day off — to watch a 
football game. Well that’s fine, those players are getting paid 
because it’s my day off. One of the players gets injured. The 
ambulance comes along. Well, they’re working too because it’s 
my day off. They take them to the hospital. They’re working 
because . . . I mean, how far can you carry that? 
 
We fail to recognize that nowadays in modern society there are 
two very significant and important classes of people — the 
single working parent and double-income families who have a 
great deal of difficulty in moving about doing their tasks with 
those in other occupations or with similar circumstances. So 
they’re there. 
 
When our government took the leadership role that we did, out 
of respect to the municipalities, out of respect to the 
municipalities, we — and their autonomy — we gave them 
control of store hours, if they so choose to control people’s 
lives. Clearly a leadership role, without any doubt. Then they 
said, or I in my position as Minister of Urban Affairs, that I was 
abdicating my responsibility. No, by resolution from SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) in 1981, they 
wanted to control their business hours. By resolution from city 
council in Regina, they wanted to control their business hours. 
Now we’ve given them this control and they seem to be 
encountering some difficulties because they’re using that 
control. I wonder if they would have difficulties if they didn’t 
use that control, as we see now in Prince Albert. 
 
So the wonderful world of business comes along, and they’re 
used to competition and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I would ask leave of the House to introduce 
some visitors from northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, I would like to introduce some 
visitors from La Ronge in northern Saskatchewan, Grant and 
Shauna Rowland, along with their children, Samantha and 
Vanessa. Let’s give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too welcome 
them to the Assembly. I have the opportunity of working quite 
regularly, not with missus but certainly with mister. Welcome 
to the Assembly. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — There has been some stories that were 
promoted by the Coalition Against Sunday Shopping that this 
would destroy rural Saskatchewan. Our legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, is similar to that of Alberta and British Columbia, and 
certainly it hasn’t destroyed their rural businesses. 
 
People fail to understand that in the harsh reality of the business 
world where competition freely exists, the larger problem is 
Monday through Saturday. And I’m talking now about retailing, 
Mr. Speaker, because retailing is about the only regulated thing 
we have left, about the only thing that’s held separate and apart. 
And you have to ask yourself why, why is that last section, you 
know, a little bit special? 
 
But getting back to the rural Saskatchewan scenario. Retailers 
in the larger centres prey on each other Monday through 
Saturday. The big chains against the little independents in your 
large cities Monday through Saturday; the large cities, Regina 
against Moose Jaw, Monday through Saturday; Moose Jaw 
versus Assiniboia, Monday through Saturday; Assiniboia versus 
Gravelbourg; Gravelbourg versus Lafleche, and on and on — 
Monday through Saturday. Sunday has nothing to do with it. 
 
The coalition that originally seemed to be quite vocal against 
our move, interestingly enough, the chairman, the very 
chairman of that coalition was the president of SUMA in 1981 
when the resolution asking for control to municipalities was 
passed. It asks me if he was sincere. The vice-chairman of the 
coalition who also because of his position is able to control 
by-laws relating to that in his own city, presently facing eight 
charges of breaking his own by-law. Is that sincerity? 
 
And it really, it really, you know, makes me stop and wonder. A 
big national chain saying that this will damage rural 
Saskatchewan, and yet that very chain finds itself in the 
catalogue mail order business in rural Saskatchewan, operating 
out of very small outlets, paying very little in business tax to 
support that community, while right next door the local 
merchant, the local merchant contributing a significant amount 
of tax dollars to his community. 
 
If that major chain is sincere in their concern for rural 
Saskatchewan, then don’t advertise to those rural folks; don’t 
promote those catalogue order centres. Give that merchant the 
opportunity to open when he wants, if he chooses to open. 
Merchants don’t have to open if they don’t want to. You don’t 
have to shop if you don’t want to. Is it fair if a merchant wants 
to open, to say you can’t? 
 
My own personal experience, Mr. Speaker, where I was in a 
mall paying the same rent, the same expenses, against what was 
considered to be a so-called drug store, selling my products in 
the evenings and on Sundays when I couldn’t by law. I would 
have created employment. I would have welcomed the 
opportunity to at least have  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

227 
 

the equal footing to open if I wanted to open, and if my 
customers wanted to come and shop at a time that would be 
convenient to them. 
 
So always, what about consumers? They appear to be the lost 
people in this argument of the last two interest groups, 
municipal legislators and a few retailers. 
 
I’ll turn to a moment, Mr. Speaker, on an item that deals with 
the future of housing in our province and why some of our ideas 
in housing is being so widely accepted. As minister responsible, 
I would just comment briefly on one or two programs and 
activities of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
 
In a few short years we here in Saskatchewan have become the 
leader, clearly, in North America in providing quality social 
housing for those who need it most — for our senior citizens, 
Mr. Speaker, and for our low-income families. We also now 
have implemented and included help for disabled people. 
 
This has been achieved through the efforts of our local housing 
authorities spread out right across the province, along with 
other non-profit private and public housing organizations 
working in close co-operation with our Saskatchewan Housing 
agency, and with our strong federal partner, Canada Mortgage 
and Housing Corporation, all of us serving in the finest 
Saskatchewan tradition, sharing our time, knowledge, energy — 
all of us together, to help serve others. 
 
Last year the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation marked the 
15th anniversary of service to the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Quietly, little fanfare, the corporation has been 
working for 15 years at its task of developing social housing in 
Saskatchewan. And what successes we have accomplished in 
the last six or seven. 
 
It’s owed mainly to the partnerships that have been made 
between all levels of government in our province — federal, 
provincial, municipal, with the local housing authorities, with 
the non-profit and private developers in Saskatchewan. We now 
have the amazing total of over 280 — 280 local housing 
authorities that provide services in public housing right at the 
community level where they can deal with it at their own local 
community with the people that they know. 
 
Last year during the anniversary year a record total of over 
1,000 delegates from all areas of our province attended the 
biennial conference of local housing authorities sponsored by 
Saskatchewan Housing. Imagine that — 1,000 at a housing 
conference in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1115) 
 
That gives you a good idea, Mr. Speaker, of the healthy interest 
in the housing programs of the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. Our successes in social housing have been very, 
very significant, including the accommodation we have 
developed for senior citizens in enriched housing facilities right 
across our province — in special care homes; in our housing 
programs for low-income families and for the disabled. 
 

But while our achievements in public housing in Saskatchewan 
have been outstanding, the challenges facing us in the future 
will be almost overwhelming. Consider the situation that we 
will be facing with respect to housing accommodation for our 
senior citizens. Our elderly population is growing at such rate 
that by the year 2000, 25 per cent of our total population will be 
considered seniors. 
 
Right now in Saskatchewan about 13 per cent of our adult 
population — or 132,000 people — are over 65 years of age . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Saskatoon South 
seems to have some trouble with seniors. He’s saying 
something from his chair. I assume it’s disrespect for the 
seniors; I’m not sure. 
 
In these circumstances we must face the problem of supplying 
even more housing accommodation to meet the growing 
increase in the number of seniors. As minister responsible for 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, I want to assure you 
that we are presently tackling this problem head-on. That we are 
working now in partnership with the local housing authorities 
and other housing organizations developing new ideas and new 
projects to provide not only more high-standard housing for 
seniors, but also for low-income families and the disabled for 
now and for in the future. 
 
Perhaps one of our major success, Mr. Speaker, two years ago I 
had the pleasure of introducing a new housing program . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll stop for water until the member 
of Saskatoon South I guess, finishes that speech. He obviously 
has no concern for seniors at all and in senior housing. I’m 
really not impressed with the NDP member from Saskatoon 
South. 
 
Two years ago, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of introducing a 
new housing program, and that will help resolve some of the 
major challenges ahead of us. It’s known as the innovative 
housing program. The program was set up to encourage 
communities, non-profit groups, and private developers to 
organize and develop housing projects in their local 
communities together with public sector assistance. 
 
The innovative housing program gives communities across the 
province the opportunity to advise their provincial housing 
corporation what they need. We don’t go out and tell them what 
the communities need, but rather it’s a reverse. They tell us 
what they need, what they require in terms of public housing, 
and then they put together proposals to develop those facilities 
with some financial assistance from Saskatchewan Housing. 
 
As minister, I have long felt that the most appropriate method 
for solving the housing needs of a particular community should 
indeed come from that community. Where else can it come 
from? Because it’s at the community level that local needs, 
local resources, and local options that are available can best be 
brought together. 
 
We are now calling for the submission of proposals for the 1989 
innovative housing program. Recently the staff at Sask Housing 
conducted a series of regional meetings across the province. 
They outlined the program, and they  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

228 
 

wanted to review for potential sponsors how to go about putting 
a proposal together. Meetings were held in Assiniboia, in 
Whitewood, in Humboldt, Kindersley, and here in Regina. We 
are particularly anxious this year to receive more projects from 
the smaller communities of our province. 
 
The deadline for submissions is the end of this month. And I 
would ask all members of this House, including the member 
from Saskatoon South, to bring the program to the attention of 
communities in their constituencies, and to talk to various 
members in your constituency. Now that you’re paying 
attention to what I am saying, perhaps you can generate some 
interest for your constituents. Perhaps you can help your 
constituents with senior housing, if you really care, and 
encourage them to get proposals which can qualify under the 
program. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that as I read from 
Hansard what the member from Saskatoon Centre had to say 
about housing — and I’ll read from Hansard. 
 

Now the government says in its throne speech that it’s 
committed to building more enriched housing units for 
seniors. . . . but the reality is that the PC government is 
emphasizing what it calls innovative housing for seniors. 
And this is the program where the PC government is 
allowing public money to be spent on housing schemes that 
charge seniors anywhere from 60,000 to close to $100,000 
for what’s called a life-lease apartment. And on top of that 
they have to pay monthly maintenance fees. Only a few of 
these units are subsidized. Those on low income who can’t 
get into them, have to go elsewhere or they’re out of luck. 
 

She goes on to say, my critic does, that: 
 

Innovative, enriched housing is really housing for a few 
enriched seniors. It is not housing for the majority of 
seniors. So I ask you, what kind of protection is that, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 

If the NDP would pay attention to that program. Unfortunately, 
my critic doesn’t have the foggiest idea of what she’s talking 
about, and it’s right here in Hansard. 
 
You would think that the Leader of the NDP Opposition would 
get a critic to be responsible enough to understand a program 
prior to criticizing it. And yet right here in the records of the 
Assembly, dated March 13, 1989, four days ago, my critic, 
absolutely totally unaware of how that program works. She 
didn’t have enough interest in the senior citizens of this 
province to go and inform herself of a new program that is vital 
to our senior accommodation. 
 
You know, every now and then the NDP call for the resignation 
of one of us ministers. I think that sometimes, in fairness, the 
critics should be properly looked at as well because if they 
don’t have interest in seniors, if they don’t have interest in 
housing, if they can’t take the time to learn a program, why 
make them a critic? 
 
And then to add insult to injury, this same MLA from 
Saskatoon Centre takes out a great big advertisement,  

with her picture, and puts it into the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 
congratulating Luther Heights, a very seniors’ project. The 
height of hypocrisy. I can’t believe that that same member 
would have the gall to insult the seniors of Saskatoon in that 
fashion. 
 
I think that the innovative housing program is the great way of 
the future for social housing in Saskatchewan. I’d even be 
willing to sit down with my critic and explain details of the 
program to her, because obviously she can’t take the time to go 
and attend the informational meetings. 
 
But through this program many new projects will be generated 
to help us meet the challenges of fulfilling our housing 
requirements in the years ahead. Our accomplishments in social 
housing over the years have been truly outstanding. But the 
challenges ahead, to continue to maintain the high standard of 
public housing that we have developed, will take our utmost 
dedicated efforts. It is desirable that as many services as 
possible for those who need assistance be delivered at the 
community level. Local people are most in touch with the 
housing needs in their communities and the opportunities to 
meet those needs. 
 
Our very, very successful local housing authority system which 
provides the key community input into the management of 
public housing has met all the challenges of the past. And 
working with our Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, I know 
that all of those volunteers, thousands, in the housing authorities 
will continue to do just that. 
 
And I have a lot of time and admiration and respect for all of 
those volunteers in the housing authorities that serve their 
people so well. They serve, as always, in the finest 
Saskatchewan tradition and in so doing are building their 
communities and indeed building a better province and a 
stronger Saskatchewan. 
 
Just prior to closing, Mr. Speaker, and I take the opportunity to 
speak rather lengthy because it appears that the opposition very 
seldom, although they have the opportunity to so, don’t ask 
questions of me, and I take this opportunity to explain some 
programs to them. And I’ll speak just for a moment on business 
tax because this is probably another issue that they will not 
understand. They claim to have such a big working knowledge 
of the business community and the understanding of the 
business community and the like, and it’s utter nonsense. 
 
So I think that I will just, for their information and benefit, 
touch briefly on one thing that our provincial government, in 
partnership with local government, is doing to improve the 
business environment, and that’s to reduce the burden of 
business tax. 
 
Reaction to the announcement of the three-year, $30 million 
program has been very, very positive across the entire province, 
from the business community obviously, but also from the local 
government sector. 
 
So it doesn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker, because in the last year 
or so, an important issue that the media was filled with almost 
daily was indeed the business tax. And it was indeed a 
dominant issue for months and months, and as  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

229 
 

this announcement came, all of a sudden the issue left the 
headlines. 
 
I am pleased that our Progressive Conservative government is 
going to be, as we said, a part of the solution of the business tax 
problem. In consultation with SUMA, we decided to make the 
provincial rebate program to small business unconditional and 
to not have it tied to similar cuts on the municipal side. This 
program will have the effect of reducing business tax, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about 25 per cent across our province. The 
rebate formula provides relatively greater benefits to the 
smallest businesses, so that for them, for the small, small 
businesses in Saskatchewan, their business tax will be totally 
eliminated. 
 
This PC initiative, however, is only a part of the solution. It’s 
not a permanent program; it’s a bridge. And it should not be 
seen as an encouragement for urban municipalities to raise 
business taxes in the hope that no one will notice. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to encourage all municipalities who have not yet 
done so, in the next few weeks and months during their budget 
deliberations, to look seriously at the level of the business tax in 
their community with the aim of reducing or eliminating the 
business tax. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that on behalf of many, 
many of my constituents in Regina South who operate their 
own small businesses, I only hope that the city of Regina in 
their wisdom, on behalf of my constituents, will certainly do 
their share in reducing a very high tax load to my constituents. 
 
It is only by municipalities reviewing their spending priorities 
and by working together with their business community, that a 
lasting solution to the business tax problem can be found. And 
some communities have already discovered that. They’ve 
already decided to provide their own rebates to businesses, and 
one case in point is the city of Weyburn which will provide 
rebates of 12 per cent this year. 
 
Now unlike the NDP who have admitted that they don’t 
understand what economic development is all about, this 
government, Mr. Speaker, is indeed moving forward and 
making progress in building a diversified provincial economy 
that will be viable in today’s world. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Any thoughts on the Speech from the 
Throne, Jack? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — The member from Regina North West will 
have his opportunity. I only hope that his comments will make 
as much sense as hopefully mine are. 
 
We on this side of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are planning 
for the future, unlike the NDP who are still living in the distant 
past. And that next speaker will be interesting to listen to his 
history as he promotes his best seller, the new economic 
development forecast for the ’70s. 
 
(1130) 
 
As one of their leaders puts it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s  

something going on out there in the new economic world that 
the NDP wouldn’t know about. Welcome to the new world. But 
unlike the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we in this government are 
moving forward with new economic policies as we face the 
challenges of the ’90s. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with 
considerable pride that I will support the original motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Although I’m 
pleased to have this opportunity to reply to the throne speech 
today, I do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with some sadness. What 
we have witnessed over the initial days of this session is a 
constant but sure deterioration of democracy in this Assembly. 
We have the rights to speak our minds in this Assembly, and 
with that comes the responsibility to say what we believe the 
truth to be. The rules of this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do 
not tolerate fabrications in the legislature, and I would think that 
you would be upset with any member who deliberately stated a 
fact he or she knew to be untrue. 
 
But what we are seeing today is a government that is running 
scared; we are seeing a government that is desperate. This 
government has obviously decided that anything goes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They’ve decided to engage in a smear 
campaign and personal attacks on the Leader on the Opposition 
in order to cling to fading power. If they can’t win honestly, Mr. 
Speaker, they’ll win whatever way they can. 
 
Now everyone makes honest mistakes, but this government, Mr. 
Speaker, makes deliberate mistakes, and what is worse, it 
makes them with a smile on its face. The position of Premier, 
cabinet minister, and members of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, used to be respected positions, but they’ve 
deteriorated in the eyes of the public. 
 
And this is because Tory governments across this country are 
prepared to stoop to gutter politics, unfounded personal attacks, 
and mindless and vicious tactics, and they are making a 
mockery of our democratic system. 
 
I have a great deal of respect for the democratic process, but if 
governments are going to continuously try to undermine the 
process for their own personal and political gains, then the 
system will not work, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been entrusted with 
a very serious responsibility and I feel that this government has 
breeched that trust. And I’m very disappointed by the lack of 
respect that has been shown by the government for this 
parliamentary institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent the last eight months meeting with my 
constituents and travelling throughout the province and meeting 
with many different groups on health care issues and many 
other issues. So I have heard a lot, a lot about what is on the 
minds of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and I’ve 
heard a lot about the policies they would like their government 
to implement. And everywhere I travelled, Mr. Speaker, I heard 
the same thing. I heard that people were fed up with misplaced, 
misguided government priorities. They told me that the  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

230 
 

PC government has forgotten the people and prefers to shower 
favours on big business and its Tory friends. And they told me 
that they’re doing this because the government knows it’s in its 
last term. 
 
They told me that this government has forgotten what’s 
important and what a government should be doing for the 
people. They’ve forgotten health care, education, highways and 
social programs, and other essential services in this province. 
 
They have told me that government policies have created 
hardship, unemployment, inequity and injustice in 
Saskatchewan. And they’ve told me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they’re waiting for the day when the New Democrats will take 
office and supplant mismanaged, patronage ridden, unfair 
government with competent, reasonable, fair government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And that is what the people want for the future 
of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the PC Government 
fails miserably in this regard. 
 
I travelled throughout this province for the last eight months. I 
venture to say that I was on the road more than I was at home. 
And everywhere I went, people were upset with cut-backs in 
health care. They were upset with high teacher-student ratios 
and a deteriorating education system. They were upset with the 
PC government selling off the Saskatchewan heritage at rock 
bottom prices to out-of-province corporations. 
 
They were upset with high taxes and the total lack of any 
long-term strategic agricultural policy in this province. They 
were upset with broken PC promises and they were upset with 
dishonest and corrupt government. They were upset with high 
unemployment, and very, very disappointed that so many 
children were leaving the province today. 
 
The people want some hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they want 
hope, and they want sincerity and genuine action. The people of 
Saskatchewan are ready to work and give of themselves to build 
a better, more decent society. They love their province, and they 
want to build a province that is prosperous, compassionate, 
caring and fair. That’s what the people want, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They want this for their children and they want this for 
their grandchildren. 
 
But what we see instead is a government that engages in gutter 
politics and political expediency to try to assure itself of another 
political win. What we see instead is a government that has had 
seven budget deficits in a row. It has a cumulative deficit of 3.6 
billion, and this deficit has meant less money for health, 
education, and social programs. 
 
It has meant that one child in four live in poverty in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker — one child in four. Well the 
people never thought it would come to this. The bread basket of 
the world, but one child in four living in poverty. And 
something like 18,000 children — 18,000 children went to food 
banks in the last year, in last year alone,  

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that’s appalling. And the 
people of Saskatchewan want this trend reversed. 
 
This $3.6 billion deficit has meant that in this province, one in 
11 people is looking for work. In February our labour force fell 
by 6,000 and the number of people with jobs decreased by 
seven. It has meant farm families cannot count on this 
government for the assistance they need and deserve, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
It has meant deteriorating education for our children, and high 
taxes for the average person in Saskatchewan. It has meant long 
hospital waiting lists in the vicinity of nearly 9,000 in the winter 
of 1989. It has meant the destruction of first-rate preventative 
health care programs in the province. It has meant pressure and 
stress on families, and particularly on farm families, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government’s priorities are not the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
It cuts funding and services and health care, education, and 
social programs, yet it’ll spend $9 million on a birthday 
celebration in 1990, which incidentally happens to be an 
election year. 
 
It will spend over 1 billion on the political boondoggle in the 
Premier’s riding, the Rafferty-Alameda project. It spends 
millions every year on out-of-province travel for cabinet 
ministers and high placed executives in Crown corporations like 
SaskTel. It spends millions on self-serving advertising, millions 
on patronage, and yet there are no jobs for ordinary people. No 
jobs for ordinary people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And on top of this, people are leaving this province at an 
unprecedented rate, and most of these people who are leaving 
are young people between the ages of 20 and 29. This is our 
future, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our future — these young people 
who are leaving this province by the thousands. 
 
While these young people are leaving the province, we see high 
priced salaries for the George Hills, the Paul Schoenhals, the 
John Gormleys of the PC party. High priced salaries for the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I wonder if the member for Weyburn 
and the member for Saskatoon South could continue their 
debate outside and allow the member for Regina Lakeview to 
continue her speech. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. While we 
have thousands of young people leaving the province, we see 
high-priced salaries, high-priced salaries for the Tory friends, 
and huge give-aways to out-of-province corporations. The 
government’s economic policies have brought massive 
unemployment to this province and they’ve caused untold stress 
on families who are trying to survive. 
 
The Premier promised to bring our children home. You 
remember that promise, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Instead he’s 
driving them away; he’s driving them away in droves, Mr. 
Speaker. And does the throne speech, the speech of the 
government, address the issue of unemployment and  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

231 
 

young people leaving this province by the thousands? No, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, not a word in the throne speech. 
 
This government obviously accepts no responsibility for this 
alarming and unprecedented decline in employment and for this 
alarming and unprecedented number of people leaving 
Saskatchewan. The government’s policies have failed. This 
government is old, it’s tired, and it’s worn out. It shows no 
creativity and no initiative. The throne speech, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was a speech of an old, tired, worn-out government 
devoid of ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Today in Saskatchewan, family farms are in 
serious trouble, and the stress that rural people are suffering is 
unprecedented, except maybe in the Dirty Thirties. Wives and 
mothers are having to leave the farm and go to work in order to 
keep the wolves away from the farm gate. Many of these wives 
and mothers are working for minimum wage, a poverty wage, 
Mr. Speaker. Minimum wage is a poverty wage, and this 
government has no compassion for those women and no 
compassion for their families. 
 
This government has no compassion for the children of these 
families who are under stress, growing up in families that are 
distraught and burnt out from the heavy financial burden that 
they face. Yet this government has no long-term strategy in 
agriculture — none whatsoever — no strategy to deal with the 
farm crisis. Instead we have a Premier who instructs 
foreclosures on these farm families. Never before in the history 
of this province have we had a premier instructing foreclosures 
on farm families. 
 
Farm families simply cannot count on this government, except 
maybe at election time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s the 
extent of this government’s agricultural policy. Farm families in 
rural communities are in crisis and their problems must be 
addressed. An agricultural policy that is consistent, well 
planned, and which addresses the real needs of the farmers must 
be put in place if we are to stop the unmitigated loss of our 
family farms and a slow death of our rural communities. 
 
Instead of dealing with this farm crisis, what we see is a 
Premier bent on privatization mania, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s 
going to sell as much of our province as he can possibly do 
before he’s kicked out of office. And that’s his agenda. That’s 
the Premier’s agenda, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He’s adhering to an 
ideological viewpoint without any reason or rationality. His 
ideology has gone wild. 
 
(1145) 
 
PC privatization amounts to a sell-off of Saskatchewan assets at 
rock-bottom prices, and it’s meant fewer jobs and lost income 
to this province. Privatization of highways maintenance and 
children’s school-based dental plan meant the loss of 800 jobs. 
Privatization of Sask Oil meant 25 per cent of its work-force 
was laid off after only six months. Privatization of SED 
Systems meant the lay-off of 70 workers within one year of the 
sale. 
 

PC privatization does not mean more jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it means fewer jobs. PC privatization has meant that over the 
past 12 months alone, Saskatchewan has lost 12,000 jobs. PC 
privatization means that if present trends continue, 
Saskatchewan will lose 20,000 people this year alone — 20,000 
young men and women who must leave this province to search 
for jobs and economic opportunity elsewhere. 
 
The PC government says that privatization creates economic 
and investment opportunity. Well it does, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but only for an elite few. The great majority of Saskatchewan 
people are in no position to take advantage of this government’s 
share offering, notwithstanding their tax dollars went to 
building up those corporations. 
 
For example, privatization of Sask Minerals meant ownership 
by two out-of-province companies. Privatization of PAPCO 
meant ownership by a foreign corporation. Privatization of 
SaskPower assets meant ownership by big business from out of 
province. Now the Premier is proposing to sell off the potash 
corporation to big business in Hong Kong and to the 
Governments of India and China. Privatization does not mean 
increased investment opportunities for Saskatchewan people; it 
means increased investment opportunities for big business and a 
few wealthy investors from out of province. Privatization, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, means lost economic control for the people of 
Saskatchewan when our resources are owned and managed by 
big business from out of province. 
 
The government also says that privatization means more 
effective and efficient public services at good value for money. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the privatization of Saskatchewan parks has 
meant higher costs. Park entry fees are up approximately 30 per 
cent, and cabin fees are up. Privatization of highways 
maintenance has meant rapidly deteriorating highways, and I 
should know; I’ve been all over them in the last eight months. 
Privatization of SaskPower assets has meant sharp utility rate 
increases. Privatization of the children’s school-based dental 
plan meant the elimination of the best preventative dental health 
care plan in North America. 
 
Privatization does not mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, increased 
services at a better value for the dollar. It means decreased 
services and higher costs for Saskatchewan men and women. In 
a nutshell, it means fewer jobs, fewer services, lost revenue, lost 
economic control for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
And at the same time we see that taxes have increased at record 
levels, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the financial mismanagement 
of this government and its misguided policies. Crown 
corporations, which brought revenue to the people of this 
province and which helped to fund health care and education 
and social programs, have been sold at discount prices. 
 
We’ve the fastest-growing deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all of 
North America, right here in this province. We have an 
operating deficit of $4 billion and a Crown corporation debt of 
8 billion. That is a 600 per cent increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
— a 600 per cent increase since 1982. 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

232 
 

Interest charges alone on the PC deficit are costing 
Saskatchewan people $3 million a day. 
 
In seven short years this government’s financial 
mismanagement has brought economic ruin to this province. 
The government blames the weather, and it blames world 
conditions, and it blames previous governments, but it never 
looks to itself. It never looks to itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or 
its own economic mismanagement as a cause of the problem. 
Well I say it’s this government’s gross incompetence which has 
given rise to the present crisis that we face in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since this government was elected in 1982, revenue from 
personal income tax jumped 103 per cent, while revenue from 
corporate tax increased by only 10 per cent. This clearly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, indicates the priorities of this government: 
burdens for families, benefits for big business. It’s time that this 
government assumed responsibility for its fiscal 
mismanagement. It’s time that it stood up and assumed 
responsibility. It’s time that this government stopped making 
the people of Saskatchewan carry the burden for its 
irresponsible fiscal policies. 
 
And I would like to talk about health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
These days we see the Premier running around the province 
trying to tell the people of this province that he cares and that 
his government is an innovator in health care simply because it 
spent millions on plastic health cards, which it was forced to do 
as a result of its incompetent policies, and simply because it has 
set up health care commissions costing enormous sums of 
money, because it was forced to do so because of its ridiculous, 
incompetent health care policies. And now this government 
tries to claim that it’s an innovator in health care, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
This government’s record on health care is a national disgrace. 
They dismantled the school-based children’s dental plan and 
imposed deterrent fees in the prescription drug plan that make it 
difficult for the sick and elderly to afford their prescription 
medication, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Through underfunding, they’ve created a situation where 
thousands of people are on a hospital waiting list throughout the 
province. In fact, I believe the figure is close to 9,000 people on 
hospital waiting lists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I hear from 
these people on a regular basis. In the last two or three days I’ve 
heard from three or four people again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
we’ll be looking at their situation and asking the Minister of 
Health what he’s going to be doing about their particular 
situation. 
 
There are unacceptable waiting lists at cancer clinics, and 
chronic underfunding. I’m sure that the member from Regina 
Wascana gets calls from his constituents as well on long 
hospital waiting lists, and if he doesn’t, it’s only because they 
know that the people who are going to stand up for them are the 
New Democratic Party opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — There are unacceptable waiting lists at cancer 
clinics and chronic underfunding and  

understaffing of hospitals. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the member 
from Regina Wascana wishes to enter this debate, he’ll have an 
opportunity to do it at another time. There has been 
underfunding and understaffing of nursing homes and public 
health care programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is this 
government’s record in health care. It’s pretty dismal, isn’t it? 
 
In the throne speech, this government talked about community 
involvement in health care policies, in health care services. 
Well let’s examine its record about community involvement. 
The government always talks about community involvement, 
but it’s another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of how the 
government pays lip-service to an idea and a belief that’s 
popular to the people of Saskatchewan and then does nothing 
about it. The government’s all talk, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
doesn’t put it’s money where it’s mouth is. 
 
They established a health care commission that’s been 
travelling through this province getting information and 
listening to the people of the province. And in the midst of this, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they came down with major health care 
policies in Saskatoon, a major policy to integrate all the 
hospitals in Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And did they do this in consultation with their health care 
commission? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not a word to their 
health care commission. In fact, I had the opportunity to 
personally ask the health care commission whether they had 
been consulted, and the answer I received was no, they did not 
know about it until they got the press release in their hands the 
day the government put it out. 
 
And this government talks about community involvement. Here 
is a commission that has been listening to people across this 
province, and this government doesn’t even consult before it 
makes a decision on a major initiative in this province. And 
that’s an example of this government paying lip-service to an 
idea that’s popular to people and something that they know the 
people want to hear, but when the crunch is down, they don’t 
follow through, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a sham. It has made 
a mockery of the health care commission inasmuch as it talks 
about community involvement when it has totally ignored the 
community involvement and input given to the health care 
commission. And we aren’t suggesting that the government 
shouldn’t be taking action; we are saying that if they believe in 
community input and community involvement, they should 
listen to it before they make their decisions. 
 
This government talks about nurse staffing levels, and they 
promise to increase them, but the truth of the matter, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the fact that staffing standards have been 
recommended by an advisory committee some time ago, and I 
understand that these have not been implemented. 
 
And in that regard, I want to just quote from a brief that was 
presented to the Saskatchewan health care commission. And the 
quote goes as follows: 
 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

233 
 

In the early 1980s a lot of work was done through an 
advisory committee to the Minister of Health to establish 
staffing standards for hospital departments and base 
hospitals, regional hospitals, and community hospitals. To 
the best of our knowledge, these staffing standards have not 
been implemented. 
 

And that’s a hospital brief. To be precise, it’s the Yorkton 
hospital brief, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the government comes here with its throne speech and says 
it’s going to increase staffing levels. They’ve been saying this 
for the last two or three years — saying one thing and doing 
another. Not following through on their promises. 
 
The throne speech talks about preventative programs and the 
need for preventative health care in the province. But let’s look 
at the record of this government on preventative health care so 
that we know where they’re really coming from and what they 
really think about health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about 
preventative health care. 
 
There has been a decrease in the number of public health nurses 
in this province. Public health nurses are the front-line workers 
in the area of preventative health care, so this government says; 
therefore, preventative health care. They establish a fancy 
advertising campaign — fancy advertising campaign, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — but they cut back on the front-line workers 
in the area of preventative health. 
 
That’s how important preventative health is to them. 
Preventative health to this government is a means by which 
they can engage in more self-serving advertising in this 
province, not a means by which they can help the people of 
Saskatchewan with respect to their health care. 
 
And let’s look at community health workers in the North. There 
were cut-backs to community health workers in the North. Once 
again, front-line workers in the area of preventative health care. 
And what are we seeing in northern Saskatchewan today? 
We’re seeing substantial increases in the number of tuberculosis 
cases, Mr. Deputy Speaker — substantial increases in that — 
unacceptable, intolerable increases in the number of 
tuberculosis cases in northern Saskatchewan. And this is 
because this government’s cut back on community health 
workers, and this government’s cut back on the northern food 
transportation subsidy which was helping people buy food for 
their families. That’s this government’s commitment to 
preventative health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It has no commitment at all. 
 
So what do we . . . And let me just show that we’re not simply 
coming to this legislature and talking about things off the top of 
our heads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve heard from the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan on this, and we’re bringing 
these concerns to the government. 
 
(1200) 
 
But here is what a number of people said to the health  

care commission with respect to prevention of disease and 
health promotion. There is a growing fear that the quality of 
care, preventative treatment and educational wellness programs 
are not the government’s main concern. Numerous reports have 
identified the need for prevention, yet we see these services 
diminishing in our area. 
 
The reduction in service is a false economy. The cut-backs in 
funding to preventative health care measures, such as the 
school-based children’s dental plan, the prescription drug plan, 
home care, and VON (Victorian Order of Nurses), has placed 
additional pressure on the hospital system. Those are the words, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the people of this province. That’s this 
government’s commitment to preventative health care. The 
throne speech is a sham and a mockery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What we have instead is a phony Everyone Wins program. 
That’s what health care professionals are telling me, Mr. 
Minister. This program is inadequate. What they want to see, 
what the people of this province want to see, are real 
preventative health care programs that put workers out in the 
field to help people with proper living standards and measures 
that they can take to improve their health care situation. They 
want front-line workers. They want the public health nurses and 
the community health workers, who have been cut and slashed 
by this government, back in the front lines working with the 
people to improve the health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And this government talks about improving 
conditions for seniors and northern residents. They talked about 
it in the throne speech. 
 
But what have they done to seniors in the last two years? 
They’ve levied deterrent fees on prescription medication that 
are very, very unreasonable for seniors, who are on fixed 
income, to meet and pay. They have increased nursing home 
rates, and yet they say that they’re concerned about seniors. 
And they’ve increased property taxes, which is an extra burden 
for seniors who are on fixed incomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And with respect to northern residents, I’ve already dealt with it 
here earlier, but simply they cut the food transportation subsidy, 
they cut back on community health workers. And what we are 
seeing in northern Saskatchewan is increased incidences of 
tuberculosis and high unemployment. If people don’t have jobs 
to buy food, how are they going to pay for that high-priced food 
that’s available in northern Saskatchewan, now that they don’t 
even have the northern food transportation subsidy. 
 
This government says that health care is its priority, but two 
years ago — we mustn’t forget that two years ago this 
government cut back the health care budget by $18 million. 
And the increase last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the increase 
didn’t even meet the rate of inflation. 
 
And it goes about the province propagating the myth that health 
care costs are spiralling out of control so it can justify its long 
hospital waiting lists because . . . so it can  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

234 
 

justify its long hospital waiting lists that are causing people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a lot of anguish and distress as they’re waiting 
to get into the hospital. Hospital waiting lists, as I’ve mentioned 
before, of almost 9,000 people, almost 9,000 people. And I hear 
from people on a regular basis, as I indicated before, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and we’ll continue to bring these matters to the 
attention of the minister and the government who are 
responsible for the suffering of these people. 
 
So why is the government disseminating the myth of spiralling 
health care costs? Well I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s to 
cover up their incompetence and their cruel and heartless 
policies. It’s to set the stage for further reorganization of the 
health care system, which is really another word for cut-backs 
as far as this government is concerned. It’s to set the stage for 
deterrent fees. This government says it’s not for deterrent fees. 
That’s what we’ve heard them say, but we all know that they 
say one thing and do another, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In fact, we had a bit of a debate about that last night in this 
Assembly, and I’m referring to the fact that the Minister of 
Finance said one thing before the election with respect to the 
budget, and lo and behold!, he was saying another thing after 
the election. In short, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t trust the PC 
government when it comes to deterrent fees in health care, and 
nor do the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government says it protects rural Saskatchewan and rural 
Saskatchewan families. But let’s look at what rural 
Saskatchewan — let’s just listen to what rural Saskatchewan 
has to say about health care. The members opposite, who claim 
that they stand up for the rural Saskatchewan family, let’s just 
hear what rural Saskatchewan people say. And this is a quote 
from a brief that was presented to the health care commission: 
 

When you live in rural Saskatchewan, don’t get sick. Many 
of my friends and I feel like we’re living in a third-world 
country in terms of availability of emergency health care in 
rural areas. When you believe that emergencies won’t be 
handled, it’s like living without health care. 
 

That’s what rural Saskatchewan people say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s like living without health care. 
 
People all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have 
expressed concerns, as I’ve indicated before, about long 
hospital waiting lists, understaffing in hospitals, ageing 
equipment, and a chronic shortage of health care specialists. 
And once again, let’s listen to what the people of Saskatchewan 
have to say on this: 
 

In the early 1980s a lot of work was done through the 
advisory committee to the Minister of Health to establish 
staffing standards for hospital departments in base hospitals, 
regional hospitals, and community hospitals. To the best of 
our knowledge, none of these staffing standards have been 
implemented. 
 

Another quote: 
 

The overall funding for hospitals per patient-day in 
Saskatchewan is well below the national average and, 
indeed, lower than most progressive provinces. 
 

Yorkton Union Hospital, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

The overall funding for hospitals per patient-day in 
Saskatchewan is well below the national average and, 
indeed, lower than most progressive provinces. 
 

That’s what the people of Saskatchewan say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And when we look at the response to preventative health care 
cut-backs which have taken place in this province in the last 
two years, let me just once again quote from the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan: 
 

Saskatchewan has had a long, proud history of ensuring that 
health care services are available to all. We feel that this 
tradition is being eroded and that our system is becoming 
deficient in the area of universality and accessibility. 
 

That was from the Saskatchewan Association of Certified 
Nursing Assistants. Another quote from a hospital board, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker: 
 

We feel that many services that could and should be 
provided are not available to our residents and that many are 
so inaccessible as to be non-existent. 
 

I could go on here for hours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — I could go on for hours about the hypocrisy of 
the PC government. It makes all sorts of glowing statements in 
its throne speech; it trots about the province telling people that 
it’s an innovator in health care and they care, and that health 
care is a priority. And it’s all hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, complete 
hypocrisy. 
 
And I’ve simply illustrated that in the last few minutes by 
showing what this government really thinks about preventative 
health care, hospital waiting lists, staffing standards, 
community involvement, and other issues in the health care 
areas. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is a health care system that is 
viewed within a framework of a broad concept of health. Basic 
necessities such as food, shelter, income and social equality are 
essential; they are essential to good health, Mr. Speaker. How 
can our children and our families, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who are 
starving, be expected to have good health? If we let children 
starve in Saskatchewan, which is what’s happening . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. And one of the members 
opposite says la-di-da! The member from Wilkie says la-di-da. 
Well that’s precisely my point, Mr. Speaker. I’m sad to stand 
here today to talk about children who are starving . . . and is it 
the member from Mayfair? It’s one of the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, who says la-di-da. 
 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

235 
 

Well I tell you, I’m just absolutely astounded at the callousness 
and the brashness of the members opposite, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have children starving in this province today, and 
the opposition . . . the government says — I should call them 
the opposition because they’re acting like one. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is we have children starving and all 
they can say is la-di-da. We can’t guarantee people’s health, 
Mr. Speaker, if we don’t provide them with food and basic 
necessities. We have to look at the health care system within a 
framework of a broad concept of health, and that means looking 
after people’s basic necessities. 
 
We had 18,000 children who went to food banks, but the 
government accepts no responsibility for their suffering. The 
government accepts no responsibility for the suffering of people 
who are suffering from mental illness. They need support 
services, too, to regain their health. And yet what we see are 
inadequate social service assistance levels for these individuals 
that make it virtually impossible for them to regain their health 
and get back on their feet. But perhaps this is a concept, perhaps 
this is a concept that’s too difficult for the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Let me just read to you two quotes that illustrate what I am 
attempting to say, Mr. Speaker, and these are quotes from briefs 
that were submitted to the health care commission. The first 
quote is from St. Joseph’s Hospital at Ile-a-la-Crosse. And St. 
Joseph’s Hospital says: 
 

In our region many people lack the basic needs which have 
the biggest impact on health. Among these needs are water 
and sewer (water and sewer, Mr. Speaker), adequate shelter, 
education and employment. 
 

And I think that quote illustrates my comments far batter than I 
could do, Mr. Speaker. Another quote from another brief to the 
health care commission: 
 

Mentally ill persons have great difficulty in accepting their 
illness, but they have a harder time accepting being poor, 
unemployed, rejected, and dependent on social services. 
 

Mentally ill people have a harder time accepting being poor, 
unemployed, rejected and dependent on social services. And 
that’s why these areas, Mr. Speaker, have to be improved upon 
substantially, and they have to be improved upon immediately. 
 
Simply put, health care is not a priority for this government. It 
never has been, and I don’t believe it ever will be. They fought 
it when the CCF-NDP brought medicare to Saskatchewan, and 
they’re no different today. 
 
They have no credibility in health care. They have hurt the 
health care system in Saskatchewan, and the people of 
Saskatchewan do not trust them with our health care. 
 
But the people of Saskatchewan can count on the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, to revitalize and maintain ambulance services, home 
care services, hospital and other health  

care services in rural and urban Saskatchewan. And together 
with the people we will build a better health care system and 
we’ll build a better society. 
 
(1215) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would respectively ask 
leave of the Assembly to introduce some guests that have just 
arrived. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
notice in your gallery that we have some guests that have just 
arrived, and I am pleased to introduce to you, and through you 
to all members of the Assembly, from Tisdale, Saskatchewan 
and area we have the Tisdale Lions Junior Band. There are 45 
band members, ages 9 to 14. We also have a number of adults 
along with them today. They’re going to be observing the 
legislature for a short while. They’ve had a tour of the 
Legislative Assembly. I do understand we’re going to have 
some pictures and drinks. 
 
And it’s just my pleasure, as some of the students in the band 
are from my constituency, it’s my pleasure to give them a warm 
welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Rural Development, does he 
wish to also . . . Is leave granted for the Minister of Rural 
Development? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague, the Minister of Highways, to introduce . . . 
he’s introduced, to welcome the students from Tisdale and Star 
City area. Tisdale, as you know, is the north-east part of our 
province, and I think all our students would agree that the area 
there is the greatest area in Saskatchewan, and we welcome . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It’s the home of many fine athletes, as 
you well know, in the summer games. It’s also the home of 
many fine people. 
 
And I’d like to extend, along with the Minister of Highways, a 
welcome to the students. Have a . . . sure an enjoyable few 
minutes here in the legislature. We’ll join you for drinks and 
pictures later, and a safe journey home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
the two members of the government in welcoming the students 
from Tisdale and Kelsey area and Melfort area to the 
Legislative Assembly. My family has a long association with 
that area of the province. I, in fact, was born and raised in the 
Tisdale-Bjorkdale area, and have fond memories of that area, 
and I certainly want to join  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

236 
 

the members in welcoming these young people to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to return 
to the fact that the government, as I said earlier, has been going 
throughout the province trying to propagate the myth that health 
care costs are spiralling out of control, Mr. Speaker. And in that 
regard, I just want to quote from a brief that was presented to 
the health care commission from the Saskatchewan Health-Care 
Association, who I believe have a certain amount of authority in 
this area: 
 

For the past two or three years we have heard quite regularly 
that our health care costs are running out of control. Costs 
have escalated, to be sure, but hysteria is unwarranted. 
 

And the point that the health care commission was making is 
the fact that yes, costs have gone up, but they are not out of 
control, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — But this government would have the people of 
Saskatchewan believe that health care costs are out of control, 
and they want the people to believe that so that they can justify 
further cut-backs. Oh, they will put it under different words, 
Mr. Speaker. They won’t call them cut-backs — rationalization 
or reorganization or some fancy title like this. But we know 
what it is, Mr. Speaker. It’s cut-backs; in many instances this 
amounts to cut-backs. 
 
The PC government also wants to spread the myth that health 
care costs are out of control so that they can justify the 
imposition of deterrent fees at some future date, regardless of 
what they say about it now. The fact of the matter is, their party 
is on record as proposing deterrent fees. The fact of the matter 
is, is that this government, some time in the future — well, it’s 
already done it on prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker. It has levied 
a deterrent fee that is unreasonable for people on low income 
and for seniors on fixed income. 
 
But the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association goes on to say: 
 

To serve the people of this province, any examination of the 
health care system must not be conducted with the intention 
of reducing costs or expenditures or to match another 
province’s allocation of available resources. It must be done 
with a view to improving the effectiveness of health care 
programs for Saskatchewan residents and, it is hoped, 
concomitantly increasing efficiencies at an operational level. 
 

A very, very reasonable and rational statement, Mr. Speaker. It 
must not be conducted with the intention of  

reducing costs or expenditures. That’s what the Saskatchewan 
Health-Care Association states. But what did this government 
do? It cut back the best preventative dental health care program 
in North America for the purpose of cutting costs. It levied 
harsh and cruel prescription drug deterrent fees on the people of 
Saskatchewan for the purposes of cutting cost. And at the same 
time, it approved drug patent legislation in Ottawa, Mr. 
Speaker, drug patent legislation that has increased the cost of 
drugs in the country, which is an example of why this 
government wants . . . it’s supporting the multinational 
pharmaceutical corporations when this government approves 
Brian Mulroney putting in the drug patent legislation. 
 
They’re in the pockets of the multinational corporations and big 
business, Mr. Speaker. They’re in their pockets. They say 
prescription medication is running out of hand and the costs are 
soaring, but at the same time they are . . . while in the back 
pockets of the multinational pharmaceutical associations they 
go along with Brian Mulroney’s drug patent legislation which 
has increased the cost of drugs across this country. And I say 
that’s hypocritical, but it’s exactly where this government is at, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what they stand for. 
 
Saskatchewan people believe, Mr. Speaker, that they have a 
right to health care. And in that regard I wish to quote from one 
particular brief, which states: 
 

As Saskatchewan citizens we historically believe that 
optimum health care for all peoples, regardless of race, 
creed, age, or financial status, is a right and not a privilege. 
 

The people of Saskatchewan believe, Mr. Speaker, that health 
care is their right — and so they should believe that. They pay 
for it; they pay for it through their taxes, Mr. Speaker, and they 
should be entitled to receive good health care. To have 
government members running around the province saying that 
people are abusing the system and they’re using it too much and 
the people of the province are abusing the health care system 
and therefore we need to cut back on services, is total 
hypocrisy. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have paid for their health care 
services. They’ve paid for it through their taxes, and this is the 
sort of health care system that they want, a tax-funded, 
tax-based health care system that’s publicly administered, not a 
health care system like the American system where 37 million 
Americans go without health care, Mr. Speaker — 37 million 
Americans without health care, and a per capita cost that is 
substantially higher than what we face in Canada. The 
Americans have something to learn from us, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to health care. 
 
And the government’s move towards privatization of health 
care by privatizing the school-based children’s dental plan, and 
by moving prescription drugs to a very high deterrent fee, 
which is a form of privatization, this isn’t acceptable to the 
people, Mr. Speaker. It’s simply not acceptable. The people of 
this province want a publicly administered, publicly funded 
health care plan, that’s what they want. And that means that the 
government is going to have to reassess its priorities and do 
what is necessary to raise the funds for health care programs in  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

237 
 

this province — and that doesn’t include selling off 
Saskatchewan assets at fire sale prices, Mr. Speaker — it 
doesn’t include that. 
 
That’s not the way; you don’t sell the pump at the well if you 
run short of money because there’s a drought in the area, Mr. 
Speaker. But that’s what the Minister of Finance would do, 
that’s what the Minister of Health would do — sell off 
Saskatchewan assets at rock-bottom prices, at fire-sale prices in 
order to pay off its deficit that was caused as a result of its 
mismanagement and incompetence and misplaced priorities, 
Mr. Speaker, instead of using Crown corporations that are 
profitable to earn money for the people of Saskatchewan so that 
they can pay for school-based dental programs; so that they can 
pay for a first-class prescription drug program; so that they can 
straighten out the hospital waiting lists that are causing the 
people of this province untold misery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They should be using money from these sources, reassessing 
their priorities, so that we can afford our health care programs 
instead of running away from them and burying their head in 
the sand and saying that costs are spiralling out of control and 
people are abusing the system. That’s the myth that they would 
like people to believe, Mr. Speaker. But I have a lot more 
confidence in the people of Saskatchewan, and so do my other 
colleagues on this side of the House, the members of the 
opposition. We have confidence in the people of Saskatchewan. 
We believe that the people of Saskatchewan use their health 
care system in a responsible fashion. We believe that by far the 
vast majority use the system responsibly. 
 
And the people want the system to be funded through public 
funds and to be administered publicly, and I hope this 
government gets that message, because I sure got that message 
clearly as I travelled throughout the province and spoke to 
health care groups and health care professionals. They don’t 
want deterrent fees, they don’t want any more cut-backs. They 
don’t want this government engaging in any more misplaced 
priorities. They want this government working for them, not for 
multinational corporations. They want this government doing 
what a government should be doing and not playing into the 
hands of their Tory friends. They want this government 
working for them, and together with the people of 
Saskatchewan we can build a better health care system, and we 
can build a better and more decent society in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
participate in this debate this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, on the 
address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I’d like to, first of all, take this opportunity to extend a hearty 
congratulations to all the Irish people in this province on St. 
Patrick’s day. It’s a terrific day for the Irish. It’s a day that Irish 
people get together and talk about old times and about their 
history and about their culture. And I think it’s an important 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for Irish  

people to get together and tell stories that stretch the truth from 
time to time. 
 
As a matter of fact, it’s commonly referred to, Mr. Speaker, as 
. . . the Prime Minister, for example, who has gone on public 
record quite often, Mr. Speaker, and told stories that have 
stretched the truth, as has the Premier of this province, and it’s 
referred to as a little bit of blarney, and it’s all in fun and it’s 
always encouraged and welcomed by people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen over the years in this 
particular legislature, is a government that uses blarney in every 
opportunity they possibly can. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(1230) 
 
The Speaker: — According to rule 13(1), when the fifth day of 
the said days of any amendment be under consideration of 30 
minutes before the ordinary time of daily adjournment, the 
Speaker shall forthwith put the question on any amendment or 
amendments then before the Assembly. 
 
We do have an amendment before the Assembly. The 
amendment was moved by the member for Regina North, 
seconded by the member for Prince Albert. 
 
The division bells rang from 12:31 p.m. until 12:37 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 18 
 
 Romanow  Upshall 
 Prebble  Simard 
 Rolfes   Kowalsky 
 Shillington  Solomon 
 Lingenfelter  Atkinson 
 Tchorzewski  Goulet 
 Thompson  Lyons 
 Brockelbank  Trew 
 Mitchell  Van Mulligen 
 

Nays — 32 
 

 Muller   Pickering 
 Duncan  Toth 
 McLeod  Sauder 
 Andrew  Johnson 
 Berntson  McLaren 
 Lane   Hopfner 
 Taylor   Petersen 
 Smith   Swenson 
 Swan   Martens 
 Schmidt  Baker 
 Hodgins  Wolfe 
 Gerich   Gleim 
 Hepworth  Neudorf 
 Hardy   Gardner 
 Klein   Saxinger 
 Meiklejohn  Britton 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. Order. The  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

238 
 

amendment is lost. Debate continues on the main motion. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity 
to extend my congratulations to Her Honour Sylvia Fedoruk for 
the fine job of reading a very weak-content throne speech. She’s 
actually a very nice person. I’ve had the honour to represent our 
caucus last Christmas at her place over a sandwich, with my 
wife, and we had the occasion to visit with her for about a half 
an hour. And my wife and I both found her to be a very 
gracious person, and we wish her well in her new job. 
 
I’d like to as well offer my congratulations to the mover in the 
address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, the member 
from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. It’s always nice to win a 
by-election — although very, very narrowly, and only because 
of the government pumping in more promises than they can 
keep — to come to this House and be part of the Speech from 
the Throne. 
 
I might caution the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that 
it’s a bad omen to move this speech after winning a by-election, 
because from personal experience I can tell you that it happened 
to me and I lost the next election, so I know he’s going to have 
a very tough row to hoe. 
 
And of course I want to take a few moments as well, Mr. 
Speaker, before I talk about what the member from Regina 
South, the minister of housing, spoke about last night. I 
represent the constituency of Regina North West, which many 
of you know. It’s a terrific riding and I’ve had the honour to 
represent that riding since the election of 1986. When the 
election was undertaken there were about 15,751 voters. That 
has now expanded to about 18,000 voters, a little over 10,000 
households. 
 
The constituency of Regina North West, Mr. Speaker, is 
composed of a number of neighbourhoods. There’s Sherwood 
Estates and McCarthy Park and Walsh Acres and Rochdale 
Park and Lakewood and Lakeridge, Regent Park, Normanview, 
and part of Normanview West as it exists now. And the families 
in Regina North West that have lived there in the last few years 
have been undergoing a very severe problem. And the problem 
that they’re faced with is a little bit of a malignant cancer of 
government in this province. 
 
We’ve had in our constituency, Mr. Speaker, a number of 
families suffering as a result of government programs that the 
Conservative government have implemented over the last 
couple of years. They feel that they’re under attack by this 
government, that they’re under attack by the Premier in almost 
every corner. 
 
The tradespeople in my constituency — the carpenters and the 
dry-wallers and the electricians, and others in the trades — have 
never had a more difficult time in earning an income in their 
profession since 1982. Mr. Speaker, up till 1982 the riding was 
a prosperous, thriving constituency. Families, both spouses in 
many cases, were working to earn an honest living so they 
could raise a family and purchase a house in the constituency or 
to participate in the economy like other families in the province 
do. 
 

But since 1982, Mr. Speaker, they have been riddled with 
unemployment. The economy has basically died in this 
province as it pertains to the building trades, and they are very, 
very concerned about the economic policies of this government, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s my view, as their representative, that this 
government has not been accountable to them or other people in 
this province. They have neglected their duties in tough 
economic times to be involved in the economy to assist in 
creating jobs with businesses and the co-operative sector. They 
have failed in that obligation, and in my view, Mr. Speaker, that 
is unacceptable, and my constituency will be voicing their 
concern come the next election. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we have teachers in our constituency. I 
visited with many of them at Centennial School this week, and 
last week at Bud MacNeill school. And they’re telling me, as 
well as the students, that they have a very major concern with 
regard to education. They’re concerned about the fact that this 
Devine government has cut back education expenditures; 
they’ve modified the approach to education like no other 
government in the history of this province. 
 
They’re concerned about the fact that when students graduate, 
when young people graduate, they are subjected to quotas to 
enter university. They are subjected as well to quotas, even 
stiffer quotas to get into technical schools. 
 
And the problem that we’ve got, Mr. Speaker, is that young 
people in our province are the most valuable resource in the 
province. And the problem we’ve got, that these have, is that 
we are not able to provide these people with continued 
education, and from continued education, jobs that come after 
that. This government of the member from Estevan — we all 
know his name — has not done their job when it applies to the 
young people of this province. They have given up on young 
people. They have not priorized, in terms of education, their 
government’s programs. And, Mr. Speaker, this is totally 
intolerable. 
 
(1245) 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, written a letter to the Premier and to the 
Minister of Education on behalf of many of my families in 
Regina North West. And the letter, Mr. Speaker, pertains to, in 
this instance, a public high school in north-west Regina. 
 
The people I’ve mentioned to you, the 10,000 households, the 
10,000 families in my constituency, which is a very large 
constituency in terms of voters, do not feel adequately served in 
the public high schools. We have, as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, no high schools for 10,000 families plus 2,000 that are 
joining my constituency on the west side of my riding and the 
south side of my riding, which is now called Westhill, and part 
of the Normanview West extension. 
 
And these families, Mr. Speaker, have to bus their children, or 
the school system buses the children to high schools a great 
distance away. And it’s my view that the public high school 
board have made specific requests for capital funding over the 
last number of years, and they’ve  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

239 
 

been turned down. But it’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that the 
government has been negligent in their duties to considering 
their request for a high school over the past number of years. 
 
In my letter, Mr. Speaker . . . and I want to excerpt some of it 
for the public record, and it’s to the Premier: 
 

Dear Mr. Premier: The public school board has planned for 
some years now to build a public high school in the 
north-west area of Regina, subject to the provincial 
government’s approval of the necessary capital funding. 
This year the board has again requested capital funding for 
this important project. In addition, many families have been 
telling me that a public high school in this area is urgently 
needed, and I write to request support on that project. There 
are over 12,000 families living in these districts, many of 
them who have children attending the 14 elementary 
schools. 
 

Eight of the elementary schools that are feeder schools for the 
high schools in the central part of the city are public schools, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I go on in the letter to describe some other details about the 
requirements and the necessity. Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Education to 
read the letter. I have not received a reply as yet, although it’s 
only been a month. I know it takes a long time for some of these 
people in this government to read letters, but it’s been a month. 
There’s been no acknowledgement of the letter; there’s been no 
response with regard to capital commitments for this coming 
budget. 
 
But on behalf of the constituency of Regina North West, I urge 
the government to favourably consider this capital expenditure 
for a much needed high school. 
 
I’m sure some of the members opposite, the member from 
Melfort, will attest to the fact that his constituency has at least 
one high school, and maybe they have more. And each one of 
those ridings over there that have far fewer families living in 
them have those public high schools. My constituency does not, 
Mr. Speaker, and I urge that that shortcoming be addressed as 
quickly as possible. 
 
I’ve done a great deal of visiting with some of the businesses in 
my community as well, Mr. Speaker, and what I have found is 
that the business community is under extreme pressure of high 
interest rates. This government has neglected to address the 
problem of small-business people. They are telling me that they 
have great difficulty with the fact that the government has 
supported Sunday shopping. 
 
They tell me that the government has knifed the business 
community in this city by saying that large national 
corporations can come in here and break the law and encourage 
Sunday shopping. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, they’re telling me the interest rates 
are important, and the fact that the government has withdrawn 
from the economy and have been the architects of the worst 
economy that we’ve had in this  

province. Bankruptcies last year in the business community in 
the province of Saskatchewan were at the highest level in the 
history of our province. And that, Mr. Speaker, is a direct net 
result of the economic policies of this Conservative 
government. 
 
I had the occasion, Mr. Speaker, a couple of days ago to attend 
the Regina Home Builders’ Association dinner, and the member 
from Regina South was there. He had some words to say, but 
even the members of the Regina Home Builders’ Association 
expressed to me their unbelievability, their astounding 
disappointments at the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, with 
their economic policies. 
 
Saskatchewan housing starts have been the worst in 1988 than 
they were in recent modern history in this province. There were, 
in 1982, 6,822 housing starts in this province; last year there 
were 3,800 housing starts; and in 1989 the home builders of 
Saskatchewan are telling me and my colleagues that 1988 was 
probably a better year than 1989 will be. And that worries them 
a great deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The membership in the Saskatchewan home building 
association has dropped significantly by about 25 to 30 per cent 
from 1988 to 1989. The government, the minister from Regina 
South, has gone on record at this dinner at the association on 
Wednesday night, said that the past year was not a good year. 
This is what the minister said, that the past year in home 
building in Regina and in Saskatchewan was not a good year. 
 
Well it was the worst year in the modern home building history 
of this province. If that’s not a good year, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
know what isn’t a good year. But it’s a terrible year, and they’re 
quite worried because they’re hung out there with the high 
interest rates, and they’re being the victims of the high interest 
rate policy that this government and their cousins and their 
kissing cousins in Ottawa have supported and forced upon the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
These high interest rates, Mr. Speaker, are not the engine for 
our economy. The engine of our economy, Mr. Speaker, are the 
small businesses, including the home builders in this province, 
and they are being attacked by this minister and by this 
government and by their cousins in Ottawa with high interest 
rates, with a lack of economic policies, and with a lack of any 
initiative when it comes to creating jobs. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the minister went on and 
confirmed what many of them were telling me. They were 
telling me that this minister has not been a very effective 
minister in the government. They were very disappointed with 
his performance. They feel that he’s done about as much for 
them as the drought has done for farmers. They feel that he is 
the drought of the home builders’ association. And he went to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that there were 22,000 jobs created by this 
home program. 
 
I mentioned a few moments earlier that the tradespeople in my 
constituency are underemployed; jobs are scarce. They’re doing 
as much as they possibly can in other areas where they have no 
training and skills just to keep alive.  
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

240 
 

Many of them have moved out of the province, seeking work in 
Ontario and Alberta and British Columbia. And this 
government refuses to come to grips with that. Their response, 
rather than coming forward with a program which would 
benefit working people, which would benefit the economy of 
this province, is to say, well we have a terrific home program. 
It’s created 22,000 jobs in the province. 
 
Maybe there’s 22,000 Conservatives hired somewhere out there 
on the government payroll, but the people in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, are not working in the numbers that he is stating. And 
I challenge the minister, as we challenged him in the February 
sitting of the Crown Corporations Committee of 1989, to table 
the information, the formula, the documents which supports his 
contention that there are 22,000 jobs created. It’s a fantasy. It’s 
a fantasy of this little Minister from Regina South. 
 
And it’s my view, Mr. Speaker, that it’s indicative of the 
hypocrisy of this government. This government is full of 
hypocrites, in my view, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Rosthern gave his speech earlier on the Speech from the 
Throne, and he talked about freedom of speech, that this is a 
place where we can get up and speak our mind, and he gets out 
and puts his neck on the line and commits political suicide by 
making accusations which were totally untrue. 
 
But his tactics and the tactics of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
remind me of the tactics of the Nazi Party in the 1930s, prior to 
gaining power in Germany, Mr. Speaker. And we all know what 
happened in that circumstance. They gained power at all costs, 
and they hung on to power at all costs. And it cost money and it 
cost the destruction of lives. Now it’s not quite that desperate in 
Saskatchewan where people are dying, although we’ve had 
some examples of waiting lists that have caused premature 
deaths because of this government’s policy. What we are 
seeing, Mr. Speaker, is a policy of this government which is 
hurting people’s lives; they’re under all kinds of stress; they’re 
underemployed; they’re unemployed; they’re being forced to 
move out of this province. 
 
The statistics from February alone, Mr. Speaker, says 6,200 
people, net loss of people from this province alone; we’ve lost 
6,200 people in four weeks. February has 28 days. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Lucky it was a short month. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Lucky it is was a short month, my colleague, 
the member from Elphinstone says. If it was March, it probably 
would have been 7,000, and we may see those numbers 
materialize yet. And that’s terrible, because what we do, what 
we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker, is this government, along with 
the taxpayers of this province, are spending money on 
education — although not enough and in poor priority sense — 
we’re training our young people; we’re giving them, hopefully, 
some skills; we’re giving them some education, and then when 
they graduate, there’s no jobs available. So the taxpayers are 
financing the training of our future, our young people; we’re 
training them; we’re paying for their  

education, and they’re moving out of the province. It’s a brain 
drain. I wish some of these members opposite, the Conservative 
members, would leave the province. It would save the taxpayers 
a fair amount of pain and a fair amount of tax dollars over the 
last . . . in our province. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it would 
not be a brain drain, as we’re experiencing with the loss of our 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — The member from Rosthern talked about 
freedom of speech. Well, the hypocrisy of that, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we have had orders for return in this House for about 18 
months, two years — took that long to get a few written 
questions responded to, and he says that that’s the freedom of 
speech, and that’s co-operation. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, this government and this Premier 
attempt to change the face of our province, and I’ll get into that 
in a few moments, or if not now, certainly on Monday. 
 
But some of the changes they’re undertaking — instead of 
freedom of speech, they’re a government of secrecy. Rather 
than having a session in the fall, which has been the tradition in 
this province in the last 15 to 20 years where the government 
introduces some Bills, the House is adjourned. The opposition 
is given the opportunity to look at the Bills and discuss the 
impact of the Bills with the groups and people that they impact 
upon; they’ve cancelled that. 
 
Now what they’re trying to do is to shroud themselves in 
secrecy. They’ve got so much to hide, as we can see from the 
public accounts disasters. They’re hiding the reasons for 
misleading the people of this province, and in effect the result is 
that the people feel that they’ve been lied to by this 
government. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order, order, order, 
order. We’ve talked about this now many times, and I think the 
hon. member knows what I’m referring to, and I would like to 
ask him to withdraw his unparliamentary remark. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I meant to say that the people of 
Saskatchewan were misled by this government, and if it was 
taken another way, I’ll withdraw that. 
 
But it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve got here is that the 
government is stymieing the opposition. They’re promoting 
secrecy in government. They’re not being very co-operative. 
The public accounts is an example. Question period is an 
example. 
 
We ask the Premier questions and he gives the answers on 
everything except the question. He comes in this House, Mr. 
Speaker; he’s got a speech to give. It doesn’t matter what the 
question is, he’s going to get up there and give his speech. And 
there seems to be a little bit of abuse on that from the Premier 
and from other members, including the Minister of Health. 
 
We’ve seen Bob Andrew . . . I’m sorry, the member from 
Kindersley-Lloydminster — I withdraw that — the member 
from Kindersley-Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker . . . 
  



 
March 17, 1989 

 

241 
 

 
An Hon. Member: — No, just Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Or Kindersley. I’m sorry. The member from 
Kindersley has gone on record in 1980 and 1981 as saying that 
the government requires more access. We have to have a 
freedom of information act. He spoke in this House time after 
time on the reason and the need for freedom of information. 
 
And what we have, Mr. Speaker, is this government, led by the 
member from Kindersley, rather than coming forward with his 
ideas that we require more information to the public, he has 
been the author, along with a colleague, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, and the member from Estevan and the 
member from Meadow Lake, in hiding information, keeping 
information secret. 
 
You never hear the member from Kindersley getting up and 
waxing eloquently about the need for more information. He gets 
up there and responds in a fumbling, disjointed, incompetent 
way, hiding information and not providing any information. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s the epitome of hypocrisy that I earlier on 
indicated this government is very guilty of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a number of other things I’d like to talk 
about and perhaps we should get into them right now because I 
think it’s important for the people of this province. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, as indicated, many other comments by 
my colleagues, a government of opposites. This government has 
no credibility. It is literally riddled with hypocrisy, and it is a 
government of opposites. Everything it says, it means the 
opposite. When they get up in this House, Mr. Speaker, they 
talk about things that they are going to do. They then . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 1 p.m. this House now stands 
adjourned until Monday at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


