


















































May 18, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 18, 1989 
 

1221 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll just do a quick recap of the 
information. Number one, of course, we’re debating the role 
regarding the ringing of the bell which will be limited for a 
period of one hour. 
 
I introduced my comments earlier on this afternoon by stating 
very clearly that there was a connection between the procedure 
and the context of the procedure. And in that sense, I made a 
connection between the concern of the people’s issues on 
selling of public utilities and the very importance of the 
people’s involvement in participatory democracy, and stating 
their position through the petition, also stating their position 
through the meetings, and making it well-known on their 
opposition to the privatization Bill, more particularly in regards 
to SaskEnergy. 
 
I guess in regards to the bell-ringing, a lot of the information 
that I got back from the people was one of standing up strong 
for Saskatchewan, and standing up strong for the history of 
Saskatchewan in regards to public corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I debate this bell-ringing incident, I also mention the 
interconnection with the short history that I have had in the 
legislature from ’86, and pin-pointed the direct connection 
between the bell-ringing and other incidents of the questions of 
democracy where the government makes, you know, their 
position known as a right to legislate, and the right to continue 
government. 
 
And from us on the opposition side we make our case and say 
we have the right to criticize, and we have the right to oppose 
so that, you know, we have a technical device of the 
bell-ringing to denote the points of difference. You know, it’s a 
procedural tactic utilized through the parliamentary 
democracies to voice a strong concern in votes or of issues, you 
know, that come up from time to time. 
 
My own overview on it as I go on to make the specific 
connection to the bell-ringing aspect and the proposals that we 
had outlined, you know, with the government side in 
communication with us, I’ll outline the different proposals that 
were brought forth, you know, as I continue this discussion. 
 
As I get into that I also want to say, when I used to talk to the 
bell-ringing situation with the people as I went out to deal with 
the petition and to deal with to the issue of the public meetings 
that the people had, I had a quick review of the Bill 5 which did 
limit the aspect of government debate and opposition debate in 
regards to Executive Council being able to make decisions in 
regards to governmental reorganization, and I made the 
connection  

there on the whole issue of democracy and bell-ringing. 
 
Then I went on into the issue of the problem of Public Accounts 
and the lack of interest. I said, my goodness, we’re debating 
important issues of the legislature such as privatization and its 
interconnection with bell-ringing. And I did mention the 
problem with quorum that we had the past couple of weeks, and 
I said . . . And I thought to myself, as a new member, that when 
we get into the midst of very key issues such as this and the 
historical development of Saskatchewan, hopefully that we 
would have had a quorum, and we saw a little bit of 
light-heartedness by the government in not being able to come 
out and even listen to their own one member. I remember, you 
know, before we went into the debate, it was their own speaker 
that was up on the floor when they didn’t find enough of a 
quorum, you know, to make the legislature work. 
 
And when it was our turn to do the quorum, they didn’t have 
enough speakers again to have that. So it sort of gave me a 
message that while in the media it stated that there is great 
concern to get back to the legislature when we were doing 
bell-ringing, the fact remains that historical documents show 
that we didn’t even have a quorum after the bell-ringing session 
came to be. And that was a very key point in my comments just 
prior to the supper hour break today. 
 
I guess the other thing that I would like to state, Mr. Speaker, I 
was just starting to make comments on one other final example 
and I want to . . . I mean the text of the auditor’s report is pretty 
thick and nobody wants to go through the full document. And I 
want to make a couple of observations on this report that was 
tabled just yesterday. 
 
And I notice that there was fairly, what I would call scathing 
commentaries by the press in regards to the whole issue of a 
government function such as the auditor being able to do their 
effective job. And with due respect to you, Mr. Speaker, I 
looked at this comment, so I’d just like to read it to the record. 
 
It says that — this was on May 18 of ’89 in the Star-Phoenix 
and it says that: 
 

(The) Provincial auditor Willard Lutz says that he can no 
longer effectively do his job because the government isn’t 
obeying its own laws. 
 
In his 1988 annual report to the legislature, tabled 
Wednesday, Lutz says he’s being denied access to 
information he has a right to see. 
 
It’s a hard-hitting report; Lutz accuses several Crown 
corporations of interfering with his right to do his job by 
refusing to release information to him. 
 

I remember when we were talking about, you know, the right of 
key people who are government, very important government 
functions, you know, whether it was the legislative law clerk, 
and also your position, and also now the auditor, and people felt 
that it’s not a good idea to ever  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1222 
 

attack these very important positions of our parliamentary 
democracy. 
 
And that I was outwardly amazed when one of my members 
read this following document, too, from the Leader-Post, again 
on May 18, 1989, and he said . . . from here it says that: 
 

Justice Minister (Bob Andrew) said Lutz — who most 
people have a hard time working with, anyway, he added 
— he’s just unhappy because he sees the government’s 
decision to appoint more private auditors as an 
infringement upon his territory. 
 

And again it appears here that privatization aspect seems to be 
more important you know, on the private auditor idea rather 
than on paying respects to the public auditor as a whole. You 
know, why would it have anything to do with, you know, hiring 
private auditors? 
 
The other aspect that I saw in here was . . . Justice Minister 
said, and these are his words: 
 

“He’s a hard guy to complain about working together,” 
Andrew told reporters Wednesday. “Jesus Christ, he can’t 
work with anybody.” 
 

And for me that’s, in regards to language, it’s a little bit harsh to 
be using that type of language to a very important position such 
as yourself, or the Clerk, or the lawyer, or the legislative 
lawyer. As I looked at it, it sort of gives a very bad image in 
regards to a government having to appear to put down one of 
their key functionaries in our system of democracy. 
 
I would just like to make that point, Mr. Speaker, as I read the 
paper of just today. It makes it very difficult when we talk about 
democracy, and when very key statements are made by a public 
servant such as the auditor, to state very, very . . . It’s very, very 
discouraging. As a person in opposition, I look at it, and I say to 
myself . . . I looked at it in terms of the earlier point I made. 
You need knowledge. You need information to make 
governmental decisions and to debate these points in 
opposition, but not only that, in terms of the historical 
development of our province, to be able to deal with these 
things very effectively. 
 
I would like to say that as a new person in the legislature I was 
very displeased, on a personal level, very disappointed to see 
that happening — that we could put ourselves at that level. 
 
I would like to also state that, you know, I was listening to some 
reports today in the news about the possibilities that we were 
not co-operating with the government in trying to resolve the 
matter of the bell-ringing, and also to try and resolve 
interrelated matters of rules in this House. And one of the key 
aspects, of course, on rule changes is that it’s not only 
something very important for the Speaker, or for the Clerk of 
the legislature, it’s very important for the government in power, 
and also for the opposition to the government. 
 
It’s very important as we look at the situation to first of all  

establish a strong basis of consultation, and not only . . . and 
I’ve said quite a bit already in regards to the substantive issue of 
privatization, but also in regards to the rules. The rules of the 
House are made on a more or less co-operative basis to try and 
make sure that we agree upon, you know, what is workable in 
the House. And I found the initial stages of the process to be, of 
course, uncertain as I recall, you know, the other day; and I 
thought, oh, my goodness, we have a chance here to make a 
little bit of a breakthrough on coming out with very important 
changes of rules. 
 
And I would like to just read into the record some of these 
things that we have discussed. We were on the understanding 
that more meetings were taking place and that, you know, a 
process of consultation would come forth. 
 
But I must take a step back before that, Mr. Speaker, and say 
that the introduction of the motion is such that initially it was 
not a consultative process. The consultative process only 
became to be in being after the fact in regards to trying, you 
know, smoothen the situation out. And I thought we were at the 
stage of getting a little bit open, you know, to try and come out 
with a point where the government side makes strong points on 
their arguments on what is useful for procedures, and we’d 
make our own points in regards to what was useful for 
procedures. And I looked at the whole bell-ringing incident as 
something that was already in the past, you know. We were 
back here sitting down and trying to figure out a strategy on 
how to handle this, you know, at the best . . . at least try at a 
consensual level, which is the usual practice of rule changes in 
the House. 
 
And my own feeling as a member sitting in with the discussions 
was, you know, coming out with these basic points. And I must 
recall that we discussed about the possibilities of bell-ringing 
being limited to two hours, and other details to be worked out 
on that, you know, was a first point, you know, that was made 
in our discussions. 
 
The other one that we did talk about was question period to be 
extended to 45 minutes. And I think part of that, Mr. Speaker, 
comes to be that when we did go out to the field, we felt that 
more public input into the issues of the public could be brought 
about in connection with the bell-ringing, and in connection to 
providing a greater scope of questions to be brought into the 
House. 
 
(1915) 
 
And we thought, you know, that’s possibly a debatable point on 
both sides, but it’s something to discuss and bring forth, you 
know, a lot more questions. Because a lot of times I know that 
as I was watching we were always cut off on debates and so on, 
and you know that sometimes a few of us got a little bit 
long-winded in questions and answers and stuff like that, and 
that indeed . . . but in most cases I saw that the practice was one 
where the questioning was not bad at all on both sides, and the 
answers not bad at all on both sides, and the answers not bad at 
all. But the important interchange of information that was 
taking place between that was such that you had to lengthen the 
time to 45 minutes. So that was, you know, talked about and 
discussed, and I thought we’d  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1223 
 

have an open forum where we could discuss this with the 
Justice minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — The other one that was on the point of agenda 
in regards to this bell-ringing was that we suggested that there 
should be an opposition day with a notice for the topic of debate 
to be given the previous Friday. I know that in certain 
parliaments and legislators in, I think, within our country, and 
elsewhere in the world, have this type of feature where you give 
a little bit of advance notice on a weekly basis on one specific 
day where, you know, a particular point of debate could be 
brought into scope. And again, that would be a point of, of 
course, debate on both sides as to how useful this might be in 
the long run. 
 
But most definitely it would then begin key issues of people 
into proper perspective on a weekly basis at the legislature, and 
there would be a specific point in the week where there would 
be concentration on major issues of the week. And I thought 
that was, again, to be a debated point on either side. But it was 
part of the bell-ringing proposal that was here today, as I 
listened with our other caucus members. 
 
The other one that was very important and, of course, I looked 
at the other aspect of regular tabling of documents. I know that 
as yourself, Mr. Speaker, you do regular tabling of documents 
on how to perform a business on a daily level, and you know 
the very importance of keeping on time on stuff. And you also 
know the very importance of the debates that take place in the 
legislature, that the information is there, and that the 
information is tabled at a proper time. And sometimes we were 
seeing the tabling of documents being two years behind, and 
that. You know, why not have a more or less regularized 
schedule where there might be, you know, up to six months 
after the end of the year we could table these things and debate 
them on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I believe recently there was a previous 
member who was more or less going through the list of rules 
and elaborating on each one like you are doing. And I 
understand from your remarks that you have an interest in it; 
however, I don’t think this is the proper forum to have a general 
discussion of rules, which it certainly sounds like you’re doing 
that. While you might use some for examples, I don’t think we 
want long debates on them, and I’d like you to shorten your 
remarks and examples. . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Order. Order, order. Order, order, order. Order. I’m going to 
once more repeat to the hon. member from Cumberland, this is 
not a forum for a general discussion of rule changes in the 
House. That is the gist of my argument. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It sure is. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Rule 33(1) discusses 
bell-ringing. It is not . . . Order, order, order, order. It is not an 
opportunity to discuss all rules in the general sense. The 
member from Saskatoon South, I’d just like to ask him to 
refrain from the interruption. We  

discussed this, I believe it was yesterday, with hon. members 
and I’m just repeating what was repeated then. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I’ll respect your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and 
maybe restrict my comments on the different points that were 
raised. So I’ll make sure that they are not long at all, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll just make them as a point of reference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other aspect that was brought about was the 
public notice of order of government business on a weekly 
basis. That’s another point that was made. The other point that 
was made was to have a timely response to orders for returns 
and oral questions. There was also some committee suggestions 
to talk about sitting time and Crown corporations, etc., and so 
on. I will leave that aspect then, Mr. Speaker, and proceed to 
talk about the — the summation of my talk. 
 
I would say that over all, Mr. Speaker, I saw the bell-ringing, 
number one, that we are talking about, of course, is not isolated 
from other historic processes of rules that are made from time to 
time in the House. There is a set procedure on rules that have 
been made prior to this new proposed rule change, and there’s 
been agreed upon principles in regards to process. 
 
And one of the things I would say in regards to process is this, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the process of consultation, which my 
understanding is, on both sides of the House, where a great 
degree of consultation is supposed to take place, hasn’t really 
taken place in regards to this particular rule change. 
 
Many of our members have stated, and I would like to state that 
it appears to be, you know, ramming down a particular rule 
simply because the government sat as a majority. The fact that 
they don’t enter into a debate on the particular motion shows 
that they are not really that interested in debating the point, but 
basically just passing it and hoping that very little debate has 
happened on it. And so I see a contradiction in regards to the 
call for a democratic process, but at the same time it does not 
appear to occur in this case on the bell-ringing rule. 
 
The other thing that I mentioned quite well in regards to the 
connections of the rule changes to substantive issues of which 
the privatization debate was part of this. And I would say in 
conjunction with the process there, Mr. Speaker, that the 
participatory democracy aspect where we involve the people . . . 
and I made a point, I said that the government side of the House 
must have learned from us in regards to — during the 
bell-ringing session — when we went out to see the people, 
because they seem to be following our example. Mind you, I 
think our example is tough to beat in regards to the great degree 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we had a great degree of 
involvement of people; we had people involved in the process 
of petitions, and we had people involved in the process of 
meetings, and it was a Saskatchewan people’s approach to 
dealing with Saskatchewan issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And because the tradition of a mixed economy 
approach is a very important aspect to the people’s democracy 
in Saskatchewan, a lot of people  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1224 
 

voiced us to . . . made a strong position to us as we went around 
to the community level. They said, make a strong stand; don’t 
give up too easy. And I think a lot of us would have come back 
a lot earlier than we did, but I think a lot of the people wanted 
us to make an important point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And we met that important point, and the 
important point was that the practice of getting democracy at 
the people’s level, combining it with our legislative strategy, 
and that’s the checks and balances that we always like to talk 
about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And I really feel that as we debate, at least on 
this side of the House we’re debating it, Mr. Speaker, these are 
the major points I would like to make. 
 
In a concluding remark, Mr. Speaker, I tried to get a sense . . . I 
always in debates, I always want to get a feeling of rationale. 
You know the rationale for role change and the rationale for the 
government. I must state, Mr. Speaker, that the rationale, as it 
sort of reflected to me on the media, was very disappointing. I 
thought that the government would be at least a little bit better 
in responding to the people’s actions. 
 
I thought that they were trying to ignore the people’s message, 
the people’s message on saving our public utilities. I thought 
that they were trying to ignore that. Another member said it was 
like a knee-jerk reaction because the people made such a big 
gain and a big impression to the history of this province when 
they made such strong stands, and the interconnection of it to 
the bell-ringing, that many people really felt that it was time to 
make this stand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — And as I looked at the other points we wanted 
to deal with many of the issues, Mr. Speaker. As we go along, 
we want to deal with many of the issues that are outstanding. 
Some people, for example, they said we’ve got such a heavy 
taxation load, we want to deal with the taxation question; many 
people say that, whether in gas, whether in liquor tax, smoke, 
and so on. So everybody wants to get back into the issue. 
 
People want to get back to unemployment, the deficit, you 
know, the family issues, the family farm issues, and so on. 
People want to get back to these things. And a lot of people are 
saying, maybe this government is out of touch. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Maybe this government doesn’t have a good 
feel in regards to what people are saying out there. Maybe this 
government is losing touch with the issues of the people. And 
that’s a central message that I get. And I will leave that as a 
central comment in my general, you know, closing statement, 
that I think that in the past two weeks during the bell-ringing 
session it showed me that when the people are confronted with 
an issue, people will stand up. People will stand up and say, 
enough is  

enough. 
 
People are saying that it cannot happen this way; you’ve got to 
make a strong stand. So we made a strong stand, and now we’re 
back in the legislature debating a limiting rule that would 
possibly limit us to make strong stands in the future. And who 
knows, if the government changed, Mr. Speaker, then it would 
be them that would be the opposition next time. And I believe 
that they would want the bell-ringing rule, you know, brought 
back when I’m pretty sure that they’re the opposition next time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to say a few words in my 
own language. And before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to say this: you know, from time to time in the legislature I 
make my comments in Cree. I think for the benefit of the 
listeners out there, Mr. Speaker, I do that in due respect to all 
the languages of the province of Saskatchewan, and also to 
mine. 
 
I would like to add, too, that sometimes some people wonder 
what I am talking about when I am speaking in Cree. I would 
like to state very clearly that I treat the content of the English 
language in the same way as I treat the content of the Cree 
language. I try and pay the respect that the House is due, in both 
English and also in Cree. 
 
So I’d like to make that point, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes I think 
people wonder, in regards to my talk, because I do know that 
there are some Cree speakers that are listening out there in the 
audience. I want to make sure that I do not disappoint them in 
regards to the issue at hand, in regards to the debates that are 
taking place, because for me it’s very important, as a person 
being involved in education, that the information that is 
required to deal with the debates of the House are brought forth, 
straightforward, and brought out as clearly as possible in the 
Cree language. 
 
(1930) 
 
I would like to state that, Mr. Speaker, because I know 
sometimes some people have wondered in the past of what I am 
saying, but I do know that the language will be in the historic 
record. It’ll be there for people to do research in Cree language 
and dealing with substantive issues in the Cree language. So I 
am very careful in regards to what I do say in my own language 
because, as I said, I am as respectful to my language as I am to 
English. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, I guess in final comment, 
I made a sort of a short summary of the talk that I did do in 
regards to Cree in a differentiated-type order, but very much the 
same type of comments that I made, you know, when I was 
speaking in English. So I would like to state that I strongly 
oppose that motion then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, the item that we have 
before the House at this time, of course, is the government  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1225 
 

motion dealing with the changing rules of the Legislative 
Assembly. This change in the rules, Mr. Speaker, comes about 
because this government does not want to deal with this matter 
in committee, but wants to bring forward their own 
interpretation of how the rules should be changed without any 
discussion in a committee, aside from this Chamber, as has 
always been done in the past. 
 
It is, therefore, Mr. Speaker, with a great deal of sadness that I 
rise to take part in this debate. I have been associated with this 
Legislative Chamber now for many years, and it gives me a 
heavy heart to take part in this debate. I remember as a teenager 
watching the debates in this Legislative Chamber, and I was 
impressed by what I saw. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I 
think what I saw at that time influenced me later in my life that 
I should partake in the political process and see if I could do 
some of the things that I felt the people on the floor of this 
Chamber were doing for Saskatchewan people. 
 
(1945) 
 
In all the time I’ve thought about this Legislative Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker, I have never, never thought that I would see happening 
what this government is doing today. Never, in any thoughts 
that I had about this Legislative Chamber, had I thought a 
government would attempt to do what this government is doing 
today. 
 
I want to review briefly my experience with rules committees in 
this Chamber. I want to go back to 1969. I was a new member 
of the Legislative Assembly, and you might say a side-line 
participant at the beginning, but in 1969 a rule change was 
made. 
 
There was a committee set up; this is their report I have in my 
hand. It’s the Report of the Special Committee on Standing 
Orders and Procedures of the Assembly, December, 1969. And 
the Speaker of the Assembly at that time was Mr. J.E. Snedker, 
the member for Saltcoats. And Mr. Snedker chaired this 
all-party committee of the Assembly to look into the rules of the 
Assembly. 
 
It was not done in 1964 or ’65 or ’66 or ’67, but in 1969, after 
the members had been sitting in the Assembly for some period 
of time, had become experienced with the rules, and then they 
drew off a committee of members of this Assembly. It was 
made up of Mr. Snedker, as the chairman, the Speaker; Mr. 
Blakeney, the member for Regina Centre as the vice-chairman; 
Mr. Dewhurst from Wadena, Mr. Forsyth from Saskatoon 
Nutana South, Mr. J. B. Hooker from Notukeu-Willow Bunch, 
Mr. W.S. Howes from Kindersley, Kerrobert-Kindersley, the 
Deputy Speaker; and Mr. Lloyd, Mr. W.S. Lloyd, Leader of the 
Opposition, the member for Biggar. 
 
Mr. Loken from Rosetown was another member; Mr. 
Weatherald from Cannington was another member. And the 
staff to that committee was Mr. C.B. Bev Koester, who was the 
secretary; Mr. G.L. Gordon Barnhart, who was the secretary as 
well; Mrs. Small and Mrs. Doan were stenographers. 
 
I might say about the staff to this committee, Mr. Speaker, these 
are recognized experts in their field, and they both, Mr. Koester 
and Mr. Barnhart both served this Chamber  

well in the years that they were here. Mr. Koester was . . . 
attesting to that fact that he served us well, he later became the 
Clerk in the House of Commons at Ottawa, and of course we all 
know the Mr. Barnhart has recently become the Clerk in the 
Senate at Ottawa. 
 
So we have established here a committee from all sides of the 
House to consider the rules of this Assembly. And that’s the 
way it had been done for many years prior to that. And I make 
only reference to the committees where I was a participant, 
either in the House or in the committees. 
 
It’s interesting to note in the presentation of the report, Hon. J. 
E. Snedker, chairman, MLA, Saltcoats, who was the Speaker, 
made this report to the House in presenting the report of the 
committee. 
 

Honourable members: I have the pleasure to present 
herewith the Report of the Special Committee on Standing 
Orders and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
appointed by a Resolution of the Assembly dated February 
17, 1969, to consider and report upon the advisability of 
making changes in the Standing Orders and procedures of 
this Assembly. 
 

And this other paragraph is very interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I 
know you’ll be interested in this one. 
 

It has been a personal satisfaction for me to have had the 
privilege of occupying the Chair of a Committee whose 
members laboured diligently and harmoniously in their 
study of the various problems relating to procedures of the 
Assembly, and whose deliberations have resulted in the 
recommendations embodied in this Report. 
 
Respectfully submitted on behalf of the Committee, (and 
it’s signed by the Speaker). 
 

In 1969 I was a relatively new member in this Legislative 
Chamber, and I appreciated that report that that committee, that 
all-party committee, set aside from the heat of the moment on 
any particular issue, had time to deliberate and consider what 
should be adaptations for the rules to run this Assembly. There 
was no rash move to change the rules in the Assembly or to 
change the rules arbitrarily. There was co-operation, and as the 
Speaker said, a harmonious relationship among the members of 
the committee. 
 
In 1976, Mr. Speaker, I have here a report, it’s the Third Report 
of the Special Committee on the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly, November 22, 1976. And I must admit 
that I was more intimately involved with this committee than I 
had been with the previous one, and as a matter of fact, I served 
as chairperson of that particular committee. And it concludes by 
saying: 
 

The first two reports of the Committee may now be 
supplemented by the recommendations in this report. As 
before, the Members of the Committee contributed their 
valuable time and consideration, aided by excellent staff 
support to prepare this  

  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1226 
 

presentation. 
 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, consideration of the rules down the 
road a bit from the first committee, which is in 1969, now 1976, 
considered by an all-party committee outside of this Chamber, 
deciding what amendments, if any, should be made to the rules 
of the Assembly. It worked well. Members were satisfied with 
the procedure. There was no rush, no pushing, no shoving. 
There was respect for the parliamentary system, and the rules 
reflected that. 
 
Later, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to chair a further 
committee of this Legislative Assembly. And their report was 
tabled on April 21, 1981, and in this particular report I want to 
read the letter of transmittal which was from myself to the 
Assembly. And it’s addressed as follows: 
 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: 
 
I have the pleasure to present herewith the Report of the 
Special Committee on the Review of Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly appointed by a 
Resolution of the Assembly dated May 3, 1979 to consider 
and report upon the advisability of making changes to the 
rules and procedures of this Assembly. 
 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, the members of this Assembly, in 
their wisdom, drew off a committee from all sides of the House, 
where the committee met together, and I have the names of the 
committee members here. And I’ll just review them briefly for 
you. The members of the committee were: myself; the member 
from Kindersley; Mr. Banda; Mr. Allen; the member for 
Souris-Cannington; Mr. Engel; Mr. Hammersmith; the member 
for Qu’Appelle; the member for Meadow Lake; Mr. Mostoway; 
Mr. Pepper; the leader of the opposition, the present Leader of 
the Opposition; Mr. Skoberg, and the member for Maple Creek. 
 
Now I notice that some other members are interested in getting 
into the debate from across the way, especially the member for 
Melville, who has addressed us with some of his rulings earlier 
today. The member from Melville had an opportunity — I know 
he wants to read his newspaper, which he has before him now, 
and is thumbing through it — you should read the headlines, 
Mr. Member from Melville, it would be of interest to you. You 
should also read the auditor’s report that relates to those 
headlines. 
 
I gave the member from Melville and the member from 
Weyburn an opportunity to get into this debate just a few 
minutes ago, Mr. Speaker. I held my seat waiting for them to 
rise and take part in this debate. Neither one, neither one — and 
they’re both talking now, Mr. Speaker — they’re both talking 
from their seats right now. With disrespect to the parliamentary 
system, they’re both talking now, attempting to make a 
contribution which they know won’t be on the record, won’t be 
on the record of this Assembly. 
 
I want to get those members on the record of this Assembly, 
and they’ll get an opportunity maybe tomorrow after I finish my 
comments to get into the debate, along with the member from 
Regina South who is also now chipping in. It seems to be a 
disease that cabinet  

ministers have over there because there’s a line of three of 
them; they’re all in the cabinet, and they’re all the ones that are 
trying to ramrod this through. They’re all the ones behind this 
business about the public accounts and the auditor. They’re the 
ones that are disrespectful of the parliamentary system. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I can get back to my comments after 
being rudely interrupted by those members opposite, I want to 
read the final part of the letter of transmittal. And, Mr. Speaker, 
if at any time . . . Mr. Speaker, if at any . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order, order. Order. I 
think everybody’s had their opportunity, perhaps more so, and 
let’s allow the member from Saskatoon Westmount to continue 
his remarks. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate 
that. The letter of transmittal reads in the second paragraph: 
 

The Committee has laboured diligently in its study of the 
various matters addressed by this report. It has been a 
great personal satisfaction for me to have had the privilege 
of occupying the Chair of a Committee whose Members 
worked harmoniously while exhibiting qualities of 
earnestness and perseverance. The deliberations of this 
Committee have been marked by a spirit of compromise 
and fellowship and have resulted in the recommendations 
embodied in this Report. 
 
Respectfully submitted on behalf of the Committee, (and 
signed by the chairman). 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have another committee, the third time in 
my experience in this legislature, where an all-party committee 
was established to decide if the rules of the Assembly needed 
amendment, and in fact they did need amendment in all three 
cases. The amendments were brought forward and accepted in 
the spirit of parliamentary harmony, as close as we can get to 
that in this Chamber which has strong feelings about political 
subjects and which sometimes interfere with their parliamentary 
views. 
 
And I think it’s important that we not let our strong political 
feelings interfere with the parliamentary process and the best 
due process for all members of the Assembly. 
 
In 1987 a further attempt was made to establish a rules 
committee. That was six years later than the last one I referred 
to here, Mr. Speaker. The attempt was unsuccessful. 
 
And I was interested in reading the remarks of the member for 
Kindersley just May 11 this year, just a few days ago when he 
was speaking on this particular resolution that is before the 
House, this motion that is before the House at this time. And 
it’s interesting to note that the minister from Kindersley 
suggested that this House should set aside a committee again, 
and it should be made up of members of both sides of the House 
and that they should attempt to establish some rules. 
 
One of his paragraphs particularly caught my attention  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1227 
 

and it was this. It’s on page 1,083, May 11, 1989, where the 
member from Kindersley says: 
 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the opposition says, why this way? 
Why not use a traditional process of the legislative 
committee to look at the rules? Mr. Speaker, we did that 
last year. 
 

Well it wasn’t last year, Mr. Speaker. The member for 
Kindersley is incorrect. It was 1987 that that was done. 
 

We attempted to find a common ground with regard to 
limits on bell-ringing, and the committee broke down . . . 
 

He says: 
 

We attempted to find common ground with regard to the 
limits on bell-ringing, and the committee broke down . . . 
 

As if to say the fact that we couldn’t find agreement on 
bell-ringing was the reason the committee broke down in 1987. 
 
(2000) 
 
If a member wants to check the record, all they’d have to do is 
go back and look at the documents with regard to the 1986-87 
committee which was unsuccessful in coming to a conclusion. 
 
A number of research items were put before that particular 
committee for study: the oral question period; the length and the 
guide-lines; the legislative auditors in Canada; Legislative 
Assembly television distribution; television in legislative 
committees; guide-lines governing television coverage of the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly; comparison of sitting 
hours per week and the number of sitting days per year; 
parliamentary calendars; motions for return and written 
questions; time limit on speeches; selection or election of a 
Speaker; time limits on division bells — there was a research 
paper on that particular matter, Mr. Speaker, which doesn’t 
surprise anyone — tabling of documents; radio questions; 
committees, business done; committees, characteristics; 
estimates processed; opportunities for private members’ 
business. 
 
Disciplinary powers of the Chair; tabling of Public Accounts; 
timing of budget presentation — two issues that were causing 
some concern among members in 1986-87, for good reason — 
comparison of practices respecting the requirement for the royal 
recommendation on money bills and motions; decorum, a 
subject which is still of current interest, I’m sure, to all 
members; recognition of third parties; introduction of guests; 
review of order in council appointments; confidence; legislative 
. . . or rules respecting oral question period in Canadian 
legislatures; answers to questions asked re: broadcast. 
 
Item 29 was proposals put in by the New Democratic Party, and 
paper no. 31 was proposed amendments to the Legislative 
Assembly respecting committees and hours of sitting. 
 

The committee was unsuccessful in coming to a conclusion, Mr. 
Speaker, not because of the question of division bells ringing, 
but for a number of reasons. And there were a number of issues 
before that committee. Even if you go back to 1980, Mr. 
Speaker, when the previous rules committee sat, the matter of 
division bells was on the agenda then. 
 
And I’m reading from the minutes, minute no. 7, May 14, 1980. 
This is some of the minutes that led to the 1981 report which I 
referred to earlier. Mr. Speaker, on that particular day, May 14, 
item 4 on the minutes states: 
 

The committee considered the matter of the length of time 
that division bells are rung in preparation for a recorded 
division in the Assembly. The committee deliberated and 
agreed to stay with the present practice. 
 

So it was considered in the committee in 1980, and it was 
considered in the committee which was unable to successfully 
complete a report in 1987-88. 
 
These attempts at amending the legislative rules of the 
Assembly were all done outside of the Legislative Chamber, 
away from the tension, the political tension of the Legislative 
Chamber, with all members coming to a consensus, or as near 
to a consensus as was possible under the circumstances, and 
bringing back a report to the legislature, which in pretty well all 
cases was accepted by the legislature. And that’s the way rules 
were amended in the past. But today we’re faced with the 
government’s intention to force this resolution through the 
Assembly. 
 
It’s interesting to note in the comments in the Assembly on May 
11, 1989. The member for Melfort made a contribution towards 
the debate a few days ago, and it’s interesting to note that he 
talked about privilege. He talked about privilege in the 
Assembly and he quoted what privilege was, and I’m assuming 
that he quoted it accurately, Mr. Speaker, because it’s attributed 
to: 
 

Beauchesne’s, in the Fifth Edition, quotes Erskine May, in 
the 19th Edition stating what privilege is. And I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: (the member from Melfort said) 
 
. . . Privilege is the sum of . . . the peculiar rights enjoyed 
by each House collectively as a constituent part of the 
High Court of Parliament, and by Members of each House 
individually, without which they could not discharge (their 
duties) their functions . . . 
 
The privileges of Parliament are rights which are 
“absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers.” 
They are enjoyed by individual Members, because the 
House cannot perform its functions without the unimpeded 
use of the services of its Members; and by each House for 
the protection of its Members and the vindication of its 
own authority and its own dignity. 
 

There ends the quotation with regard to privilege. I hope that all 
members can keep this definition of privilege, not  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1228 
 

only for members but to the servants of members who work in 
this House, who work for the members of this House. Because 
in days to come, as in days in the past, from time to time we 
will have to make decisions whether the privileges of the 
Assembly or its servants have been abridged by occurrences in 
or outside of this Chamber. And we should all keep that in 
mind. 
 
The member for Kindersley, in debating the motion . . . There 
was one other peculiarity of his comments that day, the first one 
suggesting that the previous committee which aborted, aborted 
because of the bell-ringing, which is not true. And to leave that 
inference in the record doesn’t add to the facts in the situation. 
But I read the member from Kindersley’s remarks very 
carefully from beginning to end, and then I went back and I 
read them again. And the member for Kindersley said, the bells 
are ringing. Well, referring to the bells rang, and he made 
reference to that, and that’s all he talked about. He never said 
one word — not one word — about why the bells were ringing. 
 
First of all, I don’t believe that we should be making this rule 
change in this Chamber. I think that is harmful of the 
parliamentary process. And I’ll get to that subject later, about 
parliamentary process, and the political process, and how it 
operates. But I don’t think that it’s in the best interest for us to 
be amending the rules of this House just by the numbers you’ve 
got in the House. It requires perseverance and compromise to 
change the rules. The member from Kindersley, in all his 
remarks, never mentioned why the bells are ringing. 
 
If we’re going to consider changing the rules about division 
bells ringing, for a complete understanding of it we must know 
the context in which this came about. Why did this come about? 
It’s only logical, it’s only rational, it’s only reasonable that we 
know the absolute context by which this situation arrived upon 
us. And the bells rang for a number of days. 
 
In any case, in any case, no matter when the bells . . . The last 
time they rang for a long time, I believe, was six hours, and the 
minister from Kindersley mentioned that. And I don’t believe 
there’s a straight comparison between the two; they’re apples 
and oranges. One is one situation and this is another situation. 
There is no comparison between the two. 
 
But leaving that aside, the minister quite honestly said the bells 
rang when he was a member too, and he was one of the ones 
that was ringing the bells, and I accept that. At that time it 
seemed to be a long bell-ring, but times change. 
 
Now why were the bells ringing? The bells were ringing, Mr. 
Speaker, because this government said it was going to sell off 
or privatize Sask Power Corporation, gas division, which is 
known now as SaskEnergy. They said they were going to sell it 
off. Now what has been happening? Obviously our concern was 
raised, not by this particular issue but by a number of steps 
leading up to this particular issue of selling off Sask Power 
Corporation, SaskEnergy gas division. 
 
The first one occurred a few years back when this  

government sold off a drag-line in the coalfields. And they sold 
this drag-line — and this was a $45 million drag-line; this is 
just not an average coal shovel — this is a $45 million 
drag-line. They sold that drag-line off to an Alberta corporation 
called Manalta Coal. 
 
Now in order to make the deal attractive for Manalta Coal — 
this was their first privatization of any significance in 
SaskPower, the first privatization — in order to make it 
attractive for Manalta Coal, they said, we’ll sell you the 
drag-line for $45 million and we’ll guarantee your loan. The 
Government of Saskatchewan will guarantee your loan so that 
you can buy it. And furthermore they said to Manalta Coal, this 
company from Alberta, they said, we’ll give you a contract to 
dig coal; we’ll let you dig coal. 
 
A few years later they sold off the Coronach coalfield for over a 
hundred million dollars to Manalta Coal of Alberta. They lent 
them $89 million to help them make the deal of over $102 
million, and the assets were valued at in the neighbourhood of 
$129 million. The assets were severely undervalued for the sale. 
They give them a guarantee; they lent them $89 million; then 
they give them a 30-year contract to dig coal for Sask Power 
Corporation. 
 
Now our members protested this sale of the $45 million 
drag-line. They protested the undervalued sale of the coalfield 
at Coronach for $100 million and the deal that went with it. But 
we were then, at that point, faced with the spectacle of an 
Alberta corporation using our drag-line to mine our coal to sell 
to us to burn in our power house so that they could make a 
profit in Alberta. 
 
Now that’s . . . in today’s context, this is small potatoes, you 
know, it’s $45 million and $102 million. But it’s getting worse, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s getting worse with this government selling off 
parts of Sask Power Corporation. And this is what led to the 
bell-ringing; this is what led to it. People have got to grasp that. 
 
Recently they sold off natural gas deposits — again, grossly 
undervalued — for $325 million to Saskoil. Saskoil now is a 
private corporation. At one time Saskoil was a Crown 
corporation, but this government privatized it, and within two 
years of them privatizing it 75 per cent of the preferred 
shareholders resided outside of Saskatchewan. The preferred 
shareholders are the ones that get the dividends, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So of the millions of dollars of dividends that are paid by 
Saskoil, 45 per cent of it goes out of the province of 
Saskatchewan, where before it stayed in the province of 
Saskatchewan — it stayed in the province. That again was 
alarming to the members of this Assembly. 
 
So finally the government says, well, we’re going to sell off 
SaskEnergy, which was the gas division of Sask Power 
Corporation. Their promise had been that they would never 
privatize SaskPower or SaskTel because they’re public utilities. 
And the minister in charge of Sask Power Corporation when the 
Bill was before the House to create SaskEnergy out of Sask 
Power Corporation, to split it off from Sask Power Corporation, 
he was asked directly if the purpose of that was to sell it, and he 
said no. The minister said no. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1229 
 

(2015) 
 
Well they’ve sold it off; they’re attempting to sell it off. 
They’re attempting to sell it off. The legislation is before this 
House now — and that’s Bill 22, Bill No. 22 and associated 
Bills — when the members of this opposition arrived at this 
point, the government saying they would not sell off 
SaskPower, but continuing to sell it off, bigger piece by bigger 
piece; each few years they’re selling off another piece of Sask 
Power Corporation — we said, it’s time to take a stand. And the 
members of the Assembly rang the bells and they went out to 
talk to the people. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all the time the 
government was saying, oh, it’s not our intention to ever sell 
SaskPower off, and all the time they were selling off a $45 
million drag-line; a coalfield worth over a hundred million 
dollars; gas reserves well over $325 million, probably several 
times that amount; and now selling off Sask Power Corporation, 
all the while saying they’re never going to sell Sask Power 
Corporation. 
 
Now that gives new meaning to the saying, if you can’t be 
good, be tricky — if you can’t be good, be tricky. Because 
that’s what this government has done. This government, all the 
while it was doing this, was masking their moves with 
advertising. They had a massive advertising campaign, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They had advertising in SaskEnergy, they had 
advertising in Sask Power Corporation, they had advertising in 
the privatization department, in the millions of dollars — in the 
millions of dollars. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was home last weekend and I 
got my power bill, and I’ll be darned if in my SaskPower bill 
there wasn’t a little something about privatizing SaskEnergy. 
They’ve included their little bit of propaganda with the power 
bill which goes to all the people of Saskatchewan. They’ve got 
advertising dealing with SaskEnergy, our share in the future. 
Well we own it all now. 
 
Then they’ve got another one. You send in for information from 
SaskEnergy. Then they’ve got announcements about public 
information meetings. All kinds of advertising — radio, 
television, newspaper, billboards, literature, you name it. 
 
Even, Mr. Deputy Speaker, calendars. Would you believe it? 
SaskEnergy designed a calendar. I think it must have been one 
of the cabinet ministers that designed this calendar, because it 
leaves a lot to be desired. They’ve redesigned the calendar so 
that it’s exactly reversed from the regular calendar you would 
expect to use and which people have become accustomed to 
use. 
 
This was sent to all the customers of Sask Power Corporation. 
The printing was done by Mercury Graphics, of course, which 
is a very good friend of this government. Mercury Graphics got 
the contract to do the printing, and it’s estimated that this 
calendar cost in excess of $300,000. This is what’s going on in 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy. This is why we’re ringing the 
bells, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we think this has gone on 
far too long. Someone has to take a stand, and that’s what we 
did. 
 

I suspect, if we’re ever successful in getting the information on 
this calendar, we’ll find out that it cost a lot more than 
$300,000, because there’s other costs have to be taken into 
consideration. 
 
What did the public think of this bit of advertising by 
SaskEnergy? Well here’s a citizen in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix on January ’89, and it reads as follows: 
 

A large envelope from our newly-formed Crown 
corporation, SaskEnergy, was delivered to our home 
recently. It contained a big glossy calendar. Nice, but I 
couldn’t recall ordering one. I appreciate the gesture, but 
this is a subliminal way of advertising, a business expense 
in hope of generating sales. It doesn’t concern me when 
independent businesses wish to advertise this way, but it 
does concern me with recession and fast-approaching 
depression in this province, a Crown corporation which I 
interpret as owned by the people, the taxpayers, feels it 
must advertise by sending a calendar to every customer. 
SaskEnergy is a monopoly. 
 

And here I digress for a brief moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because when these members were on this side of the House, 
they say you shouldn’t have monopolies advertising. It’s 
unnecessary for monopolies to advertise. Now I don’t know any 
other gas utility that’s in operation in the province other than 
SaskEnergy. 
 
To get back to the letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

We can’t get natural gas service from anyone else, so why 
bother to advertise? It’s our tax dollars they are 
squandering. If they have so much excess money to spend 
without . . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I believe the rule under 
discussion is rule 33, a rule on the bell-ringing, and I have . . . 
I’m having a little difficulty understanding how a debate on 
SaskEnergy relates to the bell-ringing. I ask the member to . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I appreciate your comment, Mr. Speaker, 
and I intend to relate it quite closely. You will note, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that I said there were some reasons why we rang the 
bells on this corporation — why we rang the bells. And you will 
recall, although you weren’t in the chair at the time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I remarked that we’re having a motion thrust through 
this Chamber by the government arbitrarily, which says they’re 
going to change the method by which the division bells are 
rung. Now I said it’s improbable and unlikely and unreasonable 
to ask members to discuss a change in the rules without 
discussing why are we changing the rules; what caused the 
changes in the rules. 
 
Now I’ve gone through, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I realize the 
member for Weyburn can use this as well — I’ve gone through 
some of the reasons. I said there was a drag-line sold for $45 
million to an Alberta company, to Manalta Coal of Alberta. 
There was another sale of over $100 million of coalfield to the 
same company in Alberta, Manalta Coal, so they can make a 
profit. So those  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1230 
 

companies . . . and the member for Weyburn should listen to 
this, because he’s quite vocal when he’s on his seat. 
 
I don’t know, there’s some misconnection. He should see his 
horse doctor about that, because he’s got some misconnection. 
Every time he sits down he starts talking, and I can’t understand 
what it is. You should see a vet about that; he should see a vet 
about that. 
 
Now here we have this spectacle, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a coal 
company from Alberta, using our shovel to dig our coal to sell 
to us to make a profit on us for Alberta. It doesn’t make much 
sense to me. It doesn’t make a lot of sense to me. And after that 
you get to natural gas which was another sell-off. 
 
These are the reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re ringing 
the bells, because each excess of this government, each excess 
of this government gets worse than the previous one. It’s like 
the member for Weyburn; every time he speaks it gets worse. 
Each excess gets worse. When they said, we’re selling 
SaskEnergy, we said, we’re ringing the bells. That’s why we’re 
ringing the bells. 
 
That’s why they brought in this motion of theirs to ramrod 
through this Chamber, contrary to the historic background of 
this House, at least in my lifetime, of having rules committee 
meet outside of this House, aside from the heat of the moment. 
They’re trying to ram something through here, and this is 
antidemocratic, it’s antiparliamentary, and the people should 
know the reasons why this government is ramming that 
legislation through. 
 
I don’t intend to let this government motion go by without 
telling the people exactly why the government’s doing this, 
because in a year or two, whenever this government calls an 
election, the people are going to have to make a judgement. The 
more information they have — and I want to talk about freedom 
of information later, because some of the members over there 
have talked about freedom of information — but for the time 
being I want to talk about this citizen, this citizen of Saskatoon 
who is very upset because this government was advertising, in 
effect, the privatization — this was the run-up to privatizing 
SaskEnergy. And this is exactly what they’re doing, exactly 
what they’re doing. 
 
This lady goes on: 
 

If they had so much excess money to spend without 
consulting us, why not just give us a credit on our next 
bill. SaskPower or SaskEnergy, it doesn’t matter to me 
(she says). 
 

An Hon. Member: — It makes too much common sense. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Right. Well this lady is probably 
common sense. She lives in Saskatoon. There’s a lot of people 
like that up there. As a matter of fact, most of the electorate in 
Saskatoon have a lot of common sense, and they showed that in 
the last provincial election. They showed that in the Eastview 
by-election, and they showed that in the federal election. 
They’ve got a lot of common sense in Saskatoon. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This lady goes on. She says: 
 

In fact, I already have four calendars from private firms. 
 

And I want to say, I got one of these too, Mr. Speaker, and I 
already had mine from the Minister of Urban Affairs, which I 
look forward to each year, to get. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I get one from the minister of crop 
insurance. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes. Yes, I get one from the minister of 
crop insurance too. But I got one from the minister of crop 
insurance; I got one from the Minister of Urban Affairs, and I 
get so little from him that I like to get his calendar; and then I 
get one from SaskEnergy. 
 
But this lady, she was a little upset because she already had four 
from private firms, and she gets SaskEnergy’s on top of that. 
It’s part of the expense here. 
 
Okay. Can I return this one to SaskEnergy? Send me a credit. 
Besides, it’s one of those silly calendars. Oh here’s how she 
describes it: 
 

It’s one of those silly calendars with the days of the week 
running down the left side. You have to tilt it sideways to 
understand it, and the days are not boxed, which makes 
keeping track of daily appointments totally confusing. 
 

So I think it was the minister in charge of Sask Power that 
designed the calendar because you have tip him on edge 
recently to understand what he’s talking about, to get an 
understanding out of the guy. 
 
So this is the same with the calendar. You got to tilt it on edge. 
And I’m sure you got one too, Mr. Deputy Speaker; you got one 
of those calendars, too. 
 

One other interesting tidbit (the lady goes on), I couldn’t 
find the name of the company that won the contract to 
print the calendar. I asked a friend who is in the 
advertising business, and it seems that his firm was not on 
the list of businesses for this lucrative contract. This must 
have been an oversight. 
 

No, no. I’ll tell that lady right now, it’s one of the facts of life. 
Mercury Graphics has got it in the corral; Mercury Graphics has 
got it in the corral because they know the government, and they 
get those contracts. 
 

At least the calendar he gave me had scenes of 
Saskatchewan on it, unlike the one from SaskEnergy. 
Perhaps the government feels it was not in the interest to 
remind us of the poor farming economy, or the fact that 
we can’t afford to spend weeks at our favourite resort, and 
that some of us are seriously considering leaving this 
province due to the unemployment or sheer 
disillusionment with the government. 
 

  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1231 
 

Well this is in January 1989, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there 
have been over 9,000 people leave this province — most of 
them since this lady wrote this letter. So it shows you how the 
diversification and privatization program of this government is 
working. It’s driving the people out of this province, just like 
their calendar. It’s irritating people; it’s irritating people. 
 
The lady goes on: 
 

In conclusion, does this letter have a cynical or disgruntled 
overtones? You bet. And I want the government to know 
how I feel. 
 

(2030) 
 
Well, there’s another letter from Saskatoon dealing with this 
same issue, another irate taxpayer. And this person goes on, and 
I’ll give you the names if you want them: 
 

Like many households, ours has been deluged this season 
with all sorts of calendars coming from various sources 
representing a variety of causes. Most were free and now 
occupy the haphazard confines of the untold junk drawers 
situated throughout our home. 
 
At one time calendars were doled out sparingly and 
selectively by earnest but always serious and sincere 
business people. They give calendars to cherished friends 
and customers who were appreciative of the gesture, more 
often than not actually hung the things despite their 
sometimes glaringly commercial appearance. 
 
But today, as is the case in so many areas of our lives, the 
practice of moderation has been abandoned and now even 
calendars are delivered in bulk. A good, cheap tradition 
has been cheapened to death, first by the present day 
excesses and now by the government. 
 
SaskEnergy, apparently aiming to convey its name, phone 
number and modus operandi to a captive audience, chose 
to do it this way by designing this calendar. 
 
Mine arrived recently, and in a weak moment I felt duly 
impressed. Unfortunately, I was fresh out of rooms suited 
for hanging calendars. Since everyone I knew had one just 
like it, I couldn’t give it away. It was only through sheer 
luck that I found a place for it. 
 
Flipping through the calendar, I stopped to admire the 
Crown corporation’s expensive, high-tech logo with the 
small print underneath revealing a startling fact: 
Saskatchewan Energy is Saskatchewan’s natural gas 
supplier. 
 
These are the guys who keep my house warm in winter. 
Naturally I headed straight for the furnace room. 
Chuckling to myself, I wondered how I hadn’t thought of 
this in the first place. Sure enough, folded once, the 
calendar was just perfect to shim up a wobbly corner of an 
old cabinet  

which housed my growing collection of calendars. Though 
I was successful in finding a use for my calendar given me 
by SaskEnergy, I doubt many of its 270,000 other 
customers were so fortunate. That’s why, however, the 
original intent, the good intent, I consider this calendar 
program to be pure and utter tripe. 
 

And that’s quite parliamentary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What an 
abhorrent, shameful waste of taxpayers’ money. 
 
And I happen to agree with Mr. Kardash. The previous person 
that wrote was Miss Wood. So this is what the government is 
doing — massive advertising. The calendar is only a small 
pittance of the advertising they’re doing. 
 
This government, in a four-year period, has spent $46.6 million 
on advertising. From ’84 to ’88 it spent $46.6 million on 
advertising. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, much of that was spent 
on Sask Power Corporation, Sask Government Insurance, 
SaskTel — SaskTel, $6.1 million in four years. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the date that this return ended was March 17, 
’88. You will be aware of the fact that Sask TeleBonds 
advertising came out after that, came out after that. So you have 
to add another 2 to $3 million of advertising costs on top of the 
Sask TeleBonds. 
 
The Sask Power Corporation energy ads which were flooding 
the paper have occurred by and large since this time, since this 
time. As a consequence, the figure for Sask Power Corporation 
would have to be raised by probably a couple of million dollars. 
And the advertising goes on. 
 
This government has no shame, no shame when it comes to 
advertising. They are shovelling the advertising money out to 
Dome Advertising and Roberts & Poole, their friends in the 
advertising business. 
 
Wouldn’t you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, love to get 4 per cent on 
$46 million? Wouldn’t you love to get 4 per cent on 46 million? 
Maybe even if you only got 1 per cent, maybe if you just got 1 
per cent on $46 million you’d be set, you’d be set for life. Now 
I’m sure some of that money finds its way back to its 
benefactors. I’m sure that that happens. 
 
The advertising goes on; the advertising goes on even in the 
face of this government sending the SaskEnergy legislation to a 
special committee they set up. The headlines, May 5th: 
“SaskEnergy media campaign promised.” May 5th: “Sask 
Tories rev up utility privatization campaign.” May 6th: 
“SaskEnergy media blitz going ahead.” Well they promised it 
on the 5th, and it’s going ahead on the 6th. Yes, and those are 
both articles in the Star-Phoenix, and the other one was from 
The Financial Post. So the advertising goes on, on and on and 
on. 
 
That’s why the people are ringing the bells, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because they’re fed up with this government and how 
it directs the economy; how it directs SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower; how it directs SaskTel. But for the benefit of this 
particular discussion here, they’re upset about Sask Power 
Corporation. That’s what ticked them off, Sask Power 
Corporation. And the advertising goes on. 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1232 
 

The minister of privatization awhile back went on a personal 
road show around Saskatchewan. And I’m sure he took officials 
with him, and people to answer the questions for him. And he 
was all around on his road show around Saskatchewan. He 
came back. Yes, he came back and he said, now the people are 
informed. They know all about SaskEnergy. 
 
And they went ahead, they went ahead with their scheme to 
privatize SaskEnergy, which is Bill 22. And that’s why we rang 
the bells, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because this government is 
spending excessive amounts on advertising. They’re reversing 
themselves. They said one thing; they do another thing. That’s 
why we’re ringing the bells. That’s why we rang the bells. 
 
And the advertising goes on. The advertising goes on. I have 
SaskEnergy officials . . . Now the next one, Mr. Chairman, 
you’ll be quite aware of this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
see the member’s got his crop in and he’s back here now, and 
he wants to get in to the debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, you just wait your turn. Maybe tomorrow you can get into 
the debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it could be. You 
just keep it up. You just keep it up; it could be. Yes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you see the 
arrogance, you see the arrogance of those members over there. 
You see it every day, and it was never worse than it was today, 
never worse that it was today, and the people are our witnesses. 
They will attest to that. The arrogance of this government has 
reached new heights. 
 
And it’s reached new heights in their advertising. They have 
now set up . . . they decided they didn’t get the message across 
with the minister’s travelling road show around the province 
about SaskEnergy. Apparently he didn’t answer the questions, 
so now they’ve set up the SaskEnergy officials. These are the 
bureaucrats, and I call this the bureaucrats’ travelling road show 
which is going around Saskatchewan. 
 
And I attach no blame on the bureaucrats. I don’t attach any 
blame on the bureaucrats. Their master told them, you get out 
there and you attend those 80 meetings in rural Saskatchewan 
and you tell them how it is. And so far the people are giving 
them a resounding answer to their bureaucrats’ travelling road 
show. 
 
Some attendances ran up as high as 50 at meetings, but the 
norm is 12 or 15 or 11 or 6 — some of them very low 
attendance. And the newspapers are having a field day about 
this. I don’t want to embarrass the officials any more, but I 
think this government should be embarrassed about it; it should 
definitely be embarrassed about it. 
 
Here’s some of the advertising they’ve done. Here’s some more 
of the advertising they’ve done. SaskEnergy has sent out a 
letter, and I got this one from a citizen in Battleford, 
Saskatchewan. And I was there. I walked in and he came home; 
he came home and he opened his mail. And he had two 
identical letters. And he opened them, and they were from 
SaskEnergy, and the identical letter was in both of them — the 
identical address, the identical postal code, the identical name. 
 

And it’s a letter from O. W. Hanson, president and chief 
executive office of SaskEnergy. And he is also . . . This person 
I’m becoming suspicious about. I don’t attack the bureaucrats at 
a lower level, but this person I’m becoming a bit suspicious 
about because what he says here in his second paragraph: 
 

It is to be distinctly understood that SaskPower is not for 
sale. 
 

Now what makes me suspicious? Well I have a letter here from 
the Premier to the PC Party membership, and his second 
paragraph reads: 
 

Let me make one thing very clear. SaskPower is not for 
sale. 
 

So here we have a citizen in Battleford, Saskatchewan, gets two 
of these. And the second paragraph says, same in both letters: 
 

It is to be distinctly understood that SaskPower is not for 
sale. 
 

This is from Mr. Hanson, the president and chief operating 
officer. 
 
This one is from the Premier to the PC membership in 
Saskatchewan. The second paragraph reads: 
 

Let me make one thing very clear. SaskPower is not for 
sale. 
 

And it’s signed by none other than the Premier. 
 
And you’ll notice something else, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you 
got one of these, and I certainly hope you did. You might be on 
the outs with the Premier, but I’m sure he sent them to 
everybody, no matter who you were. It says: 
 

Return to (and I’m quoting) Hon. Grant Devine, Premier 
of Saskatchewan, c/o of Government Caucus Office, 
Legislative Buildings, Regina, Saskatchewan, S4S 9Z9. 
 

And what is on the corner? There’s a postal slug on the corner 
and it’s 3-1-4-1. And I bet if you were to check this out, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you’d find that 3-1-4-1 means that the 
taxpayers of the province were paying for this letter to be 
returned to the Premier. Yes, you send them a letter. 
 
And he’s still following that ridiculous theme that he tried to 
establish a while ago that SaskPower is not for sale. He’s 
attempting to establish that theme: it’s not for sale. He repeats it 
in his letter to the membership, which the taxpayers are paying 
for the return postage on — and they probably paid for the 
outgoing mail too — but they’re paying for the return postage. 
 
And the president and chief executive officer of SaskEnergy has 
the same paragraph in it. It’s distinctly understood that 
SaskPower is not for sale. They’re not in precisely the same 
wording, not precisely the same wording . . . 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1233 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Acting Speaker, the point of order I 
raise, to state it clearly, is that the member opposite is off the 
topic, is not on rule 33, the question whether the bells should be 
allowed to ring indefinitely at the whim of the members 
opposite. That is the question here. The member is off the topic. 
Not only is he off the topic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but he is 
showing, for a former Speaker of this Assembly, no respect for 
this Assembly, for any rules, or for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And at some stage even the members opposite must have 
respect for the rules of democracy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the point of order, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I want to make it clear that the reason we’re dealing 
with this rule change motion has nothing to do with the 
opposition members. I want to make it clear that the 
government brought the motion, as they have for a number of 
days now, rather than deal with farm Bills and farm issues, 
rather than dealing with the plight of the unemployed in this 
province and out-migration, rather than dealing with welfare 
recipients that that minister is treating ill-ly in this province. We 
come here day after day and deal with an issue that you choose, 
namely bell-ringing as it relates to SaskEnergy — that’s why 
the bells were ringing. Because SaskEnergy, which is part of 
SaskPower, was put on the auction block by your government, 
the people were very upset. They told us, they told . . . 
 
(2045) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I believe that the 
member from Regina Elphinstone is getting into debate. If he’d 
just like to state his point, I’m willing to listen and then make a 
ruling on it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I appreciate that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’ll get to my point, but there was a lot of yelling and 
hollering, and I had to make the point over and over again. But 
the reason that we’re dealing — the reason my colleague is 
talking about SaskEnergy as it related to the bell-ringing is the 
reason we rang the bells for 17 days was because of the sell-off 
of SaskPower, SaskEnergy. So how can you possibly 
disconnect bell-ringing and SaskEnergy. I think it’s perfectly in 
order. That is what the whole debate in the province has been 
about for the last month. Now if the members opposite are 
saying they don’t want to talk about SaskEnergy and 
bell-ringing, then take this stupid motion out of here and we’ll 
deal with the issues that people voted us to come here . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’ve listened to 
the point of order, listened to the member from Regina 
Elphinstone. I’ve been listening to the debate and I find that we 
have allowed the debate at times to far exceed the reaches of 
rule 33, the bell issue, and I would ask the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount to relate his debate directly to rule 33. 
We’ve been on to advertising. I  

realize that SaskPower and SaskEnergy are part of the issue, but 
let’s relate it to rule 33. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate your 
guidance and I certainly want to relate this to the subject under 
debate. The letter I was reading from has on it SaskEnergy, and 
that’s the reason we’re ringing the bells. 
 
The Premier, in his letter, which he sent out probably at 
taxpayers’ expense and which the postal slug on the corner 
indicates that people will send it back at taxpayers’ expense, it 
mentions SaskEnergy in it. It mentions us, not in glowing terms 
mind you, but it does mention us. And the Premier’s 
stop-the-bells campaign is on here as well. I don’t know how 
successful that’s been, Mr. Speaker, but I haven’t heard much 
about the stop-the-bells campaign. Maybe it was late getting 
untracked and going . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Could be. 
 
Now I wanted to say one other thing with regard to this 
SaskEnergy letter, and this is the reason we’re ringing the bells, 
the member for Melville. The member from Melville is so 
anxious to get into this debate that he’s leaping to his feet on 
points of order. He should try to organize his thoughts so that 
when I do sit down eventually, he will be ready to go. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, anyone who 
understands the language of this country, by listening to the 
member opposite, would know that he is off the topic. Again he 
is showing no respect. Again he is off the topic. You, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have already pointed out to him that he should 
be on the topic; that there are rules in this Assembly. There are 
members on the government’s side who are prepared to stay on 
the topic, and I submit that if the member opposite does not stay 
on the topic, he will have to take his seat and cease and desist. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Just 
on the point of order being raised by the member, once items 
are raised for debate it seems to me that it’s a fair subject for 
debate. And I want to point out that the Minister of Justice, in 
making his comments and moving the motion, dealt or made 
reference to issues such as an unpopular budget, bilingualism, 
capital punishment, immigration policy, nationalization or 
privatization policies, interest rates or monetary policy, and that 
the Minister of Highways, in seconding the motion, dealt 
extensively with the 1975 potash debate. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if those subjects are 
proper subjects for debate in the context of this motion, then 
surely the question of SaskEnergy, that prompted this motion, is 
surely an appropriate subject for discourse. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order, and 
as I mentioned before, the debate has been far ranging at times, 
and I’ve asked the member from Saskatoon Westmount . . . and 
I will allow the member from Saskatoon Westmount to continue 
to speak and relate his comments to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1234 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — My problem, Mr. Speaker — and I admit 
that I succumb to the temptation — when the member from 
Melville baits me, I sometimes respond, and I apologize to the 
House for that. I’ll try and direct my remarks to you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, where they should be directed, and if you 
catch the member from Melville baiting me, I would appreciate 
it if you’d try and stop him. 
 
I was talking about the letter from SaskEnergy which this 
person in Battleford, Saskatchewan gave to me. He was able to 
keep a copy because he got two of them. So out of curiosity, I 
phoned my wife the other night in Saskatoon, and I said, did 
you get the SaskEnergy letter from the president and chief 
executive officer? And I said, because we’re down here and 
we’re in a little trouble with the government because we’ve 
been ringing the bells, did you get that letter? And she said, oh 
yes. She said, not only that, I got two of them. I got two. 
 
Now I don’t know whether SaskEnergy sent me one, and 
SaskPower sent me one just to make sure, or whether they sent 
one to me and one to my wife. I’m not sure how to figure this 
out. And perhaps if members like the member from Melville get 
a chance to speak in this debate, they can explain why some 
people got two or three calendars, why I got two of these 
SaskEnergy letters, and why my friend in Battleford got two of 
the same letters — the identical letters. I’ve heard of other 
people getting more than one. 
 
This is the kind of advertising that’s going on at taxpayers’ 
expense. The Premier’s advertising at taxpayers’ expense and 
now we have this . . . The president of the university is the sort 
of the hand-picked travelling show of the Premier’s. It’s a 
hand-picked commission by the Premier of this province. 
 
The question that arises . . . Oh, there’s one other thing I wanted 
to say about the bureaucratic travelling show that’s going 
around. I don’t want to forget this, because I believe the 
government was saying in its press releases related to this 
bureaucratic travelling show which is going around explaining 
something that the Minister of Privatization was incapable of 
explaining to the public, the bureaucratic show is going around 
now attempting to explain it in about 70 meetings around the 
province which will be very costly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There’ll be rental fees, and I imagine they’ll put on coffee for 
the folks. They’ve got the slide presentation as well, and they’ll 
probably have two or three officials at each of the meetings. So 
this will be quite costly. 
 
And one other thing that the Premier, through his designate — 
well, I guess I can’t call it the Premier’s designate — but it’s 
the Progressive Conservative Party, and I think he is the 
Progressive Conservative Party in this province, recently sent 
out a memo. This one is on the Progressive Conservative Party 
letter-head, and it goes to all riding executives, dated May 11, 
’89. And it’s from the executive director of the Progressive 
Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. 
 

And just to keep on the topic here I want to say it’s: Re: 
SaskEnergy Public Meetings. This is the topic that caused the 
bell-ringing. This is why the bells are ringing. It says: Re: 
SaskEnergy Public Meetings. The executive director of the 
Conservative Party says to the riding executives as follows: 
 

As you are no doubt aware, SaskEnergy will be 
conducting public information meetings in your area in the 
next few days. Your association has been contacted to 
(and get this, Mr. Deputy Speaker) get our members out 
there to these meetings. (Get our members out to these 
meetings, and that’s a direct quotation). 
 
I cannot stress enough the importance of using these 
public meetings to get our message across. 
 

The rest of it is not too complimentary to the New Democratic 
Party, so I won’t indulge in it. But I think the operational part of 
this, directed to the riding executives, to 64 riding executives 
around the province from the executive director, this is right at 
the top of the PC Party, telling them to get their members out to 
those meetings and use the public meetings to get our message 
across. 
 
Now the success . . . This was sent out on the 12th. When did 
the Elbow meeting occur?  
 
An Hon. Member: — Four days later. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Four days later. So that it obviously had 
its effect, because there was six people out, I think, for that 
meeting. So obviously the whole Tory executive got out to that 
meeting at Elbow. Maybe it was the whole membership. It says, 
riding executives. 
 
So they obviously . . . and then there probably were some 
innocent bystanders at the meeting too. So you could calculate 
maybe there were three of the riding executive from Outlook at 
the meeting, and maybe three public people that were interested 
in trying to find out something that they couldn’t find out from 
the minister of privatization a while before that. 
 
It is important that some people get to these meetings because I 
think there’s some questions that have to be asked of this 
travelling bureaucratic road show. 
 
Some of the questions that have to be asked are such as these. 
How much is your corporation paying to advertise the fact it is 
being sold? Well I suspect the answer to that would be in the 
hundreds of thousands of dollars. Now I don’t know whether 
the bureaucrats will have that information at their fingertips, but 
it’s a question the public should ask and should be able to get 
answers for. 
 
And I think maybe they should ask the bureaucrats if they 
shouldn’t maybe be back in Regina, or wherever their home 
base is, doing the job that they were supposed to be doing, 
rather than out there pulling the government’s chestnuts out of 
the fire. I think they should maybe be back in their own areas 
working for SaskEnergy rather than working for this 
government. 
 
But then again the government put them on the line. They  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1235 
 

said, get out there and do that job; we’re your boss. And they’re 
doing it with taxpayer’s dollars. 
 
There’s many other questions that I’m sure the people of 
Saskatchewan will be asking this bureaucratic travelling road 
show, and I am sure that members of the Conservative Party, 
those that still have the stamina and are not totally disillusioned 
by the actions of this government . . . Because I know some are 
disillusioned because I got some disillusioned Conservatives 
signing that petition. 
 
So there’s a lot of them that won’t be on the executives. They 
won’t want to get out there and ask questions and make use of 
these committee meetings and get their message across. It 
doesn’t say what the message is, by the way, it just says get out 
there and get our message across. 
 
So we have the Premier’s hand-picked commission to study 
SaskEnergy. So the Premier’s hand-picked commission . . . and 
why did this hand-picked commission occur? Well I’ll tell you 
how it occurred, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We got fed up with this 
government selling off Sask Power Corporation; we dug in our 
heels; we rang the bells when they attempted to sell 
SaskEnergy. The bells rang; the government finally backed 
away from it. They said well, we’ll pull the legislation back 
temporarily and we’ll set up this commission. We’ll set up this 
hand-picked commission of the Premier’s to look into these 
Bills and receive public hearings. So we have the special panel 
which is looking into the SaskEnergy sale. It’s interesting to 
note who’s on that special panel. I don’t think that all the people 
in Saskatchewan know at this time who’s on this particular 
panel. 
 
(2100) 
 
Obviously, somebody has to be the chairperson of the panel, 
and that is Regina university president, Lloyd Barber. Lloyd 
Barber is the chairperson of this three-member, special panel. 
It’s interesting when the government has got this special panel 
out there listening to people, and it occurred because we rang 
the bells in this legislature which this government wants to 
change so that we can’t do that in the future. They want to 
change that. So they have President Lloyd Barber. And what is 
Mr. Barber’s philosophy about privatization? 
 
I wonder about the desirability of appointing . . . putting Mr. 
Barber in this position. I don’t suppose he could have put him in 
that position just by forcing him. I imagine Mr. Barber must 
have agreed to go along to be the chairperson of this committee, 
but Mr. Barber is a charter member of a new group in Regina 
which . . . or in Saskatchewan which is the Institute on Public 
Enterprise, I believe it’s called. And the chief aim of the 
Institute on Public Enterprise is privatization. That is their aim. 
 
Privatize, privatize, privatize. It’s like the Fraser Institute in 
B.C. Its aim is privatize, privatize, privatize. And since Mr. 
Barber is a charter member of this Institute on Public 
Enterprise, it’s difficult for me to believe that he can divest 
himself of his strong philosophical views about privatization in 
order to be the chairperson of this three-member special panel, 
which has been hand-picked by the Premier of this province to 
hear  

representations on the privatization of SaskPower, the gas 
division, SaskEnergy. I find that difficult to believe that Mr. 
Barber can do that. But I suppose we’ll have to wait and see 
because the government is ramroding this through. Regardless 
of what we say, they’re ramroding this through. 
 
The second person on this commission is Kathryn Ford, a 
Saskatoon lawyer. She works for the law firm of Robertson 
Stromberg, and I think we all know where the sympathies of 
Robertson Stromberg law firm lie. And Kathryn Ford herself is 
of a similar political persuasion as the principals in the firm. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who will that be? Who will that be? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, they say money talks. And it says 
that Kathryn Ford, the second member on this three-person 
panel, hand-picked by the Premier, in 1987 donated $1,150 to 
the Conservative Party. I know Kathryn Ford; she’s a very nice 
person, but I find it difficult to believe, as much as I may stretch 
my imagination, I find it difficult to believe that Kathryn Ford 
can separate herself from her strong allegiance to the 
Conservative Party. Now she may be able to do that, but I kind 
of doubt it. 
 
And this three-person panel which we’re talking about, of 
course, occurred because this government brought in legislation 
which rang the bells. And that’s the reason this 
three-party-committee was set up. And the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster might not have made that connection yet. I 
know he’s busy counting and learning how to count, and once 
he’s mastered that he may be able to master the reason why this 
three-party panel was set up. It was set up because this 
government attempted to ramrod the legislation through this 
Chamber, which would privatize Sask Power Corporation. 
 
Now you see, Mr. Speaker, the member for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster is putting me in the position where I’m 
going to have to respond to him if you don’t sit him down. Now 
I don’t mind if he walks around and counts the members on that 
side, because he’s not too good at it. He’s fouled up twice 
recently on counting the correct number of members on that 
side, but as long as he walks around and keeps quiet, I don’t 
mind. It’s another indication of the arrogance of members on 
that side of the House. That bothers me. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And it should bother the people that are 
interested in the parliamentary system in our province, in 
preserving it. And I for one, and I think I’ve laid out my history 
. . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I enjoin you to join me in controlling 
the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I know he may be uncontrollable, but 
we’ll do our best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1236 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see you back, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while you were out briefly, I was 
reviewing some of the reasons with the members about why this 
three-person panel is being set up. And needless to say, some, 
but not all the members, understand the reasons why this panel 
was set up. It has to do with the sale of Sask Power Corporation 
gas division, SaskEnergy. 
 
This government has made up its mind that it’s going to have 
another sale in Sask Power Corporation. It’s had several 
already. It sold the drag-line for $45 million in a sweetheart 
deal to an Alberta company. They followed that up by selling 
the coalfield for over $100 million to the same Alberta 
company, and it sold off the gas reserves for over $300 million. 
 
Now this government is insisting that Sask Power Corporation 
sell off the gas division at probably many millions of dollars 
more than any previous sale, and we’re not interested in seeing 
this utility pass — probably within a couple of years — pass 
into hands of people outside of Saskatchewan. That’s why 
we’re ringing the bells, and that’s why this Premier finally got 
the message when we were ringing the bells, and he backed 
away from his legislation a little bit. 
 
He hasn’t disowned it, because he says it’s coming back. And 
the minister in charge of SaskPower says it’s coming back. And 
what he’s done, and I think to assure a favourable report, is to 
select a hand-picked committee which will tour the province. 
And I’ve questioned, and I think it’s right for me to question, as 
a member of this legislature who’s charged with the 
responsibility of looking after the resources of the people of 
Saskatchewan, to question whether these members, the first two 
of which I’ve mentioned, can separate themselves from their 
strong and demonstrated allegiance to first, privatization, and 
secondly, the Conservative Party. 
 
I think that the majority on the panel, two out of three, are going 
to be unable to separate themselves from those strong 
allegiances. Keep in mind that president Barber was a founding 
member of the Saskatoon . . . or the Saskatchewan institute on 
private enterprise, and that Kathryn Ford was a contributor, well 
over $1,000 to the PC Party, and her law firm is a beneficiary of 
an awful lot of Government of Saskatchewan work — potash 
corporation, and others — so that the law firm gets a lot of 
work from the people of Saskatchewan, a lot of money from the 
people of Saskatchewan through this government and through 
their Crown corporations. I question whether they can separate 
themselves from those allegiances to give us a balanced report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The third member of this three-member 
special panel, hand-picked by the Premier to bring in a report, 
which is supposed to be balanced, and to hear representations 
from Saskatchewan people, is a man by the name of Ken 
Sarsons. 
 
I know that he used to be in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
don’t believe he lives in the province of  

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, now. I am not sure, but I could be 
wrong on that, but I don’t think he lives in the province of 
Saskatchewan now. And that concerns me because of the 
people that I’d like to see on this panel are Saskatchewan 
people who don’t have a demonstrated bias. If we must have a 
panel, Saskatchewan people who are representative of the 
people of Saskatchewan who don’t have a demonstrated bias. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Otherwise, reason would lead me to 
believe that we’re not going to get an unbiased report from this 
three-person committee. 
 
And what will be the consequence of that, Mr. Speaker? Well I 
am not sure what the consequences will be because I don’t have 
a crystal ball; I can’t look into the future. But I think I could 
make some reasonably accurate guesses at what might happen. 
And I’ve been around political life enough in Saskatchewan to 
be able to come reasonably close on a political guess. 
 
If that committee brings in a bias report which says, sell 
SaskEnergy — and that’s the reason the bells are ringing, 
because of this government’s attitude about selling SaskEnergy, 
which is part of Sask Power Corporation — if they bring in a 
report that says, yes, Mr. Premier, you were right; aye, aye, sir; 
we salute; you should sell SaskEnergy; and they’ll give some 
reasoning which they say supports the case — I predict that 
when that report comes in, the Premier will come back and he 
will be hoping, by that time, that he will have stopped the 
opportunity for people to protest in the manner in which we did 
— and I think we did it justifiably. I think he will, having 
rammed this motion through the House, then he will be free, 
when the committee brings back its report which may be biased 
— may be biased — he will then ram that legislation through 
this Assembly. 
 
He will ram through that legislation to sell SaskPower, which is 
the fourth big sale in Sask Power Corporation since he became 
the government in ’82. This is the fourth sell-off, all the time 
maintaining that fiction by himself and his people who do his 
bidding that this is really not SaskPower that’s being sold, like 
he says in his letter to the PC membership in Saskatchewan: 
“Let me make one thing very clear; SaskPower is not for sale.” 
And then his president and chief executive officer of 
SaskEnergy says, in the second paragraph, precisely the same 
paragraph: “It is to be distinctly understood that SaskPower is 
not for sale.” Two letters from two different people saying 
SaskPower is not for sale. 
 
If they are the type of people that can attempt to maintain that 
kind of a public fiction when all the time they’re making sales 
— one, two, three, four multimillion dollar sales — they will 
have no hesitation in ramming that legislation through this 
Assembly, no hesitation whatsoever. That’s why we rang the 
bells. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This kind of unauthorized sale of  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1237 
 

Sask Power Corporation has got to stop, and the people out 
there say it’s got to stop. The people have told us. They said, 
the Premier has no mandate to sell this off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I must move on because I know 
that some other members across the way will want to get into 
this debate when I sit down. 
 
I want to talk about democracy. I want to talk about democracy 
a bit. And I’ve had a long experience with democracy in this 
province, and I find that I get along fairly well with it. I’ve 
accepted its judgements at one time, which I didn’t find 
altogether palatable, but I accepted it. And we all have got to 
suffer a defeat sometime, and that’s part of the democratic 
system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sometimes we all suffer it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes. And the Premier may have to suffer 
defeat, and some of his legislation may have to suffer defeat 
sometime, as happens to our government when we were the 
government — some of our legislation suffered defeat. We may 
have showed less aggressiveness about it than the present 
government. This present government is loath to back away 
from a bad piece of legislation. 
 
We actually had the understanding and the feeling of 
Saskatchewan, so that when we did have some legislation 
before the House which was not in the best interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan — that was very seldom — that 
legislation was dropped. It was dropped. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And I recommend that course to the 
members opposite, otherwise they’ll go to their political graves 
with their legislation in their hands. That’s fine with me. That’s 
fine with me if they wish to do it. 
 
But as I said earlier, it’s with a heavy heart that I see this kind 
of motion before this House. It hurts me. I don’t like it. I’m sure 
it’s distasteful, and I’m sure it’s even distasteful to some 
members on the other side of the House, and I’d be prepared to 
hear them speak on this issue if they wish. 
 
This particular arbitrary government motion is a complete 
repudiation of the democratic principles which should govern 
this Assembly. I’m not surprised, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
surprised that it is a complete repudiation of the democratic 
principles that should govern this Assembly. This motion before 
the House, by this government, adds to some other things that 
have already occurred under this government which are of 
much similar nature — the loss of the independent Electoral 
Boundaries Commission. It’s gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — It’s gone. It adds this piece of resolution 
before the House which will deal with the ringing of the bells in 
a division vote, also adds to the recent disclosures by the 
Provincial Auditor, who is a top servant of this Assembly, the 
observations of the  

Provincial Auditor which were aired yesterday in the legislature 
and again today — this adds to the detraction from the 
democratic system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This action by this government adds to 
the government’s willingness to sacrifice — and I say that 
seriously — to sacrifice democracy to salvage their narrow, 
ill-considered plans to sell off SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation) gas division. That’s what this adds to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — While this adds, it also subtracts, Mr. 
Speaker, it also subtracts. I just want to refer to the statement of 
the minister from Kindersley. And this is a presentation that he 
made to the rules committee back in 1982 — this one. The 
member for Kindersley made a presentation to the rules 
committee and it’s itemized as B-14. So if you go to the records 
of the Assembly, the Clerks will have all the B’s right down to 
14 and beyond. And this represents the view of the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How would the public get a hold of that? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well the public can a hold of this if they 
wanted to. I’m going to read the important parts to them, but if 
they want to read it all they can get in touch with the Assembly, 
and if they can’t readily do that they can get in touch with me. 
 
And it represents Mr. Andrew’s views — pardon me, the 
member for Kindersley’s views, the member who has given us 
lectures on the rules in this province represents his views. And 
he made representations in 1981 when this report was put 
before the Assembly. This was the last rules committee which 
met successfully outside of this Chamber and brought in a 
report on the rules which was accepted by this Assembly in 
1981. 
 
And I went back and I checked the debate in 1981 of the 
member for Kindersley and it’s revealing what the member for 
Kindersley and . . . but you have to keep one thing in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, the member for Kindersley was sitting over here then, 
not over there. So keep that in mind when I refer to his remarks 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Yes, he’s gathered a few 
barnacles since 1981. I’m reading directly from the debates of 
the Assembly on April 21, 1981, under the heading reports of 
committees, rules and procedures of the legislative committee is 
the subhead and the Speaker is speaking, that’s myself. 
 

I want to lay on the Table the final report of the Special 
Committee on the Review of Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly, dated April 21, 1981. 
 

And I referred to that, I don’t want to go back and repeat it, Mr. 
Speaker, because I wouldn’t want to be accused of repeating 
myself in this debate, because I have plenty of material to go on 
for an extended period of time, and it’s  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1238 
 

new material as you will see from this. 
 
Now the members of the Assembly availed themselves of the 
opportunity at this time to speak to the tabling of this report and 
its recommendations contained therein. And of course the first 
speaker was Mr. Banda, the second speaker was Mr. Pepper, 
and the third speaker was the member for Kindersley. And he 
spoke for some length, but I only want to quote certain sections 
and I’ll tell you where they are, Mr. Speaker, so that you can 
check them yourself. Page 2320, the member for Kindersley 
had this to say: 
 

My view on the question of parliamentary reform is that 
our system must look at parliamentary reform in a much 
more aggressive way than we have in this report. 
 

So the member of Kindersley was much more aggressive, at 
least he was talking in aggressive line when he was over on this 
side of the House, when this report was presented in 1981. And 
he goes on to say on the next page, the following page: 
 

. . . What I would like to make is a submission I made, (the 
member for Kindersley said this on page 2321), what I 
would like to make is a submission I made to the 
committee which, I think, covers some of the areas I 
would like to have seen the committee move in. 
 

And he goes on, he says: 
 

Number one, and I think perhaps the most important area 
of political or parliamentary development that we need, 
not only in this province but in this entire country, is in the 
area of freedom of information. 
 

This is the Member for Kindersley. If you’d heard him recently 
you wouldn’t believe it, but here it is the printed word. And 
who’s to question this? 
 

I know the Attorney General . . . (and the Attorney 
General at that time happens to be here) . . . I know the 
Attorney General has expressed his view on that on 
several occasions. But, without that information flow from 
government through to the legislature and out to the 
people, parliamentary reform is very difficult. You need 
the information first before anything else can take place. 
 

Well the Member for Kindersley had whetted my appetite by 
this time, so much so that I went and got his submission to the 
committee. This is the rules committee of which I was the 
chairperson. And I enjoyed refreshing myself by reading the 
remarks of the member for Kindersley at that time. What was 
the gist . . . and he deals with his representations as he did in the 
debate but this is the original piece. The item entitled “B-14 — 
Submission to the Committee of Rules and Procedures,” and 
it’s got his name, MLA, there. And it says: Problem . . . that’s 
the way it starts out. I won’t read it all, but I’ll read the 
pertinent parts. 
 

The government back-bencher has remained  

acquiescent and reluctant to be critical of the 
administration or the bureaucracy . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And he goes on: 
 

. . . that the fundamental basis of our system of responsible 
government, i.e. meaning that the legislature will control 
the public purse exists only in theory, and that meaningful 
reform cannot proceed unless a more meaningful 
information system is developed. 
 

He goes on, “Proposals for consideration.” He flies to new 
heights here, soars to new heights in parliamentary suggestions 
about how our committee should have been more aggressive. 
 

There is a need for meaningful freedom of information 
legislation. Without this or a similar reform the debate in 
(and the scrutiny of) parliament will always remain 
ineffective. I believe this can be accomplished without 
sacrificing ministerial responsibility and individual 
privacy. 
 

So the member from Kindersley was a hawk; he was a hawk on 
freedom of information. Now in retrospect, I look back and I 
say, here’s the fellow that wants to ram this legislation through 
. . . or this motion through the House about the bell-ringing on a 
division vote, was a hawk on freedom of information, until I 
thought, he says so much, but he does so little. 
 
So I went back and I said, how did he do with the Conservative 
Party? Well here is the Conservative Party literature. And it 
says, “commitment.” There’s the Premier’s picture there. And 
this particular leaflet, Mr. Speaker — I know you’ll be 
interested in knowing — this says, “Elect Gay Caswell.” And I 
must say something about my former foe, political foe from 
Westmount. 
 
At the public meeting we held in Saskatoon dealing with 
SaskEnergy sell-off . . . We had four very successful public 
meetings, Mr. Speaker, drawing over 4,000 people — 4,000 
people into meetings in four places in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the Premier must have got in touch with Gay Caswell for 
the Saskatoon meeting, and he said, like he said to the people, 
get out there and influence them, you know. That’s like the 
executive secretary said to the executives around the province, 
get out there and influence that committee of bureaucrats. Make 
our views known there. The Premier must have called up Gay 
Caswell and said, get out to that meeting at the Holiday Inn. 
And knowing that she’s on the cutting edge of Conservative 
thought in Saskatoon, this companion of the Premier’s, who is 
with him through thick and thin, she was there and she brought 
all the Conservatives in Saskatoon with her. It was frightening. 
It was frightening; there were all five of them were there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1239 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — All five. Well it could have been six, 
maybe it was five and a child. They were all there representing 
the Premier and they had their signs. And the people inside that 
hall — the 1200 people inside that hall or more — were 
certainly intimidated by have the Premier’s personal 
representative there with the picket signs. But this is a free 
country, and I will fight to preserve her right or anyone else’s 
right to protest, because that’s exactly what we’re doing right 
now. We’re protesting. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2130) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And the people of Saskatchewan are 
protesting. And this government is trying to ram it down their 
throats. What did this virtuous member from Kindersley say, 
and what did his party say in 1982? I’ll tell you what they said 
because I’ve got their literature right here. 
 
This piece of literature says, “PC Policies for Good 
Government”, this is a heading, right here. And it’s got, broken 
into three sections, “Tax-cuts” — I knew you’d get a laugh out 
of that one; “Government Management”, “Concern for People”, 
“Concern for People”. 
 
Under tax-cuts it says, roll back the gasoline sales tax. Well, it’s 
. . . they sort of fell short on that one. They fell short on that 
one. As a matter of fact they said once they got the gasoline tax 
off, they said there’d never be another gasoline tax under a Tory 
party, so they actually broke their promise, because they get 
more revenue now in gasoline tax then we ever got — then we 
ever got. 
 
Reduce provincial income tax by 10 per cent. Well, they put on 
the flat tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The hon. member is 
introducing several topics into the debate, and I’m trying to 
ascertain how this relates to the present motion under 
discussion. I trust that the hon. member will be able to do that in 
a direct way, or cease discussing those issues. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You’re right, you’re right, Mr. Speaker. I 
apologize. I won’t even mention removal of the 5 per cent E&H 
tax which was another part of this. 
 
I will get directly to the government management section, the 
government management section. And hear what it says, hear 
what it says in the government management section, because 
this relates directly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I have heard some 
unparliamentary remarks and I once more remind members not 
to use them. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The first one, the first one under 
government management — this doesn’t say mismanagement, it 
says management, put in the positive form: 
 

Ensure efficient management of Crown corporations and 
provide service at cost to the people. 
 

Well the Crown corporation debt in this province has climbed 
from about 3 billion to about 8 billion under this government. 

The rates have all gone up. But they say, “good government 
management.” The next thing they say: 
 

Consumers will be protected by a public utilities review 
commission. 
 

Well as soon as the public review utilities commission stepped 
on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I mentioned earlier to the hon. 
member that he’s introducing various topics that he hasn’t made 
evident are related to the issue under discussion. I once more 
remind him of the rule pertaining to that, and I’m sure he’s 
aware of it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will try to get to the 
point that I was making. And the point that I’m making is that 
there’s been a complete breakdown in what the government 
democratically promised us. And this adds . . . is being added to 
by what the government’s doing now . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Bringing in motions that will ram rule 
changes through this House . . . Yes? 
 
And I just read the minister’s remarks in the debate dealing with 
rule changes, where the minister said, he’s a hawk on freedom 
of information. And freedom of information is in here, Mr. 
Speaker, if you will bear with me for a brief moment. 
 
The next item is: 
 

Protect taxpayers’ money by ensuring independence of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 

Now that one leaves me cold. Just what happened in the last 
two days, let alone the last two or three years, with the 
Provincial Auditor, shows that this government is 
undemocratic, not only on the Provincial Auditor but on the 
legislations they’re attempting to ram through on the 
bell-ringing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Every year, if not every year almost 
every year, since this government’s been in power, the budget 
of the Provincial Auditor has been reduced and his scope has 
been narrowed. And this is one of the items, an attack on 
democracy which is before this Assembly, just like this motion 
— just like this motion the government’s attempting to ram 
through this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The next one, dealing with the 
preservation of democracy, and right on line with what the 
member for Kindersley said, is: open the books on government 
business. That’s what it says here. I can’t believe this. I can’t 
believe these people have changed that much, because 
government business is a closed  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1240 
 

book; it’s a closed book now. 
 
And finally, on this section which I’m only going to deal with, 
Mr. Speaker, establish freedom of information legislation. 
Freedom of information — can you believe that? This is the 
program of that member and his party in 1982, completely 
abandoned, completely destroyed in just a few short years. 
Every promise broken — every promise on that list of 
government management broken, and now they’re adding to it 
more broken promises. 
 
I’m depressed. I’m depressed, and I’m sure the people of 
Saskatchewan are depressed as well . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Yes, well I’m waiting for their speeches to find out where 
they stand on this issue. We want to find out where the 
members opposite stand on this important issue, Mr. Speaker, 
because this is an attack on the democratic system and the 
democratic traditions, not only of Saskatchewan but of our 
parliamentary tradition stemming from Westminster. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — We know, we have the full knowledge, 
Mr. Speaker, that the defence of democracy is sometimes a 
costly, sometimes a costly thing. We know that. And it can be 
costly in many different ways, including political ways. We 
know that. But when the Premier says that he will not sell 
SaskPower or SaskTel, and then he begins multimillion dollar 
sell-offs of SaskPower, and their sales in SaskTel as well, all 
the time saying he will not sell them, you know, when the 
Premier breaks his promise, when the Premier has no mandate 
from the people of Saskatchewan, we’ll ring the bells. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — When there are important issues at stake, 
and only, and only when there are important issues at stake such 
as this will we ring the bells. We will ring the bells whenever 
that occurs. 
 
Now there are important issues at stake, Mr. Speaker, as you 
will be aware. And the Premier must think they’re important as 
well, because he’s staked so much of his reputation, his political 
reputation, on them. This is a test of wills. And we want to 
know, we should know whether whose will is supported in 
Saskatchewan. Well it’s not difficult to figure out whose will is 
supporting Saskatchewan. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that 
when the bells rang in April and we left this Legislative 
Chamber, there were no public polls had been taken with regard 
to these issues — not by us, and not polls of the significance of 
the polls that were taken after the bells had rung for some 
period of time. 
 
We left this Legislative Chamber, Mr. Speaker, on a point of 
principle, on a point of principle. It wasn’t because it was 
politically expedient; it wasn’t because we had a poll, because 
we had no polls. We said that this has got to stop. The Premier 
has no mandate. He’s gone too far. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, what is the public view on this? 
Well you only have to look at the polls that were  

done, and there was more than one poll done. I have the one 
that was done by the Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post. I have 
the one that was done, paid for by the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour, which found that 71 per cent of those surveyed were 
opposed to the sale of SaskEnergy. And the members opposite 
scoffed at that, and they said, oh yes, well that’s just a labour 
poll. 
 
Well they can scoff at it all they want to. I hope they continue to 
scoff at those kind of polls because those will be the kind of 
polls that’ll do them in. This poll for the Saskatchewan 
federation was done by a professional pollster, and it was 
backed up very shortly thereafter. The poll for the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour was Wednesday, May 3. 
The poll in the Star-Phoenix was released . . . well, the 
Star-Phoenix one is Wednesday the 3rd and so is the 
Star-Phoenix one, Wednesday, May 3. The one by the 
Federation of Labour was taken slightly in advance of that but 
was released on the 3rd; it was reported on the 3rd. 
 
Now what does the poll show? Well, it shows that the 
Government of Saskatchewan in its plan to privatize, sell off 
SaskEnergy, was away off base, way off base. 
 
The Star-Phoenix privatization poll, first question was: do you 
support or oppose plans to privatize SaskEnergy? Not 
SaskPower. Do you support or oppose plans to privatize 
SaskEnergy? You see, the pollsters saw through this and the 
public sees through this charade . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . this charade where the government 
says we’ll never privatize SaskPower Corporation, we’ll never 
privatize SaskTel; doesn’t mean a thing to these people, it 
doesn’t mean a thing. It’s a deception practised on the public. 
The public can now see through it. The pollsters put it . . . They 
said, we’ll never privatize it, so you’re wrong. But the pollsters 
put it in the language of SaskEnergy. And what was the result 
of that? Sixty 
_seven per cent opposed the privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And then the second question: do you 
support or oppose privatization in general? It’s a general 
question about privatization. Opposed, 58 per cent — 58 per 
cent. 
 
And the next question which really caught my attention was this 
one, Mr. Speaker. Do you support or oppose the privatization of 
PCS — that’s Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, not power 
corporation. Potash corporation, entirely different entity, which 
is a Bill before this House to privatize it right now, Bill 20, 
where this government’s going to sell off a valuable asset of 
this province to foreigners, by large part. 
 
And the people were asked: do you support or oppose 
privatization of Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? Fifty per 
cent opposed it; only 28 per cent supported it. So that should 
tell this government something. They may even have a little 
tougher fight on their hands on Bill 20 as a result of this poll, 
because it’s a pretty clear indication  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1241 
 

the people of the province think that they’re off base. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You know, it’s important. In this poll 
dealing with SaskEnergy, it’s important that they included 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in the poll. The reason the 
bells were rung was SaskEnergy, but the question was not only 
SaskEnergy but potash corporation as well. 
 
That corporation, which could be the economic salvation of the 
people of Saskatchewan, is going to be sold off by this 
government under Bill 20. This is a corporation that brought in 
profit in the first few years of operation, from ’76 to ’81, of 
$413 million. The actual investment in plant and updating, or 
renovations at that point, was only 418 million, and they made 
$413 million of profit. What an investment that was, and it was 
owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was interesting to note when Dr. Barber was picked from 
that institute on privatization to head up the Premier’s 
hand-picked committee, another person on that same institute 
for privatizing in Saskatchewan made a statement about the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And he said, there’s never 
been demonstrated to the people of Saskatchewan whether 
there’s been any good to them directly from the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Well, Roger Phillips, I have 
news for you. He’s a charter member of that institute, and he’s 
the one that made the statement. And he’s the head of Ipsco, but 
that’s another story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d love to tell you the story about Ipsco and its beginnings, and 
privatization, because that would take up a fair bit of time and 
you’d find it interesting. But I don’t want to get off the subject 
and talk about that. 
 
But Mr. Roger Phillips said there was no direct benefit to the 
people of Saskatchewan from the potash corporation. The 
people of Saskatchewan seem to think that it’s a valuable asset 
because they don’t want it sold. It paid, in 1980, $50 million 
directly into the treasury of Saskatchewan by dividend; it paid 
another $50 million in 1981 — $100 million of dividends 
directly into the treasury to pay for things like health care, 
education, highways. No dividends to the people of 
Saskatchewan? Don’t you believe the people from that institute 
when they tell you, when they interpret for you, what are the 
facts of life in Saskatchewan. Don’t you believe that. 
 
At the same time, the potash corporation paid $271 million in 
taxes and royalties to the province of Saskatchewan, in addition 
to the $413 million of profits. This is a magnificent operation, 
but I know you don’t want me talking about that, Mr. Speaker, 
because I’m slightly off the subject there. And I’ll get another 
chance to talk about that one later on Bill 20, and I’ll deal with 
it more extensively there. 
 
I want to get back to this poll, this poll which reflects the views 
of the public of Saskatchewan. Done by a  

professional organization, this is by Angus Reid Associates, did 
the poll, and it’s on May 3, reported in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix. They go on: 
 

Do you support or oppose the NDP tactics in the 
legislature? 
 

And obviously they left that up to the people to decide what our 
tactics were. And I suppose the one that drew the most attention 
at the time was the bell-ringing. What did the people say? 
Supported by 49 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now here’s where that statement I made 
comes in, Mr. Speaker, that the defence of the democratic 
system sometimes can be costly. We made the decision to leave 
this Chamber and ring those bells because we thought that our 
political survival was superseded by the issue that was before 
this Assembly, namely the sell-off of that asset. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — That is a principle decision, and in due 
course we will find out whether it was a right decision or not. 
 
The next question is: should there be an election on 
SaskEnergy? Well, 52 per cent of the people want an election 
on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, I might be able to 
convince my colleagues that if the members opposite were to 
put together an election package, put in it power corporation 
sell-off, potash corporation sell-off, and this ramrod effort of 
shoving the rule change through the Assembly, and we’ll go to 
the electorate, I think I can convince them the Premier wants an 
election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll show up John, we’ll show up. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, we won’t start the war till you get 
there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We will show up. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Right. And then the last question is a 
rather revealing one, Mr. Speaker. If an election were held 
tomorrow, which party would you support? Well, 54 per cent 
said they’d support the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And there’s one figure here that I don’t 
intend to report. People are going to have to dig out their old 
newspapers because it’s too embarrassing for the Premier. It’s 
too embarrassing for the Premier. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll stop the clock. Come on. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, no, no, I’m not going to do it.  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1242 
 

I’m not going to do it because this poll is dealing not with the 
popularity of leaders, but with the issue. That’s what we’re 
dealing with, the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The issue is this government ramrodding 
the sale of SaskEnergy, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
When they can’t get their way, they’re ramrodding a rule 
change in this Assembly. They have no mandate for any of 
them. They have no mandate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And it would just be an embarrassment 
to the Premier to report the figures that show how he stacks up 
against the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
An Hon. Member: — This is not a personality issue. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s right. Well an article here, 
attached to this poll, says that the respondents want an election 
— NDP government favoured. And it reports in there about the 
popularity of the Leader of the Government and the Leader of 
the Opposition and talks about the poll. And it says: “The NDP 
has the backing of 54 per cent of the decided voters.” 
 
I don’t think that relates directly to the issue at hand, Mr. 
Speaker, so I won’t get into that, but the interesting part on this 
particular poll is the figures about the sell-off, and 67 per cent 
of the people said they don’t want the government to sell it off. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Many of those same people said that they 
would like to have an election on this issue. They’d like to have 
an election. I said it costs to defend the democratic system 
sometimes. We’re prepared to pay that cost. And that’s where 
the cost should be assessed, Mr. Speaker, not here with this 
government ramming through a rule change — anti-democratic 
— should be done the democratic way with the electorate. And 
if the Premier wants to test that he can test that any time he 
wants. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — If we’ve made that error in judgement, 
then of course we’ll pay the cost. Now it’s not to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that all people were for us on this poll. I was a bit 
surprised a while ago, a very short while ago. I got a letter from 
the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association, and I thought, 
my heavens!, what can the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ 
Association be getting in touch with me about? I opened up the 
letter and lo and behold!, it said this: 
 

For immediate release. (I felt offended because it wasn’t 
the letter to me; it was just for immediate release. And it 
says) “Back to business” (in quotation marks) The 
Saskatchewan Stock Grower’s Association urges the 
provincial opposition to discontinue the bell-ringing 
process  

and get back to business. President Bill Yeast stated that 
the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association does not 
support the boycotting of parliament. It is irresponsible 
and non-productive to boycott the House while in session. 
The stock growers encourage elected members to get back 
to business and back to the issues. 
 

And I thought well, you know, I’m a little offended that he 
issued me a press release rather than sort of writing me a letter 
and telling me to get back to work. But when he said to get back 
to business and back to the issues, I thought, well there’s a 
glimmer of hope here. I’ll maybe get in communication with 
Mr. Yeast, the president of the stock growers’ association. So I 
sent Mr. Yeast a letter, and I said: 
 

Dear Mr. Yeast: I have received your news release which 
states your association urges the provincial opposition to 
discontinue the bell-ringing process and get back to 
business. Aside from using a news release to advise me, 
which I find unusual, could you give me the thoughts of 
your organization on the business which caused the 
bell-ringing in the first place? 
 
What are your organization’s views on the Premier’s 
stated position that his government would not privatize 
SaskPower (SaskEnergy) or SaskTel because they were 
public utilities? What are the views of your organization to 
Mr. Berntson’s (pardon me, the member for . . . I’m 
quoting the letter, I’m quoting the letter) Mr. Berntson’s 
stated position that splitting off the gas division, 
SaskEnergy, from SaskPower was not for the purpose of 
selling SaskEnergy (that was on May the 9th, ’88) which 
he is now attempting to do (which he is now attempting to 
do)? 
 
What are your views on selling SaskEnergy when it made 
a profit in 10 out of the last 10 years, while the electrical 
division of SPC lost money the last seven out of the 10 
years? 
 
What are your views about the further extension of natural 
gas to rural Saskatchewan, a relatively very expensive 
capital and operational cost venture by a private owner of 
SaskEnergy? Would the program be curtailed and the 
price of natural gas rise rapidly in rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Can Saskatchewan people trust the government to create a 
PURC-like regulatory body when they disbanded their 
own public utilities review commission shortly after 
creating it? I most sincerely solicit your organization’s 
views about this important business. 
 

He said, get back to business. Well I’ve got a response back 
from Mr. Yeast, and I know the member from whatever he’s 
from . . . who’s got his crop in now and he’s back in the 
Chamber, he’s got his crop in. Mr. Yeast has responded to me, 
and you’ll be interested in his response about the bell-ringing, 
Mr. Speaker. He says: 
 

Re your letter of May 4, 1989 re our news release:  
  



 
May 18, 1989 

 

1243 
 

In response to your letter of May 4, 1989, the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association’s news release 
of May 3, ’89 regarding the discontinuation of bell-ringing 
was issued out of a request by our board of directors 
representing our membership. 
 

Here’s the next paragraph: 
 

It is and always has been a belief of our organization that 
we support free enterprise, and thus the result of our 
decision to issue the news release to discontinue the 
bell-ringing. I sincerely hope my explanation of the 
situation is clarified for you. Yours truly. 
 

Now the member of the stock growers’ association, the 
president, sent me this letter. I sent him a number of questions 
sincerely soliciting his views. I sincerely wanted to find out 
what is their position on these important issues of the day. 
 
And he writes back with a knee-jerk reaction, we’re a free 
enterprise organization, period. Now that was one that disturbed 
me a bit . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s the only 100 per cent support. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You can’t win them all. 
 
Another one which I want to comment on, Mr. Speaker, has to 
do with the chamber of commerce. The chamber of commerce 
recently elected a new president, and the chamber of commerce 
took up the issue of the bell-ringing in the Legislative 
Assembly. They voted overwhelmingly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 10 o’clock, the House stands 
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 


