


















































June 1, 1989 Hansard


  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

 June 1, 1989 
 

 
1547 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Gardner, chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Estimates, presents the third report of the said 
committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee considered the estimates of the 
Legislative Assembly, Legislative Library, Legislative 
Counsel and Law Clerk and adopted the following 
resolutions: 
 
1. Main Estimates to March 31, 1990: 

 
Resolved, that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
twelve months ending March 31, 1990, the following 
sum: 
 
For Legislation..................3,920,500 
 

2. Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted 
to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1990, the sum of $3,267,100 be granted out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 

3. Resolved, that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 
twelve months ending March 31, 1989 the following 
sums: 
 
For Legislation..................$174,600 
 

4. Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted 
to her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the 
public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
1989, the sum of $174,600 be granted out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 

5. Resolved, that this committee recommend that upon 
concurrence in the committee’s report, the sums as 
reported and approved shall be included in the 
Appropriation Bill for consideration by the Legislative 
Assembly. 

 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move, and it’s seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon South: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on 
Estimates be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
to other members of the House, some visitors from 

Manitoba. Sitting in your gallery are 64 students, accompanied 
by Mr. Dyker and Mr. Marshall, a couple of teachers. They are 
from the Westwood Collegiate in Winnipeg. We often get 
visitors, Mr. Speaker, as you know, from many parts of the 
province, but not too often from Manitoba and surrounding 
provinces. So we’re delighted to have them here today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why I was the lucky one chosen 
to introduce these folks from Manitoba, but perhaps, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s because my wife went to Calvin High School. My 
wife went to Calvin High School in Winnipeg and perhaps 
that’s why I was chosen. 
 
But at any rate, Mr. Speaker, would we please welcome all our 
visitors from Manitoba. I’ll have an opportunity to meet with 
them a little later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some 26 students from grades 1 through 
4 from Creelman School in Creelman in my riding, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re accompanied today by teachers and chaperons 
including Patty Reed, Karen Thompson, Colleen Foss, Susan 
Lind, Wendy Treble, and as well, their bus driver, Don Anslow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Creelman is one of those very vital and thriving 
communities across rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I look forward to meeting with the students after question 
period this afternoon, and I would now ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in extending a warm welcome to these 
students from Creelman, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — It’s my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
to you, sitting in the gallery opposite, in the west gallery, Mr. 
Brian Sklar, alias Captain Canada, who is the leader of the band 
Prairie Fire. And Brian, when he’s working in this area, often 
comes in and visits the legislature, being interested in it. I’d ask 
you to join me in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 
legislature, 13 grade 12 students who are sitting in the west 
gallery today. They’re from Central Butte High School in 
Central Butte, which is the largest town, believe it or not, in my 
riding. They’ve been in for a tour of the legislature, and I hope 
that they enjoy question period. I’m sure you’ll find it 
informative. It’s putting in practice many of the things that 
you’ve studied about in your grade 12 history course. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Ron Wostradowski and 
Brenda Berry, today, and I look forward to meeting them 
afterwards for pictures and refreshments and, of course, 
questions on the aspects of 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1548 

 

the legislature. 
 
Please help me welcome the Central Butte students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
privilege this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members of the Legislative Assembly, 38 grade 5 students 
seated in the west gallery, from the town of Clavet, which is 
just south-east of Saskatoon. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Darryl Merilees and 
Judy Tamke, and chaperons, Lois Weins, Gail Wilcox, Glennis 
Koop, Karen Burnett, and Theresa Lindberg. 
 
And I’ll be meeting these people from Clavet at 3 o’clock on 
the outside lawn for drinks and for questions and so on, and I 
hope that they have a very informative and interesting 
afternoon. Please help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to welcome the students from Clavet, and in 
particular Gail MacKenzie-Wilcox, who was a former colleague 
of mine. When I was a teacher at Radius Tutoring project, Gail 
was the co-ordinator or principal. 
 
So I would like to welcome the students from Clavet, as well as 
Gail MacKenzie-Wilcox. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Problems with GigaText 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
direct a question to the minister in charge of SEDCO, and I 
want to go back to what we were talking about yesterday, 
Madam Minister, and that is in respect to the government’s 
transaction with GigaText, the transaction of high-tech 
operation with a French-Canadian business man from Quebec. 
And I want to get down to the facts in which this government 
has blown primarily $4 million of taxpayers’ money and 
essentially has nothing to show. 
 
Madam Minister, I refer you to the quotations of the Premier 
outside the House yesterday. Outside the Assembly the Premier 
maintained that the project was viable from the beginning and 
it’s still being counted on to provide cheap method of 
translation of Saskatchewan statutes. He said he had it checked 
and there was good potential. But he went on to say, “It’s 
exciting and it’s fast and it’s accurate.” Madam Minister, I 
wonder if you could explain how accurate the Premier’s 
comments were in light of the performance of this technology 
to date. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the 
member, I would again make the offer that I made yesterday so 
that he understands the technology. If he would care, I will 
arrange a demonstration for him at GigaText. 

With regards to the technology, it is new technology, Mr. 
Speaker. It deals with artificial intelligence. We have a great 
degree of confidence that the technology as described by 
GigaText will in fact work. But I would point out to the 
member that I would imagine that there were doubting 
Thomases when Alexander Graham Bell said what he would do 
with the technology that he developed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Madam Speaker, a new question to the same 
minister. Madam Minister, your answer flies in the face of the 
facts. I want to refer you to a article in the Leader-Post, 
“Private translators working on laws.” 
 

Unable to depend on GigaText’s computer software to 
translate its laws, the government has already commenced 
getting the job done the old-fashioned way (and has 
entered into a contract with the University of New 
Brunswick). 
 

Madam Minister, why don’t you come clean with the people of 
Saskatchewan? Why don’t you indicate that you have 
squandered — you have made a bad deal — you have 
squandered 4 million bucks, that your government has shown 
its incompetence, its mismanagement, and its waste? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker . . . Thank you, gentlemen. 
Thank you. Thank you, gentlemen. Mr. Speaker, again the 
member speaks about something he knows nothing of. He 
selectively, selectively quotes from the newspaper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the translation business across Canada is about a 
$200 million business. We believe that the technology that is 
being developed at GigaText, once all the characters are keyed 
in, that this technology, artificial intelligence, will have the 
capability of translating our English statutes to French. 
 
With regards to the translators, I will defer to the Minister of 
Justice under who that comes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — A new question to the same minister. Madam 
Minister, I say to you, come clean. All the evidence, all the 
documentation indicates that $4 million have been squandered, 
$4 million which essentially has gone into the pockets of the 
French-Canadian business man from Montreal, directly to his 
pockets. 
 
I ask you, Madam Minister, if you’re convinced that this 
technology works, I challenge you to table all of your feasibility 
studies that led you into this transaction. Will you table them? I 
challenge you to table them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would throw out a 
challenge to the member. Screw up your courage and come with 
me over to GigaText. They will give you a demonstration on 
what they are doing, and you will see what they are doing. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1549 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, order. The 
minister has the right to answer the question. Unfortunately 
there are several answers taking place at the same time, but the 
one we want to listen to is the minister. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will again 
say to the member that we have a high degree of confidence that 
the technology, the so-called artificial intelligence, the 
technology of translating English to French or vice versa will 
work — will work. And we would hope that by the end of June, 
mid-June to the end of June, you will have a demonstration. But 
again I would say, come with me. Screw up your courage and 
come and see what it is that they do downtown. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Authorization of Payments to Entrepreneurs 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Minister, we don’t want to accept any 
more of your pretending pleas of ignorance on the questions we 
put to you yesterday. I would like you to tell us who authorized 
the payment from the taxpayers’ money of $35,000 a month so 
that Mr. Montpetit could rent a private jet from GigaMos air 
services, owned 100 per cent by Guy Montpetit? Who 
authorized the additional $18,000 a month to Mr. Montpetit for 
travel expenses? And who signed the agreement between 
GigaText and Mr. Montpetit for a $60,000 a year salary in 
addition to those other perks? Who made those authorizations, 
Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I took notice of a whole 
series of questions yesterday. Those questions, as I indicated 
yesterday, were best directed to the minister from CMB (Crown 
Management Board). The Deputy Premier is in La Ronge today 
and will be prepared to answer the questions tomorrow, 
provided the opposition is willing to give up about 10 or 12 
minutes of question period. The Deputy Premier will be more 
than pleased to answer those questions tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You’re the minister in charge, you’re the 
minister in charge of SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Corporation) . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question to the same minister, Mr. 
Speaker. You’re the minister in charge of SEDCO. You know 
what the answers are. You seem to indicate you have some 
information, and then you indicate you don’t know when it’s 
convenient for you not to know. 
 
I’m asking you, who authorized the payments to Guy 
Montpetit: the $35,000 per month for the jet that he owned, the 
$18,000 additional per-month travel expenses to Guy Montpetit, 
and the $60,000-a-year salary — who authorized it? You’re the 
minister. Come clean with this House. Give us those answers 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, 
SEDCO took over the day-to-day operations of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I think it’s 
only fair and just that you allow the minister to answer, not to 
immediately interrupt her. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, SEDCO took over the day-to-day 
operations of GigaText, I believe some time in March. The 
set-up of the company and the payments to individuals, the 
terms of their employment, were established long before 
SEDCO took over the day-to-day operations of GigaText. And 
as I indicated yesterday, I took notice on behalf of the Deputy 
Premier, the minister from the Crown Management Board, who 
will be prepared to answer the questions tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well let’s try some more. New question to the 
same minister, Mr. Speaker. It seems to me that if you were 
conscientious about your role, you would know the history of 
this great scandal that you just blew over $4 million of the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
Let’s try some more questions about the expenditures. Who 
authorized the $75,000 to a business associate of Guy Montpetit 
for the services rendered even before GigaText was 
incorporated? That’s one. Who authorized the company’s 
purchase of a condominium for Dr. Jean-Pierre Paillet at a cost 
of $137,000? That’s the second question. A third one would be: 
who authorized the acquisition of a Mercedes Benz for Dr. 
Paillet at $8,573 a year? Could you tell us who authorized those 
payments, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, those are the very same 
questions that I took notice of yesterday. Yesterday I did 
indicate to the hon. member that the purchase of a 
condominium, the leasing of a vehicle were probably terms of 
Dr. Paillet’s employment and used as means of getting him to 
Saskatchewan, as indicated in the article that the member from 
Quill Lake was quoting from. 
 
Translators are in demand across Canada — Montreal, Toronto, 
Ottawa, Regina, Vancouver — and it’s very difficult to attract 
competent translators. So I would say, as I said yesterday, I 
would assume that those two conditions were conditions of the 
employment. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Before the hon. member begins 
his question, I have been listening to his line of questioning, and 
it seems to me that he’s seeking further information on 
essentially the same question, and therefore, as we all know, the 
minister has taken notice. And you certainly have the right to 
ask further information, but not new questions on the same 
question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Madam Minister, could you tell us whether or 
not GigaText is today maintaining the payments on the 
$137,000 condo, and on the Mercedes 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1550 

 

Benz and, if not, when did these payments stop? You’re the 
Minister of SEDCO; this is a current question today. Are public 
moneys still going into a condominium for Dr. Paillet and the 
automobile, the Mercedes Benz, that he needs to help him 
translate, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, they talk about 
squandering $4 million, blowing $4 million of taxpayers’ 
money. These are the very same members, Mr. Speaker, who 
said that Weyerhaeuser will never build a paper plant in Prince 
Albert — there’s a paper plant in production in Prince Albert. 
They said Gainers will never package bacon in North Battleford 
— there is bacon being packaged in North Battleford. They said 
that there would never be a fertilizer plant in Saskatchewan. 
 
We invest in economic activity. We encourage economic 
activity in the province, and we maintain that we believe that 
the technology that is being developed downtown Regina, 
Saskatchewan, is valid and will work. 
 
With regards to the payment, I’ll bring that information back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the same 
minister. I can’t believe how you flaunt a scandal like this 
where taxpayers’ dollars are being blatantly wasted and you 
make joke of it in the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shame, shame. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You should be ashamed of yourself. You’re 
the Minister of SEDCO. I’m asking you now, Madam Minister, 
do you not know what’s going on in your responsibilities? I’m 
asking you today: is SEDCO, or public moneys being used to 
pay for a condominium and a Mercedes Benz in the GigaText 
operation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the member chooses such 
inflammatory words like scandal, scandalous. It doesn’t work. 
Mr. Speaker, the jury is still out on the technology. And we 
maintain as a government, that the technology is valid 
technology, that the technology will work. 
 

Payment to Terry Leier 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Madam Minister, I have a question to 
you as well. But I want to say: you’re starting to look like a 
side-show huckster; but before we’re done, we’re going to find 
out which shell you’ve hidden the pea under — you can count 
on that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — My question to you is this, Madam 
Minister. I want to explore a little more fully the payment of 
$5,000 to Terry Leier. You said yesterday that it was for 
legitimate board expenses. Now I want to know today if you 
still stand by that, and if you do stand by that, I want to 

know if today you’re going to table the invoices and the 
documents that would confirm your statement of yesterday. Can 
you do that today, Madam Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I believe I indicated 
yesterday that there is an RCMP investigation on and that that 
. . . I indicated also yesterday that Mr. Leier received legitimate 
reimbursement for legitimate expenses incurred as a board 
member of GigaText — as a board member of GigaText. But 
here we have the usual tactics of the NDP under that leader, 
who calls himself a leader, the member from Riversdale, 
smearing a person’s name, bringing people’s names into the 
legislature with innuendo, false allegations. I indicated 
yesterday that Mr. Leier was reimbursed for legitimate 
expenses. The RCMP investigation is ongoing, and all of that is 
part of the investigation. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, it’s clear you’re not prepared to support your 
statements of yesterday. 
 
I want to carry on with another question. I’d like to indicate to 
you, Madam Minister, that there’s a court exhibit titled GM-59 
prepared by the court-appointed inspectors in Montreal, 
Thibault Marchand Peat Marwick, and referred to in the 
inspector’s April 28, 1989 examination, under oath, of Mr. 
Montpetit. And it’s a list of some disbursements made by 
GigaText. 
 
In it, it lists two payments to Mr. Leier, one on September 9 of 
’88 for $4,000, and on September 26 of 1988 for $1,000. In 
both cases, Madam Minister, the reason for the payment was 
listed as, and I quote, “represents.” 
 
Now can you tell us today, Madam Minister, what the term 
“represents” means in terms of legitimate board expenses? Why 
don’t you come clean? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I don’t know. I wish you guys would 
get your minds out of the gutter. 
 
I would expect, Mr. Speaker, that on September 9 Mr. 
Montpetit had signing authority for the company and would be 
making payment to employees, to board members. As was 
indicated yesterday, in late October, when we were made aware 
of the court case going on in Montreal, we immediately referred 
the matter of GigaText and our involvement in GigaText to the 
RCMP for full investigation. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I have another question to the same 
minister. Madam Minister, I would like to ask you this: 
surrounding the payments of exactly $4,000 and exactly $1,000 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the member. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — I’ll start my question again, Mr. Speaker, 
if it’s all right. Madam Minister, I would like to ask you about 
these two payments to Mr. Leier. What do 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1551 

 

you think the odds are that these expenses would come out to 
exactly $4,000 and exactly $1,000 for lodging and for travel? 
Are they all even figures and do they come all out exactly? 
 
I mean, Madam Minister, I mean even to you, you should 
understand that this looks a little bit fishy. Wouldn’t you agree 
to that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — No. 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — New question to the same minister. 
Madam Minister, the document lists that on August 2, 
disbursements to the other three directors, Mr. Montpetit, Mr. 
Waschuk, and Mr. Young, at $3,600, $3,604, and $3,000 
respectively. And in each case the reasons for the payment is 
listed as “miscellaneous director.” 
 
Now why do you suppose that the payments to Mr. Leier were 
listed as “represent” and payments to the other directors were 
listed as “miscellaneous director?” Can you perhaps explain 
that to the House, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, obviously the member 
doesn’t listen. The matter of the government’s $4 million, the 
disbursement of the $4 million, etc., has been referred to the 
RCMP for investigation, and that is exactly what is going on 
right now. And the matters that the member brings up, I’m sure, 
will be looked at as part of the investigation. 
 

Further Payments to GigaText 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, the fact that the RCMP have been 
involved in this case doesn’t relieve you of your responsibility 
to answer questions in this House about the expenditure of 
public money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now I want to ask you some questions that I 
think you’re going to be able to answer — you ought to be able 
to answer, as the minister responsible for SEDCO. Aside from 
this $4 million, the initial investment, could you tell us if your 
government has put any further money into GigaText or 
committed any further money, and could you give us the details 
of that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as was indicated 
yesterday, SEDCO has taken over the ongoing day-to-day 
operations of GigaText, and I believe there is in the area of a 
half a million dollars from, I believe it was October or 
December. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — So if we’re talking about half a million 
dollars, Minister, that, I take it, is an answer to the question I 
asked you that that’s the amount that’s either been expended or 
committed. And if that’s the case, Madam Minister, would you 
care to explain why, on March 16 of this year, SEDCO gave 
GigaText a loan of 1.25 million — $1,250,000 — secured by a 
mortgage against the condominium we’ve been talking about, 

which was purchased by the company for Dr. Paillet. Would 
you care to explain that, Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would assume that 
as part of the agreement with CMB to take over the daily 
operations, that a budget was set up and SEDCO would want to 
secure it with the mortgage of the condominium. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, this is a SEDCO loan we’re talking 
about in March of this year; this is not a CMB loan. You’re the 
minister responsible for SEDCO. Now will you stand in your 
place and confirm to us that there is in fact a loan of 1.25 
million, and would you care to explain what that loan was all 
about? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Well I believe that the loan was taken 
out to continue the daily operation of GigaText. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Minister, your answer doesn’t square with 
what you said earlier. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member is following 
a line of questions and he’s not indicating whether new or 
supplementary. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — So you told us earlier, Minister, that the 
amount of SEDCO involvement was $500,000. Now you seem 
to be agreeing that the amount involved is actually $1.25 
million, and which is secured, as from the best of my 
information, by a mortgage on the condominium worth 
$137,000. 
 
Minister, would you care to explain why SEDCO is loaning 
$1.25 million to a company that has, dare I say, no valuable 
assets, with the only security being an interest in a $137,000 
condominium? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as indicated, if the 
member cares to listen, SEDCO is running the daily operations 
of GigaText. A budget was set up on a monthly basis. All the 
1.2 million is not disbursed; it’s being disbursed on a monthly 
basis as needed. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Now you know a fair amount about that, 
Minister. Can I go back to the question that was asked earlier? 
Is that money being used in part to pay for the condominium 
and to pay for the Mercedes Benz? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I would think the vast majority would 
be paid . . . used to pay the 22 employees that are presently 
working at GigaText. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, prior to the orders of the 
day, I request leave of the Assembly to introduce a motion with 
regard to membership on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. I’ve mentioned it to the government House 
Leader. I wonder if we could do that 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1552 

 

now. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Names on Committees of the Assembly 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I would move: 
 

That the name of Ms. Atkinson be substituted for that of 
Mr. Lyons on the Standing Committee of Crown 
Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to lay 
on the table the 20th annual report of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin where I left off 
yesterday, I want to thank, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
with my deep felt gratitude for giving me the opportunity to 
delve a little bit into the history of this institution, because in 
doing so, Mr. Speaker, it has made me appreciate even more 
our actions as an opposition in standing up in this attempt to 
muzzle democracy and attempting to stop the privatization of 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will go on at some length today in dealing with 
one of the issues that I began to discuss yesterday in regards to 
this debate over the attempt by the government to ram this rule 
change down the throat of the opposition so that they can 
privatize SaskPower. 
 
The point that I will attempt to go today with some length, Mr. 
Speaker, is the notion that what the opposition has done in 
stopping the privatization of SaskPower and the tactics it has 
utilized, is in fact an action which stands well within the norm 
of the British parliamentary tradition, and stands well within the 
norm of the role of an opposition in terms of the formation of 
parliament and its subsequent evolution. And also, Mr. Speaker, 
stands well within the norms of the political activities of 
political parties which have participated since the late 1300s in 
the parliamentary operations of England and also of the British 
Commonwealth. 

So, Mr. Speaker, in outlining that, I would like to say that, first 
of all, this: that in leaving this legislature when the opposition 
did, in bringing to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan 
in a manner in which the opposition did, we have performed a 
function which stretches back, as I had indicated earlier on, to 
1215 and the “Magnum Carter,” as one of my colleagues has 
outlined it, but stands not necessarily, Mr. Speaker, obviously in 
the same historical light as the creation of Magna Carta, but 
stands firmly within the true fundamental political traditions 
established by that document which many constitutional 
authorities throughout history have noted, forms the basis of our 
notion of what constitutes liberty and what constitutes 
democracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to . . . as I say that, to a work done 
by a noted scholar of British constitutional history, professor 
George Adams, former professor emeritus, head of the 
department of history at Yale University. And a text written by 
him, entitled Adams’ Constitutional History of England, and 
the gentleman’s name is A-d-a-m-s-’, so it’s a plural Adams. 
And the Constitutional History of England, written by him, and 
revised by Dr. Schuyler, another noted historian. Dr. Schuyler is 
a professor of history at Columbia University in New York. 
 
And in what has become one of the parliamentary authorities in 
terms of the notions of the development of constitutional 
processes within the parliamentary tradition, and within the 
context of developing that opposition, Dr. Adams goes on to 
make what I consider to be a number of fundamental points as it 
relates to this debate regarding the government’s attempt to ram 
a rule change down the throats of the opposition in order so that 
they could privatize SaskPower. That is, Mr. Speaker, that in 
dealing with Magna Carta, dealing with the fundamental tenets 
of the democracy upon which our law is based, we find a 
number of seminal notions within that context. 
 
The first is that governments have the right to govern, but in 
saying that, that there are limits on that governance. And those 
limits are proscribed by the activities of the opposition. And it 
doesn’t matter whether the activities of the opposition are 
members of our party walking out and ringing the bells for 17 
days to attempt to stop the privatization of SaskPower, or 
whether it is the barons at Runnymede forcing a despotic tyrant 
such as King John, or whether in fact it was the barons who, in 
the late 1300s, put an end to the reign of Edward II through the 
revolution which ended in his overthrow and ultimate 
beheading, or whether in fact it extended up unto the revolution 
in the 1600s, 1688. 
 
English history is replete with activities of an opposition which 
have, in determining what constitutes legitimate opposition, 
ended up defining what they themselves determined to be what 
was legitimate in developing that opposition. 
 
(1445) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was challenged yesterday by members of 
the opposition in the line of argument that I am proposing to 
this House. They — some members’ 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1553 

 

argument — said to me that I was drawing a long bow, and to 
try to compare the activities of the present government with the 
activities of a tyrant such as King John or any of the other 
feudal rulers of Britain in the medieval point in our history. And 
you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that we’re doing so, 
because there are certain fundamentals and some fundamental 
characteristics which stretch from that period of time to today. 
 
You know, we are quite privileged, I think, Mr. Speaker, to be 
able to stand upon, if you like, the peaks of time, and to look 
back into history, a history that will stretch before us much as 
an ocean does, and from a height — those of you who have 
seen an ocean know very well that you can generally make out 
the contours of the ocean, the heights and troughs of the wave, 
and the general direction and the sweep of the tides. And I 
know, Mr. Speaker, that while you’re in the ocean and trying to 
swim, at that particular point in time you feel that the tides have 
changed, and the tides of history are erratic and are a maelstrom 
in which human activities have been cast. 
 
However, from the vantage point of where we stand here in the 
20th century and looking back to the days and the development 
of English parliamentary democracy, we see that that is not 
necessarily the case. So for the members, for me to say that 
there is a long bow, maybe from the point of view of today it 
may have that appearance. Obviously the members of the front 
benches of the government opposite who have proposed this 
Bill, which would ultimately result in the privatization of 
SaskPower, don’t see themselves in the role of the monarchy of 
13th century England. They don’t see themselves in that role, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they don’t see themselves in that role only because they 
happen to be swimming in the sea — and it is a turbulent sea at 
best for those hon. members and a storm-tossed maelstrom for 
them at worst — so maybe that they aren’t able to see the 
situation they find themselves. 
 
But I’d like to quote, if I may, from Dr. Adams’ book regarding 
the situation of the present government, because I think that we 
find ourselves with some fairly close parallels. And on page 53 
and 54 of the work I had previously quoted, the Constitutional 
History of England, Dr. Adams says: 
 

Meantime, the state was the king, quite as truly as in the 
France of Louis XIV. The officers of the state, justiciar, 
and treasurer and sheriff were his personal servants. The 
machinery of the state, above the merely local, was his 
machinery. The force which operated it (that is the 
machinery of the state) was his will. If the king was strong 
and ruled firmly, the state was in good order. If he was 
weak and vacillating, it fell to pieces. 
 
More specifically, the area of the state was his lordship 
and domain. Like the manor of a baron, its revenues were 
his private income. Justice was his, and he assumed for 
himself the right to enforce it upon all. An offence against 
the law was an offence against him personally. 

Justices and courts were his instruments. Even the Great 
Council, the national assembly, existed to do his business, 
not the nation’s. It had no right of initiative, except by 
petition; its decisions were his decisions, and invalid if he 
did not make them his, a fact which becomes the 
sovereign’s absolute veto in the modern state. 
 

And I want to stress that, Mr. Speaker, because I’ll be returning 
to that notion some time in the future, and that is the concept of 
the absolute veto of the sovereign in the modern state. 
 

In a word, the king assumed that the state and all its 
belongings and all its actions were his. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at the present situation, the 
activities of the government, and whether or not the activities of 
the government fit within the description of the activities of the 
king and of the monarchy, the absolutist monarchy in the time 
of the 1300s in Britain. And I think that, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
those members saying that there is a long bow in drawing this 
analogy, that when one looks at the activities of this 
government in that regard, you will see that in fact rather than 
being a long bow, what we have is rather a straight arrow. 
 

Meantime, the state was the king quite as truly as in the 
France of Louis XIV. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, legally, if you look at the position of the 
ministers of the Crown, and particularly of the Premier of this 
province, you will see that unlike ministers of parliament of the 
13 and 1400s; unlike those in which the ministers were directly 
responsible to parliament, were liable to impeachment, and in 
fact, were impeached and met with some fairly severe 
retribution; unlike those ministers in those days, we have the 
ministers of today, one step removed from that responsibility to 
the parliament as a whole in this province. 
 
We have a legal situation in which the Premier approaches that 
of an absolute monarch because in fact, legally, the Premier is 
not bound to this parliament; the Premier is here at the whim of 
the sovereign, through the Lieutenant Governor. That is to say, 
in a very real sense, members of the Executive Council which 
are appointed, are appointed by the representative of the 
sovereign and are not appointed by the parliament. 
 
We find, for example, that the state, in other words, Mr. 
Speaker, the state in fact devolves itself in the personage . . . the 
state in fact devolves itself into the personage of one person. 
That is the Premier of this province. Quite literally and quite 
legally and constitutionally, what we have here is a situation 
that approaches the days of Absolutism, if you like. 
 
And there is certain reasons why that developed. It did in the 
1400s, and we can thank Richard II and some of the other 
Plantagenet kings for that. But we’ll get into that in a little 
while. But we find ourselves, Mr. Speaker, in the role where the 
Premier of this province is in effect the Louis XIV of 
Saskatchewan. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1554 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the methods of operation . . . and this rule 
change is a perfect example of that in which he himself takes it 
upon himself and the ministers of his government to break with 
the procedures and precedents of this parliament. The Premier 
has instituted an action much in the same manner that the 
despots of the 1300s and the 1400s in medieval England have 
done; that is, they have taken upon themselves to order that 
parliament shall do a thing without the consent of parliament, 
without the consent of parliament as defined by the procedures 
and precedents of this parliament itself. 
 
So in the first criteria, while those members opposite say, no, 
you can’t compare the Premier of this province to a despot, 
quite constitutionally, Mr. Speaker, you actually can. Because 
not being responsible to the parliament, the Premier of this 
province is responsible to the king, and we find ourselves in 
that constitutional spot, quite frankly, right now. 
 
Now the machinery of the state . . . excuse me, the officers of 
the state, judiciary, and treasurer and sheriff were his personal 
servants — were his personal servants. Do we find in this time 
in history here in Saskatchewan that the officers of the state, 
judiciary and treasurer and sheriff are the personal servants of 
the Executive Council? And, Mr. Speaker, we in this parliament 
are within the tradition of ministerial responsibility for the 
activities of the civil servants; that is, of the officers of the state, 
of the judiciary, of the treasury, and of the sheriff. Now we 
don’t have the sheriff with the star or the Sheriff of Nottingham 
running around, but we do have law enforcement officers which 
ultimately are responsible, not to this parliament, Mr. Speaker, 
they are not to this parliament, but ultimately responsible to the 
Premier of the province. 
 
And how does that occur, Mr. Speaker? Well very simply, the 
Premier of the province has the power to appoint ministers. 
Those ministers are not elected by this parliament. Those 
ministers are not even given their consent by this parliament. 
Those ministers are appointed by a single person, in this case 
the Premier of the province. And, Mr. Speaker, those ministers 
are responsible for the activities of the civil servants; in other 
words, the machinery of the state. 
 
Once again, we find some striking parallels between the 
situation we find ourselves legally and constitutionally here in 
Saskatchewan and the situation that people like Edward II 
found themselves in back in the bad old days of the 13th and 
14th century England. 
 
Now the force which operated it, and I say, Mr. Speaker, the 
force which operated it, which is the machinery of the state, was 
his will. And we have seen, Mr. Speaker, very recently, a whole 
operation, a political propagandistic operation carried out by 
Mr. Oscar Hanson and other officers of the state responsible to 
a minister of the Crown. We’ve seen an operation where they 
went, spent taxpayers’ money, travelled around the province 
holding these so-called public information meetings, which 
were nothing more than attempts to sell a sorry mess of pottage 
to the people of this province; that is, the sale of SaskPower. 
We’ve seen the officers of the state, and the use of the 
machinery of the state, to carry out the will of whom? Why? 
Constitutionally, to carry out the will of the 

Premier of the province. So here we have the machinery of the 
state — above the merely local, was his machinery — the force 
which operated it, was his will. 
 
And in the case of the sell-off of SaskPower here in 
Saskatchewan, and in the case of the government’s attempt to 
ram a rule change which nobody in this province wants, nobody 
except a small, small group of Tory hacks — I may say that — 
what we see is the imposition of the will of the Premier to try 
to, first of all, privatize SaskPower and then, when that wasn’t 
successful, attempt to put forward a rule change which would 
lead to that privatization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask you on the face of it, what is different 
between the activities of the Premier in the instance of trying to 
privatize SaskPower, than the activities of a Richard II, or an 
Edward II, or a Henry I in regards to using their will to make 
the machinery of the state operative? And I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest none — none whatsoever. 
 
We had the Premier of the province . . . made a decision to go 
ahead to try to privatize SaskPower, put in motion machinery to 
try to get that thing through illegally as it turned out; illegally, 
because it didn’t even follow the laws of the province regarding 
the putting forward a prospectus to sell off the assets that 
belong to the people of the province. But be that as it may, we 
have the Premier going ahead, putting into force the machinery 
of the state by his will alone. 
 
(1500) 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier of the province 
attempted to sell off SaskPower, just as he is now attempting to 
put this rule change through the House, did he have the consent 
of the people of the province to do it? Was it through consent? 
Was it through a political mandate? I guess the answer to that is 
no. What is was, is through his absolute will, an absolute 
dictum laid down by the Premier of the province that he was 
going to go ahead and ram through the sale of SaskPower, just 
as he’s trying to ram through these rule changes despite, and in 
spite of, the wishes of the people of this province. 
 
So I would say on two counts — first of all, the relationship of 
the Premier to the parliament is the same type of relationship 
that the king has to parliament in England, that they are not 
personally accountable and also in terms of the appointment and 
the operation of the machinery of state, and, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t have to look any farther than today’s question period to 
see, in fact, how the operations of the machinery of state can get 
all mixed up in terms of the Gigagate scandal that we see 
unfolding before us. 
 
But be that as it may, what we see is that the machinery of the 
state is used to impose the will of the Premier on the people of 
this province and not to utilize the machinery of state to carry 
out the will of the people of Saskatchewan. And I suggest, sir, 
to you that it is not a long bow to say that that is a form of 
absolutism, and it is a form of absolutism that is contrary to the 
British parliamentary tradition. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Adams goes on to say: “If the king 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1555 

 

was strong and ruled firmly, the state was in good order.” Well 
what do we find ourselves in, in the situation we find ourselves 
today, Mr. Speaker? Is the king strong? That is, is the Premier 
strong? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And is he ruling firmly? Is the state in good 
order? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — No, Mr. Speaker. I very often do not disagree 
. . . Let’s put it this way — I seldom disagree with my friend 
and colleague from Regina Centre. But when he says that the 
king is strong, i.e., the Premier is strong, I’m going to have to 
disagree with him on that score. It’s obvious that, given the 
activities of this government — given the activities of this 
government — the king is not strong. 
 
I don’t have to say that. Every journalist and every political 
commentator in this country knows that since this government 
embarked on its course to try to ram through the sale of 
SaskPower, that this government has come apart, blown apart at 
the seams because it has run up against the fundamental 
democratic will of the people of this province. 
 
The king is not strong, Mr. Speaker, and I could list a whole 
host of reasons why I would say that. This rule change, I may 
say, is a perfect example of that. You know, when despots can’t 
get the consent of the governed, they then must use coercion. 
And after all, Mr. Speaker, just as the government tried to ram 
through the privatization of SaskPower, we find a coercive 
activity of this king — of the Premier of the province, if you 
like. He is not strong and hence the government is falling apart. 
He is not ruling firmly and hence we’ve seen the kind of 
Gigagate scandals that are springing up all around. The state is 
not in good order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on the criteria laid out by Professor Adams in regards to 
those . . . that particular criteria, do we find a parallel, do we 
find a parallel between the operations of the Premier and the 
operations of England in the 1300s? All I can say is, yes. Based 
on what we see before us, no other conclusion can be reached 
because the other side, the other side of the equation — if the 
king is not strong — Professor Adams says, “If he was weak 
and vacillating it fell to pieces.” It fell to pieces. “It” referring 
of course, to the state and the machinery of state. 
 
Has, Mr. Speaker, has the machinery of state in Saskatchewan 
fallen to pieces? Well when it comes to the use of the 
machinery of state to try to sell, try to sell to the people of the 
province the notion that selling off SaskPower is good for them, 
even at that level, what we see is that the machinery of state is 
falling to pieces. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to your attention and to the 
attention of the House, an event which occurred at 
Empringhams the other night, in which this government, having 
sent forward the machinery of state, i.e., Mr. Hanson and his 
minions to try to sell the government line, there were two or 
three civil servants — and I’m told this 

by constituents of mine — that there were two or three civil 
servants at the front of a room in which there were 40 or 50 
people who evidently were all opposed to the privatization of 
SaskPower. 
 
And one of the first questions that was asked by one of the 
people at that meeting, Mr. Speaker, was this: is this meeting 
being taped? Is this meeting being taped? Now the person who 
was speaking, acting as spokesperson for the machinery of 
state, tried to brush off the question. Oh, I don’t know; we don’t 
know; maybe it is; what do you think? What do you think? 
 
This was directed back to the person who was running the 
sound recording equipment. Clear, clear attempt to deceive the 
people there, because one of the people at this meeting walked 
around to where the recording equipment was held, looked 
down at the recording machine and saw a tape operating in the 
sound equipment — this with the obvious knowledge of the 
people who were running the meeting. This with the obvious 
knowledge of those officials from SaskEnergy — pardon me, 
SaskPower, natural gas division — who were engaged in an 
operation of deliberately trying to deceive the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that that is the state machinery 
falling apart, falling apart because the political will of the 
Premier, the absolutist ruler of this province, is trying to, 
against the will of the people of the province, do something 
which is contrary to the will and the popular opinion. 
 
And so what happens? We have a weak and vacillating ruler 
who, using the state machinery, is embarked on the course 
against the will of the people. It’s falling to pieces. I use that as 
one example because civil servants in Saskatchewan, people 
who used to be employed and some of who still are employed 
by SaskPower and the other Crown corporations, had a 
reputation for honesty and integrity despite their political 
affiliations. And now we have sunk to the level in this province 
of civil servants being forced to lie to the people of this 
province to carry out the will of a weak and vacillating leader 
— weak and vacillating leader, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Professor Adams, in dealing with the 
constitutionality of where we find ourselves in parliament, talks 
about more specifically the area of the state was his lordship 
and domain. Like the manor of a baron, its revenues were his 
private income. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Speaker, with what we have seen in the 
past little while; with what we have seen with the attempt of 
this government to muzzle the opposition; with what we have 
seen with this government’s attempt to force a rule change 
which would deny the right of this opposition to act in a manner 
more consistent with the democratic will of the people of this 
province; with what we have seen particularly by the activities 
of the Minister of Justice, who has gone out of his way to do a 
political hatchet job on the auditor of this province — an office 
I may say established back in 1337, I believe . . . pardon me, 
1377 when the first auditor was appointed. In fact, at that point 
in time there were two, and we’ll get to that a little later. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1556 

 

But with this government’s attempt to ram its rule changes 
down the House of this legislature, we have to ask ourselves: 
what for? Because it’s obvious, given the Gigagate scandal that 
we’re dealing with, that this government is intending to use 
taxpayers’ money in the manner that Professor Adams outlines: 
like the manner of a baron, its revenues were his private 
income. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is that drawing the long bow when 
this government can turn around and spend $8,000 on a 
Mercedes Benz, or $18,000 for a millionaire business man to 
travel around the country, or $137,000 for a condominium? . . . 
and the list goes on and on and on and on and on. It’s obvious 
that this government, i.e. this Premier, is treating the revenues, 
which accrue to this parliament like revenues from his own 
private income. 
 
So I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, when I say that this Premier is 
acting like a despot, or like an absolutist king of England in the 
1300s, when it comes to the treatment of public funds, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, just on a point of order, on 
the point of order of relevance, I believe, Mr. Speaker, the 
member is off the topic. I believe, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite has a lot of reference material there dating back to 
Oliver Cromwell and before, maybe back to the caveman, and 
Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan don’t believe that all 
of that is relevant to whether or not the NDP wishes to continue 
to have the obstructionist method of ringing bells for an 
indefinite period of time available to them. I make the point of 
order on relevance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to speak to the point of relevance. 
 
I would suggest to Mr. Speaker that this is relevant. What we 
are talking about are the rights of this legislature, the manner in 
which this legislature functions, and the manner in which it has 
functioned. And the history of this institution and the manner in 
which it developed is directly relevant to how this institution 
functions and how it’s developed. And that is directly the point 
with respect to the bell-ringing. 
 
It is our argument that the bell-ringing is a legitimate part and a 
legitimate outgrowth of the development of the rights of a 
legislature. And that’s what the member’s on, and I suggest that 
he’s directly relevant. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I have listened to the member’s point of order 
and considered the member’s response, and I have in fact been 
listening to the member’s comments yesterday and today. And 
of course relevancy is sometimes difficult to define, as all 
members will appreciate. However, I would just like to say that 
we are discussing a rule change, and while it may have a 
historical perspective, I do believe that the member 

should tie this historical perspective directly to the rule change 
and on a rather more direct and frequent basis than perhaps he 
has been. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
appreciate your ruling. I will make on every attempt I can to 
directly relate this rule change to the kind of unprecedented 
activities of the government, unprecedented in the history of 
this province, and as I will prove beyond any doubt whatsoever 
that the activities of this government are without precedent in 
regards to this rule change. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, the point 
I am making to develop before I reached that particular point in 
time, the argument I’m making is this: is that the activities of 
the opposition which led to the rule change — that is the 
bell-ringing for the 17 days — was firmly within the tradition of 
this House, and the manner in which the government is 
opposite, is totally outside the history of this legislature in this 
province. It is totally without precedent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not once, not once in the history of the legislature 
of Saskatchewan has there been a unilateral rule change — not 
once. We find now this despotic and absolutist type of 
government, led by a weak and vacillating king-like figure, the 
king who would be man, attempting to ram down the throats of 
this legislature an unprecedented activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Regina Centre is absolutely 
right. I intend to put this within the historical context because 
the activities of the opposition stand firmly in a line of 
opposition to tyranny stretching back to 1215 and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in direct regards to this government’s attempt to 
drive this rule change down the throats of this parliament, the 
whole question of notion and justice arises. The whole question 
of justice arises. 
 
Let us look, Mr. Speaker, at the concept of justice as carried out 
by the absolutists. And if there’s any doubt on that there was an 
absolute rule back then, let me provide another little quote from 
Professor Adams: 
 

On what material and constitutional advantages the royal 
Absolutism was based will be pointed out hereafter, but it 
must be emphasized at once that it was Absolutism. 
 

In this context, Mr. Speaker, I intend to point out that not only 
was it Absolutism, that this rule change, this rule change in 
order so that SaskPower can be privatized after they get it 
through, is nothing more than a modern form of Absolutism, 
well-known to Conservative right-wing, hard-line ideologue 
governments from time stretching well back, not to the days of 
the caveman, Mr. Deputy House Leader, not to the days of the 
caveman, but to your political antecedents, to your political 
ancestors. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1557 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we said, justice — is this rule change 
justice in the sense that we have come to know it? Well let’s 
look at the justice, the concept of justice, as embodied in the 
absolute monarch. 
 

Justice was his (says Professor Adams). 
 
And once again I’m quoting from Adams’ Constitutional 
History of England. And I would defy any member opposite to 
stand up and oppose themselves to the interpretation of 
constitutional history, put forward an interpretation which 
differed any way significantly than that from Professor Adams. 
And at some future point in this debate, I want to hear 
somebody from the other side go up and argue and try to say 
that what Professor Adams is interpreting is wrong. 
 

Justice (Mr. Speaker, in regards to this rule change) was 
his. And he assumed for himself . . . 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, once again we get the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who likes to blabber away from his seat. 
He asked the question, he asked me, what university did he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I believe I heard 
the hon. member from Regina Rosemont indicate in reference 
to the member opposite that he likes to “blabber away.” I don’t 
think we wish to use those kinds of provocative words in this 
House, and I would just like to remind the member that that will 
only elicit a further provocative response. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I will say he’s 
making noise and speaking nonsense from his seat, and I will 
do that. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, he asked me the question as to the 
authority from which I am quoting and which I am using as an 
authority. It’s Professor George Adams, George Burton Adams, 
late Professor of History emeritus, Yale University, former head 
of the department of history in that distinguished university; and 
the revised edition by Robert L. Schuyler, professor of history 
at Columbia University. And for that member opposite, he is 
now the head of the history department at Columbia University 
and an expert in constitutional law, not only in Britain but also 
in the United States. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, justice in regards to this rule change and 
how the Premier sees himself . . . let’s go back to what 
Professor Adams was saying. The notion of the absolute ruler in 
unilaterally imposing things on parliament was this: 
 

Justice was his, and he assumed for himself the right to 
enforce it upon all. An offence against the law was an 
offence against him personally. Justices and courts were 
his instruments. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the legal and constitutional 
position that the Premier of the province finds himself in, what 
is the difference? I ask every member opposite, particularly the 
Minister for Justice, the minister, in this case, injustice: what is 
the difference of that notion of justice and the notion of justice 
that this 

government has carried out, both in regards to this rule change, 
but into other activities, whether it’s attacks on officers of this 
legislature and, in particular, the newest attack on the auditor, 
where the Minister of Justice, pretending he’s in the Court of 
Star Chamber, puts forward charges which are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I believe I mentioned relatively 
recently that members should not bring up in debate issues that 
have been dealt with by the House, and we have dealt with that 
issue just relatively recently, within a matter of days, as a matter 
of fact, I remind the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I realize that ruling. 
The comments in that sense were off the topic. But basically, in 
regards to the rule change, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, what is 
the notion that this government has in regards to this 
parliament. Is it an absolutist notion? Does it say to itself: we 
take upon ourselves to know what is right and what is wrong in 
this parliament, and the opposition be darned? Or to quote from 
history: the opposition be damned? Is, Mr. Speaker, that the 
temper of the government opposite? Is that their notion of 
justice that they are going to be the guardians of what is correct 
and proper in this parliamentary forum? 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is, that their notion of 
justice isn’t a two-sided notion, that when it comes to this rule 
change, just as it came to the sell-off of SaskPower — the 
attempted sell-off of SaskPower — that their notion of justice 
is: might is right. Their notion of justice is: might is right. They 
say to this parliament, Mr. Speaker, we have the majority and 
we’re going to ram this rule change down the throats of the 
opposition and down the throats of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan the same way that we’re going to ram the sale of 
SaskPower down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan 
despite their will. And that, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, is a 
concept of justice which is foreign to this parliament, is foreign 
to the notions of democracy, but is not foreign to the concepts 
of Absolutism. 
 
And as I’ve been saying from the very start, the line of 
questioning, the line of reason I shall follow is this. This 
government is a government which sees itself above the law 
and above the people and above this parliament. It sees itself in 
the same way that the monarchy of the 1300s and the 1400s saw 
itself. And that is why it is trying to ram this rule change down 
without the consent of the opposition. That’s the line of 
argument. 
 
And the historical references I’m referring to prove that. That’s 
why I am, yes, taking some time, and I shall take some time, 
because I feel quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, that this a precedent 
which this legislature . . . that this precedent is something that 
this legislature does not want to have on the record books, that 
is to say, does not want to be recorded in Hansard. 
 
Now as I was talking, Mr. Speaker, the concept of justice in 
regards to what an absolutist monarch thinks, I would suggest to 
you, sir, with all due respect, is the concept that the leader of 
the government, the Premier of this province has, that his 
justice is a one-sided justice based on what his notions of right 
and wrong are in regards to the 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1558 

 

operation of this parliament. 
 
Professor Adams goes on to say: 
 

Even the Great Council, the national assembly, existed to 
do his business, not the nation’s. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about the national 
assembly here, but we’re talking about the provincial 
parliament here. That is the council which has been set up 
supposedly to represent all the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now Professor Adams argues, Mr. Speaker, that the mind of an 
absolutist ruler says that parliament or the national council or 
the Great Council exists to do his business, not the nation’s. 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Speaker, have the events of the past several 
months not shown that the definition in regards to how the 
absolutist ruler or those who would be absolutist see the 
functions of this Assembly, or are the notions of the 
government not absolutist but are democratic. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the activities of this 
government and the mind-set of the Premier of the province as 
exhibited by this rule change and by its attempt to privatize 
SaskPower shows the kind of great deal of what can be nothing 
else but contempt — can be interpreted as nothing else but 
contempt for the institution. 
 
Even the Great Council existed to do his business, not the 
nation’s. Here we are, Mr. Speaker, in a province in which 
thousands of farm families are losing their farm. Here we are in 
which there are 50 or 60,000 people on welfare — tens and tens 
and tens of thousands of our citizens without the adequate 
means to fend for themselves. We have tens of thousands of 
people who do not have a job. We have literally hundreds of 
thousands of people who are feeling financial distress of one 
sort or another, urban and rural. 
 
(1530) 
 
We have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of thousands of 
people in this province who want the government to get on to 
the nation’s business. And what do we have? What do we have, 
Mr. Speaker? We have an absolutist government intent on 
ramming through a rule change, intent on ramming through a 
rule change, spending hour after hour after hour of the 
Legislative Assembly’s time, spending hour after hour by 
putting it on the order paper. Because, Mr. Speaker, day after 
day we tell this government that they are not going to put 
through a rule change which will allow for the privatization of 
SaskPower. And as long as they keep coming at us with that 
kind of stupidity, they are going to get this kind of speech in 
return. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it is, as you know and I know and as the 
people of Saskatchewan are learning, the government 
determines the order of business. The government determines 
the order of business, Mr. Speaker, not the opposition. 

So each and every day when all members of the Legislative 
Assembly come in to pick up the Votes and Proceedings book, 
goes forth — and today being the Thursday, June 1, we have a 
series of things in the agenda: presenting petitions; reading and 
receiving petitions; presenting reports by standing, select and 
special committees; notices of motions and questions; 
introduction of guests; oral questions; ministerial statements; 
introduction of Bills; orders of the day. 
 
Each and every day that this Assembly sits, it is the government 
which determines the business of this House. Today, as it did 
yesterday, as it did the day before, and as it did the day before 
that, and as it did the day before that, this government 
determined that the business of the nation was not dealing with 
the question of farm debt; not dealing with the question of farm 
foreclosures; not dealing with the question of the developing 
crisis in education as we see in Regina in the Regina separate 
school board; not dealing with the question of unemployment; 
not dealing with the question of welfare and of poverty; not 
dealing with the question of child care; not dealing with the 
question of the hundreds and hundreds of people who are 
leaving this province weekly, going to search some place else 
where they get away from the kind of absolutist mentality 
which leads a government not to deal with the nation’s 
business, but the business of a weak and vacillating despot, the 
king who would be man, the Premier of this province. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, fits absolutely, 100 per cent to the T, 
Professor Adams’ description of what constitutes an absolutist 
— of someone who thinks they’re an absolute ruler; of someone 
who thinks that they’re above this institution; of someone who 
thinks that they’re above the will of the people for whom he 
should be ultimately responsible. What did Professor Adams 
say? 
 

Even the Great Council, (and in Saskatchewan, that is the 
legislature of Saskatchewan) the national assembly existed 
to do his business, not the nation’s. 
 

The fact that we are here in this time of crisis in this country, at 
this time, debating this issue, as opposed to dealing with the 
business of the people, shows to what extent that the man who 
would be king and the king who would be man that occupies 
the Premier’s chair has totally lost touch with any kind of 
reality. 
 
You know, it’s not a question of him ignoring the polls, because 
this government is famous for its polling and its polling 
tracking, and it’s spending hundreds of thousands of dollars 
every year of taxpayers’ money to find out what the taxpayers 
of the province think. 
 
You know, that’s not the question. He knows, he knows what 
the taxpayers of the province think. He knows that 
unemployment is a major issue in the minds of the people of 
this province. He knows that out-migration is a major issue. He 
knows that the agricultural crisis is a major issue. He knows 
that health care is a major issue. He knows that privatization 
and the need to stop privatization, particularly of SaskPower, is 
a major issue of the people of this province. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1559 

 

They know all that. The government, the Premier knows all 
that. He knows that that is the nation’s business. He knows that 
that is the business of Saskatchewan. He knows that that’s what 
the people want this government to do. 
 
But what does he do? Does he deal with those issues? No, like 
the despots of old, he makes this legislature, the Great Council, 
exist to do his business, his business and not the nation’s. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, I say, Mr. Speaker, that that analogy is not a 
long bow to draw in this province in this day; that the analogy 
that we have set up, that the Premier is acting like an absolutist 
and a despot, fits the definition of an absolutist and a despot to a 
T. You don’t have to ask me; ask Professor Adams and the 
other constitutional experts who have defined what constitutes 
Absolutism, particularly when it comes to the British 
parliamentary tradition. The Premier is acting like a despot; the 
people of the province know it. 
 
I would rather, Mr. Speaker, I would rather, I tell you, be on my 
feet addressing questions of farm debt, addressing questions of 
health care, addressing questions of child care than debating 
this issue. But I want to say, I will be on my feet as long as I 
possibly can, saying the things that I am, to say that what we in 
the opposition are doing is right, and what the government is 
doing is wrong. I will be on my feet for a fair, fair length of 
time. And so will, Mr. Speaker, the other members of the 
opposition, because we stand opposed to the kind of absolutist 
mentality which says that the nation’s business is not the 
business of the people of this province, but that the nation’s 
business is the business of a weak and vacillating king who 
would be man. 
 
I say that to you, Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, because that is 
what is at stake here. We’re perfectly within our rights, 
politically, constitutionally, historically, to oppose this type of 
ramming motion, a motion which is without precedent in the 
history of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, during the days of Absolutism of the 
type of King John, as opposed to the type of the king from 
Estevan, Professor Adams noted that what the leaders of the 
opposition seemed really to have been doing was to try and find 
some basis in the past on which the arbitrary action of the king 
could be legally limited. 
 
Now he was referring, of course, to the barons at Runnymede 
and also the baronial attempt to impose upon the king the 
confirmation of charters of 1297, I believe it was. 
 
We, Mr. Speaker, here today in the opposition, we here today in 
the opposition are doing the same thing — finding in the history 
of our . . . parliamentary evolution of our parliamentary system, 
precisely the same thing. We are bringing to the attention of this 
House those things from the past which would legally limit the 
power of this absolutist to impose things upon this House which 
we in this House don’t want, and which the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t want. 
 
And in doing so . . . and the barons of King John’s time, as they 
looked back, and they looked back to a document called “laga 
Edwardae,” and laga Edwardae was a 

document produced during the days of Edward the Confessor 
which established certain fundamental rights, or presumed to 
have established certain fundamental rights — fundamental 
rights which exist to this day in this legislature. As those barons 
looked back into the past, they looked back at what the 
historical significance was of that particular document. And so 
we too are doing it — going back to the days of Magna Carta, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to, if I may, quote from pages 129 and 130 of the 
work to which I had earlier referred, and that is the Magna 
Carta, and a chapter called “The Historical Importance of the 
Great Charter.” And I will read three paragraphs, if I may, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The historical importance of the Great Charter is to be 
found, not in the specific provisions which it embodied, 
but in the principle upon which it was based. In 1215 this 
meant no more than an application of the fundamental 
contract relationship between lord and vassal to the special 
problem of the time . . . 
 

Much the same way, Mr. Speaker, much the same way that the 
debate taking place today, on the surface of it, would appear to 
have no other special relationship than the attempt to stop the 
Bill which would lead to the privatization of SaskPower, but I 
would submit, Mr. Speaker, has a much deeper and longer-term 
effect in regards to the future operations of this legislature, 
particularly after the government opposite has fallen and a new 
government committed to an open and democratic legislature 
takes place. 
 

In 1215 this meant no more than an application of the 
fundamental contract relationship between lord and vassal 
to the special problem of the time — how to make sure 
that the king would be faithful in the future to his side of 
the contract. 
 

That’s the nature of what we’re talking about here, is how we 
have accountability in this legislature. 
 

Fortunately, this fundamental principle was not stated in 
explicit form in the charter; it was taken for granted and 
left to be inferred, though plainly implied. It was 
consequently left in shape to be easily expanded into a 
general principle applicable to all the changing phases of 
national development. 
 
There is a body of law in the state of rights belonging to 
the subject or to the community which the king is bound to 
regard. 
 

Which the king is bound to regard in the community. There 
once, in this province, was a community in which things were 
done through co-operation. There once was, in this legislature, 
rule changes, for example, such as the one we’re debating today 
which would lead to the privatization of SaskPower. There once 
was the ability to operate in a manner of co-operation in 
defining those rules. 
 

However, with this there went another principle, drawn 
directly from the feudal law and put into 

  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1560 

 

specific form in chapter 61 of the charter (that is, the 
Magna Carta), though with reference only to special case 
of 1215; that is, if the king will not regard these rights, he 
may be compelled by force, by insurrection to do so. It is 
upon these principles . . . 
 

Mr. Wolfe: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The member is 
continuing to read. I believe that the Speaker ruled the other day 
that they should be short quotations and not continuing reading 
from a book. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would submit that the 
member’s quotations have been relatively short, no more than a 
paragraph or two, and then they’re related — and they are 
related. He has pointed out that bell-ringing and the behaviour 
of the government in changing the rules unilaterally is out of 
keeping with the traditions of parliament. He is talking about 
traditions of parliament and the way it’s developed. I’d suggest 
it’s directly relevant, and it is not a violation of the reading rule. 
He’s only read a paragraph or two and then related it. I submit, 
if you check the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ll find that 
he’s well within the rules. 
 
(1545) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — As the member from . . . the point of 
order has been well taken and the response by . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — My comments were well taken. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Rosemont has 
been asked before to keep his comments short when he’s 
reading from the text. It’s been ruled on once, and we just ask 
the member from Rosemont to keep his comments short. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, I will keep my quotations short. 
My comments will be of somewhat more length and lengthier 
nature. I will then read, Mr. Speaker, to proceed on to the next 
point, just two sentences — just two sentences. 
 

With this there went another principle drawn directly from 
the feudal law and put into specific form in chapter 61 of 
the charter, though with reference only to the special case 
of 1215 that . . . 
 

And this is the important part, Mr. Speaker. What I am about to 
read is the gist of our debate in opposition to the comments of 
the members that what we did by ringing the bells to stop the 
privatization of SaskPower was somehow anti-democratic. 
Because that’s the accusation they have made. They have stood 
in this legislature and said, by us going out for 17 days and 
ringing the bells this was somehow anti-democratic. 
 
Well let’s see what the professors of constitutional law, dealing 
with Magna Carta, the fundamental document which prescribes 
the rights of parliament at least as a nucleus, let’s see what it 
says about the right to rebel. It says, Mr. Speaker, that: 

If the king will not regard these rights, he may be 
compelled by force, by insurrection against him to do so. 
It is upon these two principles, henceforth inseparable, 
though standing necessarily in quite different relations to 
the formal, avowed constitution, that the building of the 
constitution rested. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the building of the constitution referred to is the 
constitution under which this parliament operates and the 
constitution which determines the rules. Here we have a 
professor of constitutional law, a noted authority on British 
constitutional law, former head of the history department at 
Yale University, and says this: that the fundamental document 
which determines the notions of English democracy and 
freedom rest on two fundamental principles. 
 
One is that there shall be codification of law, and in this case 
the codification consists in the rules of the legislature. But 
secondly, that if the king, in other words, that weak and 
vacillating leader who calls himself the Premier of this 
province, that if he does not do what the people of his kingdom, 
i.e., in this case, Saskatchewan — if he does not do what the 
people of Saskatchewan want him to do, of his kingdom want 
him to do, if he does not do or if he does those things which 
they do not want him to do, they can go as far as insurrection. 
 
That’s what this professor, this noted professor of English 
constitutional law says, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously our ringing the bells to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower was not by any means at all — only in the wildest 
fantasies of the most paranoid right-winger sitting on the other 
side — an insurrection. 
 
But this, Mr. Speaker, this interpretation of Magna Carta which 
is supported, I suggest, by many other interpretations of Magna 
Carta, by many other scholars who have looked at this 
document —and when we proceed century by century up until 
the present day you will see how the pieces begin to fit together, 
that our bell-ringing to stop the privatization of SaskPower was 
certainly not outside the very prescriptions under which British 
parliamentary democracy was formed. Because the very 
prescriptions under which British parliamentary democracy 
forms, allows for insurrection, allows for insurrection. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been time after time after time in the 
development of British history in which Magna Carta was used 
for precisely that purpose — for precisely that purpose. 
 
So it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, on the face of it, and looking 
from the viewpoint of history, a 17-day bell-ringing to stop the 
privatization of SaskPower, doesn’t quite measure up to what 
constitutional authorities say Magna Carta and the British 
parliamentary system, or the principles upon which the British 
parliamentary system, and the parliamentary system and the 
democratic system of other democratic countries including the 
United States, allow. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, when I get to the point in which the 
opposition allowed for by law in the United States constitution 
in which it explicitly gives the citizen not only the right but the 
duty to rise up against a government 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1561 

 

that they find tyrannical, you will see that the 17-day 
bell-ringing incident pales, I would suggest, in comparison to 
other activities which are constitutional in their very essence. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as the debate proceeds, I’m sure that the 
other members opposite will want to try to in some way refute 
that particular argument, and I would welcome, Mr. Speaker, 
their attempt to do so. 
 
But we have heard, for example, from the member from Regina 
South say in this House that somehow, try to imply and say 
directly that what we did was anti-democratic. That what he 
said, and he repeats it from his seat that the bell-ringing was 
anti-democratic. 
 
Well how, Mr. Speaker, is it anti-democratic? How is it 
anti-democratic? How was it anti-democratic? Was Henry 
Bolingbroke anti-democratic when he overthrew Edward II? 
Was he anti-democratic when he established the 60 years of the 
supremacy of parliament? Not only did he hijack parliament, 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will return to this theme and the statements of 
the member of Regina South in a minute. I understand the 
Minister of Parks, Recreation and Culture would like to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — I thank the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would ask leave to introduce some guests at this time. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I thank the hon. member for his courtesy in allowing me to 
interrupt his speech. And of course you’ll be welcome to 
continue just as soon as we’ve finished with the introductions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and through 
you to the members of the Assembly, a group of 22 grade 8 
students from Turtleford School in Turtleford, and they’re 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re accompanied by 
Henry Czarnota, who is the principal of the school, and 
chaperons Ken Chambers, Marilyn Roney and Tom Richardson. 
 
We welcome you to the Chamber. We hope you’re having an 
enjoyable visit in Regina, and a very safe trip home. 
 
I’ll be pleased to meet with you later this afternoon. I believe 
we’re scheduled for 4:30 — possibly it will be a wee bit quicker 
than that now because you’re in early — for photographs, 
refreshments and some discussion. 
 
I trust the weather hasn’t dampened your spirits any since you 
arrived and you’re enjoying yourself thoroughly. Have a nice 
trip and a good trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTIONS 
 
Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to welcome the students to this Assembly. I hope you find 
the debate instructive and informative. And it’s going to sound 
like a history lesson in school, but sometimes those things 
happen. We have a little bit of history being played out before 
your eyes over this next couple of months, and I hope your stay 
here will help you understand about that. 
 
What we’re debating today, Mr. Speaker — and to familiarize 
the students with just a minute with what we’re talking about — 
is the attempt by the government to introduce a rule change into 
the legislature, a rule change which would stop the bells from 
ringing. It’s a change that the government wants to put forward 
unilaterally without any kind of dissent . . . or discussion with 
the opposition. 
 
We on the other hand take the position that the bell-ringing — 
and you all know about the bell-ringing that occurred for 17 
days was done in order to stop the privatization of SaskPower 
— that we on the other hand take the position on this side of the 
House that there is a long tradition in the House that rules are 
changed by consensus, that they’re done by co-operation with 
each other, that they’re not unilaterally imposed on this 
parliament. 
 
It’s one of the things that’s been the tradition of the legislature 
in Saskatchewan, is that any time there has been a rule change, 
that those rule changes are done through co-operation and are 
agreed upon mutually and are not unilaterally imposed one 
upon the other. So what we’re basically dealing with is the 
question of parliamentary tradition and the tradition of the 
rights and duties of an opposition in regards to the government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the hon. members opposite, 
particularly the member from Regina South and also the 
member from Rosthern, made the allegations that by leaving the 
legislature for 17 days that somehow this was an anti 
_democratic act, right? — that it was anti-democratic, that it 
was outside the bounds of British parliamentary tradition. And I 
just have gone to some great length to convince the members 
opposite that far from being outside the tradition, British 
parliamentary tradition and British common law going back to 
the days of Magna Carta and the battle of Runnymede in 1215, 
and the signing of that, that that particular fundamental 
document of democracy, as we’ve come to know it, allows for 
two things, one of which allows for insurrection. 
 
So that in the context of the history of the development of 
British parliamentary democracy . . . and I see the member from 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster shaking his head at that. I’m looking 
forward to the day that the member stands up and refutes that 
because that’s the implication of what they’re saying, is that 
somehow that our ringing the bells to stop the privatization of 
SaskPower was anti-democratic. I say, Mr. Speaker, that in 
history, that in 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1562 

 

the tradition of British parliamentary democracy, that that is not 
so. 
 
I want to . . . not only, Mr. Speaker, the quotation I’d earlier 
read, but there’s another. Many other authorities have dealt with 
this question because this basically is a fundamental question of 
what constitutes democratic rights, and that’s what we’re 
dealing with here. We’re not dealing with some abstract idea, 
some abstract notions of democracy who the members opposite 
think exist, devoid of content, abstracted from the realities of 
the everyday world, who somehow, like angels at a party or a 
ceilidh, are out dancing around above and beyond us. 
Democracy is a practical form of governance which exists in the 
real world and which exists between opposing forces, as it 
always has. It exists as it always has. And it has allowed for, 
when there are acts of despotism, it has allowed for what those 
in power seem to be extreme acts. 
 
Well I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that not only does Magna 
Carta provide the basis for doing things which those in power 
may not like, there are many other laws which have helped 
shape our current, common day practice doing the same thing. 
 
For example, the feudal law of western Europe, and that was the 
law that existed on the continent of Europe and France, of 
Aragon, for example, and Aquitaine, and all of those small 
principalities and baronies, they had a law in place which 
recognized the right of the vassal, i.e., of the person that worked 
the land and lived in the little towns, the little hamlets and 
villages of medieval Europe, to renounce his allegiance to the 
lord, i.e., to the baron or the duke, the king or the queen, it was 
codified in law that upon written notice to the feudal lord, that 
upon receiving written notice, that vassal then had the right to 
make war on his lord, as it says here, to protect himself. 
 
(1600) 
 
That wasn’t, Mr. Speaker, to protect himself from injustice. 
We’re not talking here about bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
not talking about bell-ringing and bringing attention, we’re 
talking about the right, and that’s codified again in the 
constitutional law of this country and of the United States and 
other countries, to protect themselves from injustice. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, as part of the basis of British common law, 
there is contained within it a streak which says it is right to 
rebel against injustice and against tyranny and against 
absolutism. 
 
So when we find ourselves, in Saskatchewan, finding the 
government trying to ram a motion like the . . . ram an action 
like the privatization of SaskPower, our walking out for 17 days 
and ringing the bells and allowing the people of this province 
the right to be heard — it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that pales 
in significant or what to be determined democratic acts up to 
and including the right to wage war on the sovereign. Because 
that, Mr. Speaker, that is part of the constitutional history of this 
country and of the British Commonwealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is more interesting, that under that law, in no 
such case could he, that is the vassal, be charged 

with treason. In no such case could that person be charged with 
treason. In other words, it was not an act against the state. To 
wage war on your liege lord, as they called it back then, was not 
treasonable. In other words, it was not outside the constitutional 
requirements of existing in that state, that that person retained 
their rights as a citizen, up to and including waging war. 
I would submit, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of just that law, never 
mind Magna Carta, but that law alone, that our bell-ringing 
certainly fits within the definition of what constitutes 
democratic practice. If British common law gives you the right 
to overthrow your liege lord, it gives you the right to rebel 
against injustice. I say, Mr. Speaker, that if that is democratic, 
then by heck, so was ringing the bells for 17 days. And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, it was. 
 
Has there been a greater democratic exercise in this province in 
many a year than the one we have just gone through? Has there 
been, Mr. Speaker? I would ask the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloyd to, if he doesn’t agree with that, to bring forward a 
case in which there has been. 
 
Now obviously we had a election a little while ago and that was 
an expression of the popular will. And in that expression of the 
popular will, the members of this side of the Assembly received 
more votes than the members of that side of the Assembly. But 
because of gerrymandering and because of little quirks of fate 
here and there, they ended up with more seats — they ended up 
with more seats. And now, Mr. Speaker, now we find ourselves 
in a situation faced with a boundary change which will even 
make it even less democratic than we find today — and even 
less democratic than we find today. Right, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But as I said, 17 days, Mr. Speaker, those bells rang and 
allowed in here the sounds of the bells to ring, but out there in 
Saskatchewan, allowed the popular will to be heard, allowed 
farmers and workers and small-business people and young 
people and old people clear across this province to make their 
voices heard in opposition to the absolutist moves of a weak 
and vacillating Premier, the king who would be man. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is a profoundly democratic 
exercise. That exercise stands well within the tradition of 
Magna Carta; stands well within the tradition of — the name of 
the law is de felica, that allowed for that vassal to wage war on 
his lord, all of which were seen as perfectly constitutionally 
correct, and in fact democratic in their time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that on the face of 
it that that bell-ringing episode that we’ve just gone through is 
democratic; is not anti-democratic as that members would 
allege, but in fact represents the finest kind of historical 
tradition established by the barons at Runnymede and extending 
on until to day, to going out to allowing the people to have their 
grievances expressed in the form that they want those 
grievances expressed; in this case, as we’ve just gone through, 
the expression of opposition to the privatization of SaskPower. 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1563 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those are just two examples of the right to 
rebel, as established constitutionally. But I want to bring it up a 
little closer in time to the members opposite. The member from 
Rosthern talked about the jackboots, talked about jackboots and 
his intervention, right? — the jackboots of law and order to 
which he seems to subscribe. 
 
I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, that member in Rosthern, if you 
were in occupied France in 1939 and 1940 and 1941 up until 
1945, whose side would you be on? Would you have been on 
the side of that supposed constitutional government of Vichy. It 
had, Mr. Speaker, all the trappings of constitutionality, all of the 
trappings of some kind of democracy which imposed its rules 
on the people of France and on the sham parliamentary 
institutions — at that time they weren’t parliamentary 
institutions, they were another type . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I think the hon. member, 
while he can claim it as being an example, I suppose there are a 
myriad of examples that one may claim, but the essential point 
is that we’re discussing this rule of the bells, and I’d like to ask 
him to speak more directly to the rule. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, very much. Thank you 
very much. I say to the members opposite, your attempt to ram 
this rule change through, your attempt is the same type of 
absolutist manoeuvre that the government of Vichy carried out, 
the same type — there is no difference. Without the consent of 
the opposition, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, without the 
consent of the opposition, because the opposition weren’t in 
there polishing the jackboots, they weren’t there polishing 
jackboots, they were out there fighting that kind of tyranny; 
they were fighting that kind of tyranny. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, any move to limit the 
democratic rights of the opposition . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member from Regina Wascana 
wants to act in that way, pacing back and forth and yelling from 
his feet in front of all these students, I guess that’s his business. 
But the point I am making, Mr. Speaker, is this: that in regards 
to this Assembly, the unilateral moves of this government and 
its relationship to other forms of tyranny is one, not of 
substance but of degree. 
 
Where does it stop? Where do you draw the line? In this 
Assembly from day one it has been the history of this province 
that if you’re going to change rules of the legislature that you 
do it in co-operation, you do it through an established form and 
procedure. You do it, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member from Canora, why is the 
member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and pleasure 
to introduce to you and to the members of the legislature, 28 
grade 8 students from the Preeceville School in Preeceville, 
Saskatchewan. They are accompanied by teachers Lorne Plaxin 
and John Mills, and chaperons Pat Kozloski, Marilyn Bzdell, 
Anita Meberg, and bus driver, Dale Goodsman. 
 
Preeceville is a progressive community in my constituency, and 
also these students come from an excellent school environment. 
So it is my pleasure to introduce them to the legislature. They 
are located in your gallery. I would ask the members to join 
with me in making them welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague, the member from Canora, in welcoming the 
group from Preeceville today. As they would gather from my 
accent, I wasn’t born in this country. I arrived here 23 years ago 
from Scotland, and the first school I taught in was the 
Preeceville School. And John Mills, who’s the current principal 
there, also arrived at the very same time I did 23 years. Lorne 
Plaxin was already on staff then and was a former colleague of 
mine. 
 
So I would just like to join with my colleague in welcoming the 
students from Preeceville and hope you’re having an enjoyable 
day. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS 
 
Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly (continued) 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join all the other members in welcoming these students 
here from Preeceville and hope they enjoy their time in the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The debate today is over the question of changing the rules of 
the legislature. We’re having a debate as to the reason for that 
debate. We’re saying that it’s for the purposes of privatizing 
SaskPower; the government tries to say other things. But it will 
give you some idea of the . . . it will give you some ideas of the 
operation of the legislature. And I know very well the students, 
that if you acted that way, yelling from your seats in your 
class-room, your teachers would be throwing you out of your 
seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Point of order. There is no legislation 
before this House on the privatization of SaskPower. For a 
member to deliberately mislead students, that that, I think, is 
improper and he should withdraw his remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1564 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. The Minister of Finance knows 
that the rules of the House do not allow for accusing of another 
member of deliberately misleading, and I ask him to withdraw 
that statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate, I withdraw my 
remarks, I withdraw my remarks, Mr. Speaker. But on a point 
of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — What’s your point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Let me state that I believe there is no 
legislation before this Assembly, as the hon. member has 
referred to, regarding the privatization of SaskPower. There 
never has been, Mr. Speaker; there never will be. And I ask the 
hon. member to not follow the practice of the college where 
they try and mislead young children, where they give 
statements that were highly inaccurate to young students, where 
they gave NDP propaganda to young students, and perhaps 
learn the traditions of this House that you don’t abuse the 
privileges of this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the point of order, the member from 
Rosemont was clearly explaining why the bell issue was before 
the House. He explained it in terms of the Bill on which the 
bells rang. The Bill that the bells rang on was Bill 21, An Act to 
amend The Power Corporation Act — the power corporation 
Act, Bill 21. I say the Minister of Finance is misleading the 
Assembly when he says that it wasn’t on SaskPower. That’s the 
issue that the bells rang on, Mr. Minister. You may have been 
on holidays when it occurred, but the issue that the bells rang 
on, that we are now debating, was Bill 21, An Act to amend 
The Power Corporation (Act.) 
 
That is Sask Power Corporation, Mr. Minister. That’s very 
clear. The students will know more about what the bells rang 
for, that we were protecting Sask Power, than you apparently 
do. But the Bill that’s being referred to is Bill 21, an 
amendment to The Power Corporation Act. 
 
Don’t say SaskEnergy; it was not SaskEnergy that the bells 
rang on, but The Power Corporation Act. You should know 
that, Mr. Minister, and I’m embarrassed for you that you didn’t 
understand what the bells were ringing for. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker, the 
hon. member made specific reference to SaskPower, not the 
privatization of SaskEnergy. The hon. member knows full well 
that the legislation dealt with the privatization of SaskEnergy. 
 
I just call to the hon. member’s attention, Mr. Speaker, the 
practice of the New Democratic Party of trying to browbeat 
students, and we’ve had evidence of that in the past, of going 
into grade 4 class-rooms with NDP campaign material, Mr. 
Speaker. I say that that’s improper; I say his statements are 
improper. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order, which in 
fact after listening to the member’s issue, is not in fact a point 
of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has deteriorated into a debate by both sides 
of the House, which is essentially what it is, and may I just add, 
if I may, that perhaps this sort of thing is bound to happen if we 
draw guests in the Assembly into the debate. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster 
indicates he has a point of order. What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like you to review 
Hansard as you have done with our minister when he was 
addressing himself on his point of order and you made him 
withdraw the remarks of misleading. The member from 
Rosemont was misleading. When the member from Elphinstone 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . excuse me — he’s corrected me 
on that several times and I apologize to him. But when he had 
basically made his remarks, he had deliberately attacked the 
Minister of Finance by indicating that he was misleading. And I 
would ask him that . . . I ask you to rule and ask him to 
withdraw those and apologize to the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order, 
and the objection that I raised with the Minister of Finance was 
that he indicated that the member had deliberately misled. I 
think that the issue is closed and let’s continue with the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much for your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. I think it’s clear to everybody that our argument here 
today, as it was yesterday, and as it was and will be in the future 
as long as this government keeps bringing forward this Bill 
which will unilaterally change the rules of the House, contrary 
to all traditions of the House, contrary to parliamentary 
procedure, something that has never been done before in this 
legislature. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that there is only one reason, there’s only 
one reason for that, and that is so that they can end bell-ringing 
in order to privatize SaskPower. And that’s been our contention 
all the time. The people of this province and the students of this 
province know that the government are out to privatize 
SaskPower. 
 
The weasel words of the member from . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I think that perhaps 
emotions are rising, which sometimes happens, and when that 
happens we begin to use provocative words which elicit further 
provocation. And I’d like to just remind the member that the 
weasel words is certainly not the type of term we want to 
introduce to this House, and I 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1565 

 

ask him to refrain from it. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw the weasel 
words that . . . (inaudible) . . . I know that weasel has a 
connotation that’s not . . . that probably, probably shouldn’t be 
used in the House, so I’ll use rodent words, I guess, used in the 
generic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before we were interrupted with the points of 
order, we were at a point in the proceedings where we had 
developed an argument that . . . saying that there are certain 
things which are fundamental, certain things which are 
fundamental. And in this particular debate, I want to reiterate 
what I happen to believe are some of the fundamental problems 
that we are facing here in this legislature in regards to this 
particular point of our parliamentary history. 
 
First of all, I think that we have proved conclusively, that from 
my point of view have proved conclusively that just from the 
viewpoint of history, that it is quite proper for the opposition — 
and whether it’s a baronial opposition or the coming together of 
a country-gentrified opposition which occurred in the 1300s in 
Britain — that no matter what the make-up of the opposition is, 
is that when there is a perceived attack on the rights of the 
opposition — and the opposition not as a small political party 
but the opposition as spokespeople for the interests of the 
people — that when there is attack upon those rights, the 
opposition certainly has not only the ability, and not only be 
granted the ability, both constitutionally and also morally, but 
that they are forced through their duty to carry out, by whatever 
means is necessary, to bring the concept of redress of 
grievances to the House. 
 
Now in the case of the bell-ringing episode, it was perceived by 
the people of this province that they were going to suffer undue 
duress and that they had a grievance against the government, 
the executive. In the case of this parliament and the way the 
parliamentary system is set up, the absolute ruler who, quite 
frankly, has those absolute powers constitutionally — in this 
case the Premier, who attempted to ram through the 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
Now the people of the province said to the opposition, we are 
opposed to the privatization of SaskPower. We don’t want you 
to sell off the natural gas side of SaskPower. We don’t want you 
to allow Bill 21, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act, 
into this House. We do not want you to let this Bill pass. That 
was the nature of the grievance to which the people . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Just calm 
down. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can appreciate that 
some tempers are flying here. I mean, let’s deal with this in a 
calm and rational manner. Let’s deal with this in a calm and 
rational manner. 
 
We have a situation in the legislature where our duty as 
representatives is to bring forward . . . And I might say this, that 
it’s incumbent upon those who are not members of the 
Executive Council on the government side of the House, to do 
the same thing much the same way in which 

Pat Nowlan, member of parliament, has taken the Prime 
Minister to task for his — the Prime Minister’s — attack on the 
freedom of the press. But that is basically, Mr. Speaker, that in 
order to redress grievances, in other words, to stop the 
privatization of SaskPower, it is our duty as representatives in 
this legislature, and outside this legislature, I may say so, to 
bring that grievance to the attention of the government. 
 
Now the government was amply warned, Mr. Speaker, amply 
warned that a number of things were happening that were 
abnormal, that were not within the normal bounds of the 
functioning of a government. The first thing that it was warned 
about was that it did not have a mandate to privatize any of the 
assets of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, throughout history, as we stretch back from 
1215 to today, one of the primary causes of unrest among Her 
Majesty or His Majesty’s loyal subjects has been taxation 
without representation or without consent. 
 
Now taxation has taken many forms, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll get 
. . . at some future date in this, we will deal with this question, 
because basically the privatization is a taxation of a sort. It is 
taking away the assets of the people of the province, and taking 
those assets and using them for purposes other than the people 
of this province want them to be used for. 
 
But we’ll leave that and the whole question of taxation and the 
relationship to the opposition and to the functioning of 
parliament to another day. I just wanted to make the point, 
however, that the people of this province saw that as a 
legitimate part of their grievance that they sought redress for. 
They did not want this form of their assets being taken from 
them, and they wanted something to happen to be done by the 
members of the opposition. 
 
The members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, in that regard felt 
it compelled not only by acts of political expediency, although 
Heaven knows, when you speak up on behalf of the people of 
the province, you are obviously going to gain in political 
popularity; that’s the very nature of politics. When you speak 
on their behalf and when you act on their behalf, they are going 
to see you as their legitimate representatives, as opposed to 
those who do not speak on their behalf and who do not act on 
their behalf. So I say that there was certainly political advantage 
for us to do that. Nobody on this side of the House would deny 
that. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, it was not a question of 
political advantage which led to the bell-ringing, but to the 
activities of a government which did not — and had been 
warned in the past — did not have the legislative authority, i.e., 
the mandate expressed in a constitutional manner, to go ahead 
and do what they’re doing, i.e., to sell SaskPower. 
 
Because part of the overall constitutional process of the British 
parliamentary system has been this: is that when a sovereign or 
when a ruler, in this case the ruler of Saskatchewan, the Premier 
of the province, wishes to make his or her program known and 
abided by, they must seek consent for that activity. That is a 
fundamental, fundamental proposition proven time after time 
after time 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1566 

 

in the evolution of parliamentary — and any democracy, quite 
frankly, whether it’s parliamentary or republican — that 
without the consent of the government, that they do not have 
the moral or . . . because what is the same thing ultimately, the 
constitutional authority to carry out the activities that they 
intend to carry out. 
 
In this case, the Government of Saskatchewan did not have the 
consent of the people of this province to dispose of their assets, 
assets which by law de jure as well as de facto belong to them; 
that this government was attempting to dispose of something 
that belonged to them and was held only in trust for safe 
keeping by the executive branch. 
 
(1630) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
Mr. Wolfe: — Point of order. I fail to recognize how this has 
any relevance to the bells at all. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member’s failure to understand is 
scarcely a point of order. That’s all he said, I fail to understand. 
That’s hardly a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I’ve listened to the member’s point of 
order, and while the member is attempting to give the reason for 
the bell-ringing, I would say this to the hon. member. I have 
been listening, I have been listening to his arguments, and he 
has been repeating his arguments, and that is not acceptable. I’d 
like to bring that to the hon. member’s attention, that the 
repetition of arguments is against rule 25(2) in our standing 
orders, and I know he has many things to say about the issue, 
but he must speak more directly to the ruling. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your 
ruling. I obviously am not making myself clear. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you. I’m going to obviously have to 
delineate the first argument. The first argument that I have 
made, Mr. Speaker, is in response to a charge made by the 
members of the government who said that our bell-ringing was 
anti-democratic. And I think that I have put forward, just on the 
basis of two centuries of British tradition, the 1200s and the 
1300s, that not only was it not anti-democratic, that it was 
constitutional. I think I made that point clearly. 
 
My second argument, which I will now unfold — and perhaps I 
should have prefaced by remarks by this — my second 
argument that I now will unfold is this — is that not only what 
the opposition did was constitutional, the opposition, by its very 
nature is compelled, that this opposition on this side of the 
House was compelled not only by its political insertion in terms 
of the social formation, i.e., our role as opposition in 
Saskatchewan, on that political level, but we are compelled 
constitutionally, as members of this Legislative Assembly, to 
speak up on behalf of individuals and of the populace who feel 
that they have a grievance to redress. 

Now maybe the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg can 
understand that. On the one hand, what I’m saying is that the 
opposition was not only politically motivated, but was 
constitutionally correct in ringing the bells, as is presently the 
case in Ontario, when we see what’s happening in Ontario, and 
as the members of the opposition party have engaged in from 
time to time throughout the parliaments and legislatures of 
Canada. 
 
Not only was that a constitutional act and hence not 
anti-democratic, but in fact it was an act that we all, as members 
of the opposition, are compelled to do in order to carry out our 
responsibilities as members of the opposition. That’s an entirely 
different matter. Not only is it legal for what we did, it is 
something that we had to do, Mr. Speaker. Because the people 
of Saskatchewan said to us as elected members of this 
legislature, stop the sale of SaskPower. That’s what they said by 
the hundreds, by the thousands, by the tens of thousands. And 
Mr. Speaker, you know yourself . . . excuse me, Mr. Speaker, 
all members of this Assembly know that through the method of 
petition, by the hundreds of thousands, people in this province 
were saying, we want you to stop the sale of SaskPower. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, does that compulsion as a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, have any historical 
precedence? That, I guess, is the question that needs to be 
answered now. Do we, as members of the opposition, have 
historical reasons upon which we base our actions in terms of 
being members of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
And I would submit, Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you, sir, 
that in all due respect, that the mandate given to us and the 
mandate given to all members of the Legislative Assembly at 
election, that they are compelled constitutionally and by law to 
bring forward redress of grievances, and that those members 
who do not bring forward redress of grievances are negligent in 
their duties as members of the Legislative Assembly to which 
they belong. That will be my second argument, Mr. Speaker, as 
this debate unfolds in the days to come. 
 
And I say so, Mr. Speaker, because I happen to believe that 
when it comes to the privatization of SaskPower, the refusal of 
those members outside Executive Council to stand up and speak 
out on behalf of their constituents, is a dereliction of their duty, 
is a breaking of the mandate that they have received from their 
constituents. I think that, Mr. Speaker, we can prove with 
material exhibit, which we have done through the introduction 
to this Assembly of petitions signed by petitioners from every 
constituency represented by the members opposite, petitioners 
who seek redress of a grievance based on the actions of an 
absolutist government, based on the sale of SaskPower and, Mr. 
Speaker, that this action of the opposition in opposing this rule 
change, which will lead to the privatization of SaskPower, is 
not only constitutional, Mr. Speaker, it is mandated by our 
constituents. In other words, what we are doing on this side of 
the legislature is our duty. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The hon. member has 
advanced that argument several times, over and over. The rules, 
the rules do not permit that, even though he 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1567 

 

may feel strongly about it and may wish to continue repeating 
it, but the rules, in fact, do not permit it. And you, sir, have been 
advancing that argument several times this afternoon, and I’m 
drawing that to your attention. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. In regards to advancing the 
debate that it’s our duty, yes, I’ve said that several times and I 
believe that. Now what I will do, what I will do . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. Order. This isn’t a debate on that; I’m just drawing it to 
your attention, drawing it to your attention because I cannot 
allow you, sir, to continue repeating the same arguments over 
and over. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for 
drawing my attention to that matter. I shall now proceed, Mr. 
Speaker, and it will take some time to outline the historical 
precedents of why it is that members of the legislature are 
obliged to do their duty. And I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, first 
and foremost, to the activities of the member of parliament for 
the constituency of Reading, Mr. John Kent. Mr. John Kent was 
appointed by the sheriff of the shire of . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — J-o-h-n K-e-n-t. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — K-e-n-t. Exactly, that is the spelling. Mr. Kent 
was the first member of parliament for the shire of Reading. 
Reading is a constituency in England. It was a little town in 
Reading, where among other things a monastery was set up. 
The activities of Mr. Kent, Mr. Speaker, the activities of Mr. 
Kent, as they were mandated then and as that mandate consists 
today, forms the basis upon which all our activities in this 
legislature are carried out. And I want to, Mr. Speaker, draw 
your attention to that fact of the activities of why it is the duty 
of members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to understand that the situation in 
Reading in the middle and late 13th century were not quite akin 
to that as it is today, let me just outline for you and for the 
House how borough representatives, as they were called, were 
picked. They were, first of all, Mr. Speaker, summoned to what 
was vaguely known as a parliament because the institution itself 
had not come into its own right, known of its own right. 
 
But Mr. John Kent, of whom recorded history has written this 
little tome called, Parliament Through Seven Centuries, done 
under the auspices of the Hansard society, deals with 
parliament. And it deals with . . . Mr. Kent was appointed to 
parliament because at that time, people were not elected to 
parliament. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, borough representatives were appointed in 
the following manner. The writ of the year addressed to all 
sheriffs set forth the reasons for the summons, and the year that 
I’m referring to here is the year 1295 — 1295. And here’s what, 
Mr. Speaker, the reasons for the issuing of that writ, that writ of 
summons which subsequently became the writ of election — 
the dangers threatening the kingdom. Mr. Speaker, John Kent, 
in 1295 was summoned to parliament because of the dangers 
threatening the kingdom. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in some way . . . Mr. Speaker, in the same 
way that the people of Saskatchewan mandated the opposition 
to bring to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan the 
dangers which threaten the kingdom, so too was Mr. Kent 
brought to the Reading. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the members opposite have 
absolutely no appreciation for precedence. It’s obvious that the 
members opposite have no understanding of tradition. And it’s 
obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite are engaging 
in a kind of nervous laugh, a kind of nervous laugh that shows 
their desperation, that shows their desperation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And not only their desperation, Mr. Speaker, 
also shows their total lack of respect for their predecessors in 
the parliaments of this country and in the British 
Commonwealth, Mr. Speaker. And while the member from 
Rosthern can laugh at democracy, while he may enjoy polishing 
the jackboots of tyranny, let me say, Mr. Speaker, that I for one 
happen to respect the work done by the John Kents of the 
world, representing the Readings of the world, to act on their 
mandate which is to speak on behalf of the people of this 
province the same way, Mr. Speaker, that all members of the 
opposition spoke on behalf of this province in carrying out the 
duty established by Mr. John Kent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Because, Mr. Speaker, the nub of the writ of 
summons in 1295 was the dangers threatening the kingdom. 
Well let me say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan in 
1989 perceived a dangerous threat to the kingdom, to their 
kingdom, the province of Saskatchewan, through the 
privatization of SaskPower. 
 
And we can draw those historical parallels because, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Kent, Squire Kent at the time, knew it was his 
bounden duty to go to this parliament to deal with what was 
called dangers threatening the kingdom. And he ordered them 
to: 
 

. . . causes to be elected without delay two nights from the 
aforesaid shire, and from each city of the aforesaid shire to 
citizens, and from each borough to burgesses of the more 
discreet and able sort. 
 

(1645) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, why isn’t it, Mr. Speaker, why isn’t it that 
that rule is in existence today? Why don’t we have that rule in 
today, Mr. Speaker? — having burgesses of a discreet and able 
sort. Because, Mr. Speaker, if that rule, if that rule was in 
existence today, if that rule was in existence today, the benches 
of that government opposite would be mightily empty; let me 
tell you, if the requirement was for discreet and able sorts to be 
elected, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, as I say, Mr. Speaker, not in the same way that we reached 
this parliament, but in a different manner, these people were 
summoned and “make them come to us.” 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1568 

 

That’s the form in which they were addressed. The absolutists 
said that they had to come to us, with a big “U”, because the big 
“U” means king, “at the aforementioned day and place.” In 
other words, a setting of the time, and that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. I believe I have 
brought to the attention of the hon. member a few days ago the 
fact that speeches should not consist of a series of quotes 
interspersed with a few original sentences. That’s against the 
rules of the House. I believe it’s rule 328 if I’m not mistaken. 
And I bring that to your attention again. You can make your 
point, but certainly we don’t want you going through a book or 
an article, reading quotes and interspersing it with some original 
thoughts. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
finished the quote. As I finished the quotation, the point that 
that quotation backs up and provides reason for is the 
following: that in 1295 there were duties assigned to each and 
every member of those who were summoned to the Legislative 
Assembly. And in 1295, Mr. Speaker, those duties were laid 
down and were laid out, some of which I read here, and there 
were others that were assigned to members of parliament at that 
time. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to say — and I won’t 
read the quotation — but in page after page after page of this 
book, dealing with Reading and the parliament from 1295 to 
1601, and the Stuart and Hanoverian period from 1603 to 1754 
and beyond, the last years of the unreformed House of 
Commons, those duties, Mr. Speaker, remained the same. And 
the duties that were obliged of each and every member of the 
House of Commons and of this parliament remained the same 
— an unbroken line of duty compelling members to carry out 
certain tasks. 
 
First and foremost of those tasks was to bring to the attention of 
parliament the redress of grievances. 
 
Does this rule, Mr. Speaker, which this government is 
introducing in the House today, I ask you, sir, does it help in the 
tasks and duties that are obliged by all members of the 
Legislative Assembly? Does it help in helping each and every 
one of us to carry out those things to which we are obliged to 
do? Or, on the contrary, does it hinder us in carrying out our 
duties as members of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a question, I think, that deserves 
consideration by all members of this House when it comes — if 
it comes — to a vote on this motion. We on this side, Mr. 
Speaker, say that it is an infringement on our duties as members 
of the legislature to carry out those things to which we have 
been mandated to do. 
 
It is the duty of the government members to prove to us and to 
prove to the people of Saskatchewan that by ramming this rule 
change through the House, a rule change which we say will lead 
to the privatization of SaskPower, but a rule change which they 
intend to ram through this House or want to ram through the 
House, does it help the members of the Legislative Assembly 
carry out the duties to which they’re obliged? 

The answer, Mr. Speaker, the only answer, the only answer to 
that question can be no. No. Not . . . It does not help us in 
carrying out the duties to which we are obliged. First and 
foremost is to bring to the attention of parliament the redress of 
grievances, Mr. Speaker. It does not help us in that task; in fact, 
it hinders us in that task, Mr. Speaker. It puts road-blocks in 
front of us in carrying out that task. 
 
All it does, Mr. Speaker, is allow the little monarch from 
Estevan to carry out his will. Not the will of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but carry out his will 
as Premier of the province, his will as leader . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, if you’re listening to the 
member from Rosemont in his name-calling of the member 
from Estevan, I would ask you to retract that particular remark. 
He’s referring to the . . . I’d ask you to go back in Hansard and 
ask him to withdraw and apologize to the House for that 
particular reason. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve heard the member’s point of order, and 
actually he does have a point. I think if we’re going to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Does he know what it is? 
 
The Speaker: — I think if we’re going to . . . I believe he was 
referring to the quote, “the little monarch from Estevan.” Is that 
correct? Yes. Well I believe if we begin to, you know, 
name-call, in a sense, you know, all members begin to use those 
types of phraseology, we’re certainly not going to have a good 
situation. So I would like to ask the hon. member for Regina 
Rosemont to withdraw those comments. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Well, Mr. Speaker, is the pejorative . . . and I’ll 
ask the question to withdraw the comment, little or monarch? 
 
The Speaker: — We had an issue on here maybe three, four 
weeks ago about a comment that was ruled as perhaps not 
acceptable, and perhaps referring to another member as a little 
monarch from Estevan, or from Regina Rosemont, or whatever 
constituency you might use, is not really acceptable 
parliamentary language, and I bring that to your attention. I just 
to ask you to withdraw that. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll 
withdraw the remarks about the little monarch from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Estevan, the Premier of this 
province, as I have said earlier on today, is engaged in activities 
which through the introduction of this Bill, limits our . . . limits, 
puts shackles on, hinders, confines, ties up the obligations that 
we as members of this Legislative Assembly are mandated 
constitutionally and legally to do. 
 
That’s what this rule does, Mr. Speaker. And there is centuries 
and centuries and centuries of historical precedent which would 
lead one to suppose that those truly interested in democracy 
would be doing exactly 
  



 
June 1, 1989 

 

 
1569 

 

opposite; that far from limiting the rights and obligations and 
duties of a member of the Legislative Assembly, what the 
government of any reasonable person, of any reasonable 
government intent on allowing the redress of grievances, which 
after all is the first duty of a member of the opposition and, I 
submit, all members of the legislature outside the Executive 
Council; that the whole movement of history has been to 
empower parliamentarians with those tools which will allow 
them to broaden their ability to represent their constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — To move forward, Mr. Speaker, not to move 
back — that’s what we’re faced with. When you get down, 
stripped away of all the political rhetoric, does it meet that 
criteria? Does it meet the criteria of helping members of the 
Legislative Assembly represent their constituents? And the 
answer to that is no, it does not. No, it does not. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we had a case very recently in the 
House of Commons in Ottawa in which there was a bell-ringing 
episode. And after the bell-ringing episode was finished — and 
it was carried on by the members of the Conservative party, but 
that’s neither hither nor yon, because, Mr. Speaker, what was 
relevant was that the bells were used to bring to the attention of 
the Canadian public what members in that House saw as a 
grievance that needed to be redressed, and they used that tactic 
— but the government, Mr. Speaker, the government and, 
unfortunately, other members of the legislature, including 
members of my party, went along with that. They went along 
with that particular ruling. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, when you talk today to those 
members of parliament in Canada who were there when the 
bell-ringing was outlawed, you will find that those members 
wish that had not been done. 
 
When you canvass those members, Mr. Speaker, you will find 
that as individual members, individual members of the 
Legislative Assembly, that they . . . pardon me, of the members 
of the House of Commons, that those members do not want that 
kind of hindrance put in their path ever again, because they 
understand, Mr. Speaker, they understand, just as the people of 
Saskatchewan understand, that this is nothing more than a Bill 
to privatize SaskPower after this rule change goes through. So 
too do the members of the House of Commons realize that the 
clamping down of their rights as members has not been a step 
forward, but in fact was a step backward. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t have to look very much farther into the past than the 
inability of members of the House of Commons, who 
represented a majority of people by popular vote, and their 
inability to stop the free trade deal from going through. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that inability is precisely linked to their inability 
now to make their protest known in a manner which brings to 
the attention, and brings to the attention of the parliament, the 
particular grievances that the people of Canada want redressed. 
In the case of the free trade agreement, in which a majority of 
the people voted for members of parliament who were opposed 
to free trade, since the bell-ringing has been outlawed, one of 

the tools that those members had to bring parliament to a halt so 
that this thing would have a sober second look, or third look, or 
be discarded; that tool was taken from the hands of the 
members of parliament. And when you canvass them today you 
will find, oh, there will be those who for reasons of political 
expediency may say it was a good thing, but even privately 
when they’re canvassed you will see, Mr. Speaker, that there is 
a great deal of unease about having allowed that motion to take 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say this here today, that if you go to Ontario and 
you speak to the members of the provincial parliament in 
Ontario and ask them whether or not in bringing to the public 
attention the scandals of a Liberal government by the members 
of the Conservative opposition in Ontario, whether or not they 
want bell-ringing done away with, let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
you won’t find too many Conservative members of the 
provincial parliament in Ontario saying, we want bell-ringing 
outlawed, because that’s what the PC members of the Ontario 
legislature are doing today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It being 5 o’clock, the House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


