


















































May 11, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 11, 1989 
 

1075 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Acting Clerk: — It is my duty to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Acting Clerk: — Pursuant to rule 11(7), I have examined the 
petitions presented yesterday and find them to be in order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. My colleague, the 
member from Quill Lakes, is unavoidably and somewhat 
unexpectedly absent in connection with his work as an MLA; 
therefore, on his behalf I take pleasure in introducing to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly, 16 students from 
grade 6, 7, and 8 classes, plus, I’m told, nine adults from St. 
Gregor School in St. Gregor, Saskatchewan. They’re 
accompanied by John Pearce. 
 
This indicates that they have already met with Mr. Koskie, and I 
know he would want all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Also on behalf of the member from Quill 
Lakes, I want to introduce eight students from the grade 10 class, 
again accompanied by two adults. This is from Muenster School 
in Muenster, Saskatchewan. The name of the contact in this case 
is Paul Reist. 
 
This note indicates that the member from Quill Lakes was to 
meet with you at 3:05. If that’s still the case and if he hasn’t 
already had a chance to meet with you, one of the members from 
this side will find a few moments to sit down with you and 
discuss what you’ve seen. I know all members will want to join 
me again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour and 
privilege today to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, 28 grade 8 students from St. 
Bernadette School, seated in the opposition east gallery. 
 
There are with them, Mr. Speaker, their teacher, Mr. Len 
Kleisinger, as well as four chaperons who are parents: Mrs. 
Duran, Mrs. Huber, Mrs. Sitter, and Mrs. Parisone. 
 
I would like to just share with the members that I have already 
met with the students, and they have asked some very interesting 
and exciting questions about privatization. I want to hope that 
your tour is a very successful tour this afternoon, and I wish you 
a safe journey home. 
 
I ask all members to join with me to welcome these

members. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Johnson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce three people that are visiting our province from British 
Columbia, through you, and to the Assembly. They are visiting 
from Delta, B.C., and they’ve had a chance to tour the legislature 
with a group of school children, and they’re sitting up in your 
gallery. 
 
We have Donna and Frank Fahie, and they’re actually from 
Dartmouth, Nova Scotia. In the last year they’ve moved to British 
Columbia and, interestingly enough, they’re cooking in the 
North, in camps. And they feed people, from 150 to 1,000 
workers, when they’re in doing their cooking up in the North 
country. And along with them is Mona Gray, and she’s also from 
Delta, B.C. And I’d just like to wish them a safe journey back to 
British Columbia, and come back and see us again. I hope you 
enjoyed the tour of the legislature, and you’ll enjoy question 
period. And please help me welcome them and wish them a safe 
journey back to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, 
and to all members of the legislature, His Excellency, Mr. Karl 
Bertil Eriksson, and Mrs. Eriksson. Mr. Eriksson is 
Consul-General of Sweden, and he’s here visiting our province 
for a couple of days. 
 
I understand that Mrs. Eriksson in fact is a Norwegian, and that’s 
not all bad, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I have decided that I’m 
going to take some time and visit with both of them right after 
question period, because on my father’s side of the family they 
came from Norway, and on my mother’s side of the family they 
came from Sweden. So I want all of you to join with me in a nice 
warm Saskatchewan welcome for them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to join with my colleague 
from Souris-Cannington in welcoming you to Saskatchewan. 
Present company excepted, Swedish people have made a great 
contribution to Saskatchewan, and I know that many 
Saskatchewan people of Swedish descent will be interested in 
your visit. 
 
We hope you find the province enjoyable. We wished you would 
have brought with you a little of the rains which fall on Sweden; 
we’re a little short of them now, but we welcome you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Population Loss in April 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I have a question for the Premier, and it concerns the statistics by 
the department of statistics, the Premier’s 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1076 
 

own Bureau of (Saskatchewan) Statistics, pertaining to the 
population loss for the month of April where, according to the 
government’s own figures, approximately 1,500 people net 
out-migration have left the province in April, making a total of 
about 10,700 or nearly 11,000 people net out-migration this year 
thus far. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to put this question into perspective, the 
loss thus far this year, if my figures are correct, is more than the 
entire population loss for 1987, so indeed it’s a very serious 
situation. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: in the light of these very 
startling and disconcerting figures, can the Premier tell us now 
whether or not he would agree that his preoccupation with the 
privatization economic strategy, which he’s been pursuing since 
1982 and particularly the last two or three years, really has 
proven to be in total an abject failure? How else can the massive 
population loss be accounted for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly it 
does not please the government to see our citizens leaving for 
jobs, primarily in Alberta where they have newly elected 
Conservative government for years and years . . . re-elected 
Conservative governments, and where they have diversified 
Alberta when this province was buying up assets which were 
primarily holes in the ground. 
 
And I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to agree that what 
we really need in this province is more diversification, and that 
the increase in 7,000 new jobs in non-agriculture last year did a 
lot to assist this province. 
 
Not only do we need more diversification, but quite clearly we 
need more rain. The member from Moose Jaw North scoffed at 
the idea that we needed more rain, but we need rain and we need 
diversification. And I implore the opposition not to hold up 
diversification any further. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a new question. 
I guess it’s for the member from Melville since the Premier 
refuses to answer my questions. 
 
I would preface my comments, the minister from Melville, to say 
that the opposition would endorse any genuine and true program 
of diversification; what we will not endorse is the massive 
give-away of Saskatchewan’s heritage and background for the 
privatization of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question to you, Mr. Minister, is simply 
this: are you able to convince your Premier, are you able to 
convince your colleagues, or are you able to announce 
government policy today which would put aside your 
ideologically driven program for privatization, your insistence 
that the privatization legislation be pursued? Will you put that 
aside and get on with legislation to provide jobs for our young 
people, for the

small businesses and the farmers of the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the 
reasons I’m answering these questions today is because this is 
not a new debate. The Leader of the Opposition and I had this 
debate 13 years ago, and the answers that he had at that time did 
not work. 
 
They talked about building Saskatchewan and instead they tried 
to buy Saskatchewan. We are talking about building 
Saskatchewan in co-operation with the people of Saskatchewan, 
not with their own money but in a joint venture with the people. 
That is called diversification and growth of jobs. 
 
I can list examples for hours and hours of the diversification of 
this province through such things as Buy Saskatchewan, which 
was so elementary that the Leader of the Opposition, when he 
was in government, couldn’t even think of something so simple 
as buying at home. Those are the kind of things that did not work. 
We have a Buy Saskatchewan program. That is a good policy. 
We have a diversification program. That is a good policy. 
 
And does the Leader of the Opposition tell us now that the new 
jobs at WESTBRIDGE Computer are bad? Does he tell us that 
the new jobs at Weyerhaeuser are bad? That the jobs at Meadow 
Lake in the pulp mill that Ross Thatcher wanted to build 20 years 
ago, and that his election in 1971 and 1972 stopped, does he tell 
us that is all bad? Can he tell us what the government should buy 
to create jobs. We are in the process of diversifying 
Saskatchewan. I may have lost the debate to the Leader of the 
Opposition 13 years ago, but the people of Saskatchewan are 
winning now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m absolutely 
devastated by that brilliant answer by the member from Melville 
— so devastated that I’m forced to ask the member from Melville 
a question which I think that even he would be prepared to 
answer in very simple terms. 
 
Mr. Minister, surely the acid test of your policies of 
diversification are the hard economic indicators of whether there 
are jobs and employment, whether people in the province of 
Saskatchewan are coming or leaving, whether taxes are going up 
or down, whether provincial debt is going up or down, and by 
every economic indicator, Mr. Minister, your Premier and your 
government has failed the young people and the future of 
Saskatchewan miserably. Make no mistake about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My question to you is simply this: why doesn’t 
this government tend to business? Business is looking after health 
care — yes, health care — education care, highways, tending to 
business. Drop your ideological, Maggie Thatcher privatization and 
introduce Bills for jobs to keep our people here. Do that and we’ll 
co-operate with you fully. Why don’t you do that? 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1077 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — There is a clear difference, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, between the Progressive Conservative government of 
the Premier and the old ideas of the New Democrats across the 
way. And the difference is this: that this government believes in 
building jobs; we believe in a jobs climate in this province — not 
a pro-business climate, not a pro-labour climate — a jobs climate 
where business and workers, the people of Saskatchewan all 
participate publicly in the diversification of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition sent a pamphlet into my 
constituency and it says he has a vision. I don’t doubt that one 
night he had a vision, but there was a flaw in this dream. He has 
a vision that is unfunded. 
 
This government has a plan, and the plan is to diversify. And 
when you diversify you build, and when you build you have tax 
base, and when you have tax base you can pay for the social 
services to cover the record spending of this government in 
health, education, and social services. 
 
Yes we could do more, and we will do more, and we will not be 
stopped by the opposition and their tactics of anarchy on the 
streets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I direct my question to the Premier of the province 
because clearly, when it comes to the economy and employment 
in this province, the buck stops at your door, sir. 
 
Your Minister of Labour and Employment talks about jobs. Mr. 
Premier, yesterday in the media there were reports that the 
Moosomin Motor Inn is closing its doors, and a large part of the 
reason given by the owner is that there just aren’t enough young 
people left in town to patronize it any more. They’ve left to look 
for work. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier, for our communities, for their 
people, and for the family business on Main Street, will you 
please, will you please stop your ideological piratization plans 
and start working to turn things around for the communities of 
Saskatchewan? Will you do that for the communities, please? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I forgot to point out 
to the Leader of the Opposition, who hadn’t noticed that there 
was a gigantic dirt storm yesterday in Saskatchewan. When I 
drove out of the city yesterday, it rained a little bit of mud. The 
members opposite have not noticed that there is drought in 
Saskatchewan, that that is a problem in rural Saskatchewan that 
also filters into the towns and cities of this province. We are all 
living in this province together, sharing together, and we also 
have to share drought and adversity. And surely, as some of the 
supporters of the NDP allege, this government is not responsible 
for the drought.

This government has taken action to assist small business. I 
recently drove through Moosomin, and I saw the increase in 
tourism was assisting the businesses in Moosomin. I saw the 
traffic of licence plates coming into Saskatchewan — not out, in 
— in the lines of tourism. Our policies in having public 
participation in tourist resorts, in parks, which you have opposed, 
which are building year-round tourist facilities, help those 
communities. 
 
Yes, it is difficult in Moosomin and it’s difficult in Melville and 
it’s difficult in all of rural Saskatchewan where we still depend 
on some rain. And if the members opposite do not understand 
that, then they do not understand small business or nature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I direct my question, again 
a new question, to the Premier of the province, the man who is 
most held in accounting for the performance of this government. 
 
Mr. Premier, when I look at your government’s statistics, your 
government’s statistics, I see a disturbing continuation of a trend. 
In April we saw 350 young people, age 15 to 29, move into this 
province — yes, move in. At the same time 930 left — a net loss 
of 580 young people last month alone, Mr. Premier. No province 
can afford this kind of brain drain and that loss of human energy 
in creativity. The young people of Saskatchewan are voting with 
their feet. 
 
Your minister says that your government is going to give them 
more of the cause. Piratization is not a solution; piratization is the 
cause of the problem. And I ask you, sir: will you get off your 
piratization mania and start working to build this province again, 
to build this province with a sense of hope and future for the 
young people of Saskatchewan? Will you attend to that agenda 
in Saskatchewan, sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, why are the 
members of the opposition surprised? When they stopped the 
Rafferty dam and said, oh joy, how many young people had to 
leave Saskatchewan because their jobs were cancelled on the 
spot? When they went out and rang the bells for 17 days and 
stopped diversification of SaskEnergy, how many young people 
will not be employed for another six months because of the 
delay? 
 
All of these policies of theirs to disrupt a free-market economy 
in this province cost us jobs. And when our young people have 
to go to free-market provinces like Alberta and British Columbia 
to get jobs, it’s time that we changed Saskatchewan. If we do not, 
if we do not change Saskatchewan, and if we allow the members 
opposite to ever become government, I’m afraid this will be the 
first province to be socialist in North America and the last 
province in the world to be socialist, and we don’t want any part 
of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Panel of Inquiry 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1078 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the hon. 
member from Melville won’t have a choice about it because 
people in Saskatchewan will decide, not you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Public Participation, and I’d like to ask the minister about a 
question that deals with his committee or panel — the Barber 
commission, whatever you want to call it, that’s going around the 
province — in terms of the cost. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Finance revealed to us in this House 
that just the panel members alone would be drawing about $1,150 
a day for a salary or per diem. And on top of this, you know, 
there’s expenses, advertising. I was wondering if the Minister of 
Public Participation could tell us today what the total cost is of 
this panel that you have set up to go around the province, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my seat mate 
outlined yesterday in the House, the per diem cost to the 
members, or the per diem charge of the members, I just want to 
indicate to you that the cost of running this House is about 
$30,000 a day during the strike by the opposition. 
 
You take the number of days that they were out on strike from 
this legislature times $30,000 and I tell you . . . and you compare 
that to the cost of the commission; the commission could go 
around Saskatchewan for two hundred and sixty some days . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nearly a full year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — . . . nearly a full year, at the cost to the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers that their strike cost — the same exact 
figure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Anybody in 
Saskatchewan could tell you we saved people in Saskatchewan 
money to stop you from raping and pillaging the resources of this 
province. 
 
I’d like the minister to watch my lips: how much will the Barber 
commission cost the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I can certainly tell you that it will cost the 
people of Saskatchewan less than your strike did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I can’t believe, Mr. Minister, that you would 
launch an advertising campaign, a commission of three people go 
around this province, to have no idea what the costs are going to 
be. It shows the total incompetence with which you govern this 
province.

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Could you tell us, Mr. Minister — watch my 
lips again — how much will it cost? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well certainly, I can repeat myself again if 
I didn’t make it clear to them in the first three times, but certainly 
that is that the cost tag in the wages of the commission is less 
than the strike that the NDP cost the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I get a little annoyed when I see people like you stand in 
here, that opposed Gainers, you opposed Hunter’s, you opposed 
Rafferty, and you stand as hypocrites, saying that we should be 
creating more jobs when every one we bring forward, you vote 
against. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Pretty sensitive, Mr. Minister, pretty sensitive. 
We’ve accused no one except you on that side of this House. 
You’re the ones who have ruined the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the minister cannot 
answer the question, will not answer the question, about the cost. 
Could you maybe tell us something about the purpose of the 
committee? We would like to see a committee in the province 
that would listen to people. If the committees you’ve set up to 
date are any example, they don’t listen, they go out and try and 
sell a concept. 
 
Is your commission going to go out there and try and sell a 
concept that has already been rejected by a hundred thousand 
names on petitions in the province of Saskatchewan and many, 
many more that are still waiting to sign petitions? What are you 
going to do with that commission? Sell-job, or are you going to 
listen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
see again the opposition trying to cast a shadow over a 
commission of very credible people that are going out to see the 
people of Saskatchewan. You can criticize them; yes, you can 
criticize them. You criticize the president of the University of 
Regina if that’s your choice. I think across Canada he would be 
seen as a very credible individual. 
 
They’re going out there to listen to the people of Saskatchewan, 
discuss with the people of Saskatchewan; the Premier put out the 
frame of reference. So all I can say to you is, again we see the 
negative attitude of that member and that government. Would 
you give the commission a chance? No, you will be against it. 
You will be against it. The opposition has every opportunity. I 
charge the Leader of the Opposition to go and state his case 
before the commission. In most cases, he probably won’t show 
up. I charge you to go forward; put forward your case. 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1079 
 

I can tell you that again we see the negative attitude before these 
credible people can go out and hold their hearings, and we don’t 
know how many hearings they’re holding. You are trying to cast 
aspersions and cast a cloud over the commission before it’s even 
put in place, and I think that’s disdainful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister again. You held 
meetings around the province; you’ve failed. We held meetings 
around the province; they were successful. Now you’re sending 
out a panel of three people to sell the government’s position, not 
to listen to anything. 
 
And I would have to agree with you that these are credible people 
in their field. This is not their field. Chairman Barber is a member 
of the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise — support 
privatization. Kathryn Ford — she is a lawyer, credible in her 
field I’m sure. Her firm does work to privatize the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. The other individual — I don’t 
know about him, but if two of those people are any indication, 
they do not have credibility in terms of privatization in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve failed. Will you promise us that those 
commission meetings around the province will be to listen to 
Saskatchewan people and not to sell a Tory line at millions of 
dollars of expense, possibly, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I say to the 
member opposite . . . He mentions that I have meetings around 
the province of Saskatchewan. Yes I did. I had about 24 meetings 
throughout the province, and I can tell you the difference 
between my meetings and their meetings just for petitions. Like 
we told the truth, we told the truth to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and that is a considerable difference than having the Leader of 
the Opposition go out as he did in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, as he 
did on this issue, to purposely mislead the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I can tell you, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, 
you’re going to be hoisted by your petard of that kind of action 
in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chairperson of Human Rights Commission 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’m sure that the people of Saskatchewan, the 
residents of Saskatchewan, by the tens of thousands who have 
signed those petitions, will continue to be totally offended by that 
minister saying they didn’t know what they were doing. When he 
referred to us as the government, the people of Saskatchewan 
can’t wait to throw that government out. 
 
The minister of piratization is in trouble, so I would like to switch 
gears and take a bit of heat off the government and direct my 
question to the Minister of Justice. My question, sir, is that six 
weeks ago the chief human rights

commissioner left the post to take up another job with your 
government. Since that time the commission has been left 
without a chairperson. Mr. Minister, can you advise this House 
when you are going to rectify that situation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The proposal 
for the new chairman of the Human Rights Commission is 
presently about to be placed on the cabinet agenda, I believe at 
the next cabinet session. If it is dealt with at cabinet, then an 
announcement will be made very shortly thereafter. 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A new 
question to the minister . . . Mr. Minister, you told me a month 
ago that next week there would be some announcement and so 
it’s another broken promise . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
we weren’t on strike then. 
 
The cities of Saskatoon and Regina have been calling for 
inquiries into racist treatment of our native population. In the face 
of such calls, don’t you think now is the time when we should be 
having a strong Human Rights Commission? Instead of acting, 
why have you chosen to ignore the needs of the Human Rights 
Commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that we 
have not ignored that, as I indicate. I understand — correct me if 
I’m wrong . . . I don’t recall the hon. member posing that 
question to me in the House in the last month or two. Perhaps I’m 
mistaken, Mr. Speaker. I don’t believe that’s in fact happened. 
 
I can undertake to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the matter is 
being placed before cabinet on the cabinet agenda. That 
announcement will be made very, very shortly, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hope that the hon. member at that point acknowledges the 
contribution. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:35 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 
sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 
Ending on March 31, 1990. 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:37 p.m. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I would like leave to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1080 
 

Speaker. I’d like to introduce for the second time — this group 
wasn’t in here when we started question period — a group of 18 
students from the Muenster School. They are in grade 10, and 
they are here with their teacher, Paul Reist, and a chaperon, 
Corinne Grace. I am introducing this class, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
on behalf of my seat mate, the member from Quill Lakes. And I 
would like to through you ask all members to welcome the guests 
here today from Muenster. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also ask leave to 
introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
introduce some guests on behalf of my colleague, the member 
from Humboldt. They are students, 16 students from grade 7, 8, 
and 9 of Carmel School in Carmel, Saskatchewan, and they are 
here with their principal, Mr. Glenn Hepp, and chaperon, Tina 
Colistro. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, someone will be meeting with them from 
our caucus this afternoon for drinks and pictures. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take my place 
today to introduce this motion to amend the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly. Now I have participated 
in this type of a process and moved these type of motions before, 
but not under these type of circumstances, Mr. Speaker, and not 
under this type of process. 
 
At the end of my address today, I will be proposing an alternative 
perhaps that perhaps all in this House would be able to accept. 
 
Let me divide my brief remarks into three parts, Mr. Speaker: 
first of all, dealing with what the rules are and how they will 
work, and what the rules are in other jurisdictions in similar 
situations; number two, as to why these amendments are being 
proposed; and number three, why they’re being proposed in this 
fashion. 
 
First of all, let’s deal with the question of the rules and what rules 
are being proposed here and what amendments are being 
proposed here. We are dealing in these rules, Mr. Speaker, 
primarily with the question of division or the call of a standing 
vote. 
 
And as we all know in this Assembly, when a standing vote or a 
division vote is called, two members stand in their place on either 
side, the Speaker then instructs the Sergeant-at-Arms to call in 
the members, the bells are set

in motion. And that historically was the way by which members 
were called to the House to vote. 
 
And the purpose of that rule, obviously, was to allow members 
who were not in their place to have an opportunity to come and 
cast their vote — number one — and number two, be able to 
come to this Assembly and cast their vote and have that recorded 
on the journals of this Assembly. 
 
Under this proposed rule change, Mr. Speaker, when those bells 
are in fact rung, they will be rung for only a period of one hour. 
At the end of that time, the Speaker will put the vote and call the 
division. As is the case today, if during that period of one hour 
the whips from either side give their nod to the Sergeant-at-Arms, 
the bells will be shut off and the division will be taken. 
 
If, Mr. Speaker, under these proposed rules, during that period of 
one hour of bell ringing, the House leaders or the whips from the 
government and the opposition can agree between themselves to 
have the vote deferred to some future time — now that could be 
at the end of the sitting day; it could be the next day; it could be 
any time within a two-day period. In the event, however, that the 
members from both sides, the government House leaders or the 
whips cannot agree, either side would be able to approach the 
Speaker and ask for a deferral, at which time the Speaker would 
be obligated to defer the vote two days hence at a time just before 
orders of the day. Now that’s how that particular rule would 
work. 
 
The rule on deferrals would not apply to the vote on the throne 
speech or the vote on the budget speech as, under our standing 
orders now, there is a mechanism in place that requires a vote to 
be taken at a set and specific time. However, the one-hour 
bell-ringing rule would apply in both of those votes as well. 
 
The final part of the rule, Mr. Speaker, is non-debatable motions. 
A good example is a motion to adjourn. All non-debatable 
motions with the exception of the introduction of a Bill or first 
reading, which is a non-debatable motion, will not be allowed to 
be deferred. The vote in first reading, however, under these rules 
could be deferred under the bell-ringing and the deferral process. 
Again, the one-hour rule on bell-ringing would apply to the 
non-debatable motions. 
 
These rules, Mr. Speaker, are virtually identical to the standing 
orders introduced and in existence now in the province of 
Manitoba. And I might add that those rules in Manitoba, of the 
deferral and the one-hour restriction, also followed an extensive 
bell-ringing episode in that province, in that case over the issue 
of bilingualism. 
 
(1445) 
 
These rules will allow two things, Mr. Speaker, to happen. It 
allows an accommodation for the member who is not in his place 
at the time that the division is called to have one hour notice to 
get from where they are to the Assembly to cast the vote and to 
have their vote recorded in the Journals. Or it allows for those 
that, because it’s an important vote for them, to contact their whip 
or their House Leader and request them to request a deferral, so 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1081 
 

that if they perhaps were in Swift Current or in Saskatoon and 
one hour was not enough time to get to the Assembly to cast that 
vote, to have it deferred to two days down the road, at which time 
they could be present to cast their vote. It also would allow either 
side to have the particular issue that they want deferred for two 
days. And if it is deferred, then no more business can be 
conducted with regard to that motion. 
 
Let me explain. For example, we are currently debating the Bill 
on the potash corporation. In the event that a division was called, 
should these rules be accepted — in the event that a division was 
called, a standing vote was called, the opposition in this particular 
case would maybe suggest for a deferral of two days, then that 
particular Bill would be deferred for two days. Debate on that 
Bill would be deferred for two days. Now these are . . . these 
deferral votes or motions or rules were first introduced last year 
on an experimental basis, and I would suggest to all sides it 
worked reasonably well. 
 
Now then, I think it’s important when we look at this question to 
also canvass the other jurisdictions in Canada and the other 
jurisdictions in the Commonwealth to determine what the rules 
are in each of those jurisdictions as well. 
 
The following Canadian jurisdictions: the House of Commons in 
Ottawa, British Columbia, Manitoba, Quebec, and the four 
maritime provinces, all have rules limiting bell-ringing. Most of 
those jurisdictions have either adopted or modified those rules 
over the last 10 years. And if you take all of those jurisdictions, 
the rules vary on the length of time that the bells can ring — from 
a minimum of two minutes, which seems extremely short, to a 
maximum of one hour, which is the case in Manitoba and one of 
the maritime provinces. 
 
Ontario has limited rules on division votes in certain specific 
areas in the rules. We are advised that the people in Ontario are 
presently looking towards coming up with some rules on 
bell-ringing on all divisions for the province of Ontario. 
 
The province of Alberta has no specific rules on division bells, 
but there’s a long-standing convention in the province of Alberta 
that basically allows the bells to ring for a maximum of eight 
minutes. And that process in Alberta has basically been set, the 
precedent set by Mr. Speaker, who basically, in an event, said 
eight minutes is lots of time, it’s time for you guys to get on with 
the job; sit down and come into the House and vote. 
 
Australia, New Zealand, and the Mother of Parliaments at 
Westminster have time limits ranging from two to six minutes 
with regard to the division bells. The only two jurisdictions then, 
with no rules whatsoever, are the province of Saskatchewan and 
that grand democratic institution, the Senate of Canada. These 
rules changes are then consistent, I would suggest, with the rest 
of Canada and in fact with the rest of the Commonwealth. 
 
Let me then turn to the second part of the question: why are we 
proposing these amendments? The most obvious reason, Mr. 
Speaker, is as a result of the recent 17-day, bell-ringing episode 
that we have experienced in this

province. 
 
I think that it is important when you look at this to review the 
history of bell-ringing in parliaments around the Commonwealth. 
As I indicated earlier, the prime purpose of the division bells is 
to call the members to vote, to give them notice that in fact the 
vote is being held, and give them an opportunity to be there to 
cast their vote, to record their votes in the Journals of the 
parliament. 
 
The first time the bells and the ringing of the bells was used as a 
protest or an obstructionist tool was in 1877 in the British 
parliament. And as I understand, researching that, the case 
involved the following. There was a group, in the British 
parliament, of rowdy Irishmen, who had as a stated purpose the 
disruption of the House by whatever means were available. And 
in 1877 this group of Irishmen set the bells to ringing in the 
House of Commons in Great Britain, and a dilemma was created. 
The dilemma was resolved when the Speaker of the House of 
Commons took it upon himself and indicated that the vote was 
going to be taken at a set period of time. And the members 
therefore were into their place and in fact were required to vote. 
 
The first time in a significant and material way that bell-ringing 
as an obstructionist tool was used in Canada, in a significant way, 
was in the House of Commons in Ottawa during the debate on 
the omnibus trade Bill involved in energy. Primarily what we 
were dealing with there was the, if you like, the national energy 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that matter was the bells rang for some period of 
time. The Speaker in the House of Commons came to the view 
that — and I quote from a decision by Mr. Speaker in Ottawa at 
that time, Mr. Francis: 
 

There is nothing in British practice and precedence that 
could assist us in resolving any problems related to the 
bells. This problem is uniquely Canadian. I know of no 
parliamentary jurisdiction outside of Canada where bells 
can ring for an unlimited period prior to the recorded vote. 

 
At the end of the day, the bells were finally stopped and the 
parties came back into the House, and on they went with their 
business. And the rules subsequently were changed in the House 
of Commons so that they now have a 30-minute time limit on the 
ringing of the bells. 
 
Manitoba, the province of Manitoba, and Saskatchewan are the 
only two major provinces that experienced bell-ringing as a 
protest or obstructionist tool. In the province of Manitoba, during 
the Pawley government time, the then Conservative opposition 
were in a rather obstructionist mood during one of their sessions 
as well, primarily focused around the question of bilingualism 
and bilingualism policy in the province of Manitoba. 
 
In that particular session, Mr. Speaker, the bells were rung in 
protest, or in obstruction, 24 separate times, delaying or stalling 
the House for some 375 hours. And at the end of that session, 
quite frankly, the government of the day prorogued the House as 
the only way to basically get around that stalemate. Subsequent, 
the standing orders of 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1082 
 

Manitoba were amended to be exactly the same as the ones that 
we are proposing here today. 
 
In Saskatchewan, bell-ringing has been used by both major 
political parties while they sat in the Assembly. And I, Mr. 
Speaker, have experienced them from both sides of the House. It 
is my submission, Mr. Speaker, that these rules left unchanged 
and unchecked, as we have seen, can be used by the opposition 
as an unrestricted, obstructionist tactic. In can in fact shut down 
the legislature. It can be forced . . . for the government to 
prematurely prorogue the House, perhaps prior to the passage of 
a budget or the legislative agenda. 
 
And I explain to you in this way. As we went through the most 
recent 17-day bell-ringing incident, we came against the wall as 
it related to the ability to make payments out without the passage 
of interim supply. As some might not understand or appreciate, 
when session is in, when the legislature is in session, government 
is precluded from using special warrants to make payments that 
are not otherwise authorized, and only can make payments 
through the appropriation motion or what we call interim supply. 
 
Had those bells rang, Mr. Speaker, for another week or another 
two weeks, effectively we found ourselves in a situation with the 
only option would have been to prorogue this House. And I 
question, Mr. Speaker, whether that is in fact the right thing. 
 
In my view, Mr. Speaker, this tactic, left unchecked and left 
unchanged, violates the fundamental principle of the democratic 
and our democratic parliamentary system, and that being the 
principle of majority rule — the right of the people to be 
governed by the party of their choice. 
 
And that principle, Mr. Speaker, is as old as parliament itself, and 
it’s fundamental to our constitution of this country. Our 
constitution says we shall have elections at least every five years 
— not every one year — every five years. And the winner, Mr. 
Speaker, of those elections forms the government, and that’s the 
principle of majority rule. 
 
And the government presents the spending estimates, as only 
governments can present the spending estimates in a 
parliamentary system. And the government presents a legislative 
agenda, and the opposition, through this Assembly and in this 
Assembly, primary function is grievance before supply. And they 
have a right to pose questions to the government under that 
process of grievance before supply. 
 
And the legislature, Mr. Speaker, this institution, is the place 
where those elected members come to have open and free debate, 
open and free debate by freely elected free men and women. And 
that is the basis upon which our system, Mr. Speaker, is based. 
 
If the opposition can shut down this House for 17 days, can they 
not also shut it down for twice that many days or more? Clearly 
they can. If the opposition can ring the bells, Mr. Speaker, and 
walk out and demand that, let’s say, that the budget be altered 
before they will return, what do we have, what do we do, and 
what have we done

to that principle, Mr. Speaker? 
 
If the opposition can decide through the ringing bells and that 
tactic, Mr. Speaker, when it is convenient for them to speak in 
this Assembly and when it is not, and when it would be more 
convenient to go to the streets and speak and close this place 
down, Mr. Speaker, have we violated that principle that I refer 
to? And have we, Mr. Speaker, not denigrated this institution? 
 
Mr. Speaker, some six weeks ago or so in this Assembly, the 
members offered to Mr. Gordon Barnhart, who had served at the 
Table in this legislature for some 20 years, the opportunity to 
address this Assembly. And I think we all in this Assembly 
remember that. And as he addressed this Assembly, Mr. Barnhart 
said, among other things, this: 
 

Parliament (and referring to parliament as a debating 
forum) as that place of speaking works best when members 
can express opposite points of views on a political and 
philosophical plane and yet respect the rights of others to 
hold a differing point of view. 

 
Have the events of the last months, Mr. Speaker, lived up to that 
view of this institution as a place of speaking, as a place that 
works best, as a place where we respect each other’s rights to 
have and to state their views strongly as they might wish? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I and anybody else in this House can, I suppose, 
quote from a variety of sources or from a variety of editorials, 
pros and cons of this particular motion and this particular 
amendment. And I do not wish to intend to do that in the interest 
of time of this Assembly. 
 
(1500) 
 
I would like though, Mr. Speaker, to go back to 1981 when I, not 
sitting on this side, but sat on that side, and when I as a member 
of the then opposition participated in a bell-ringing exercise. And 
I did so, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, and toed the party line, Mr. 
Speaker, and went with my party in solidarity even though, Mr. 
Speaker, one questioned how parliamentary that tactic was. 
 
And during that time, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition 
Conservatives, of which I was a member, walked out of this 
House for some six hours, the Leader of the Opposition, then 
government House leader, made the following statements, not in 
here but into the Leader-Post at the time, and he said the 
following: he said that he was shocked and disappointed by the 
childish antics. It is without precedence in his 14 years in this 
legislature. He said, with respect to the politician, that respect for 
politicians is going to be greatly degraded and the tactics of 
disruption are a serious threat to the parliamentary democracy. 
And he went on to describe bell-ringing as parliamentary 
lawlessness. 
 
Now those are very strong words, Mr. Speaker. And I ask this 
Assembly, and I ask the hon. member, what has changed in eight 
years? What has changed in eight years as it relates to 
bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, other than the fact that we have traded 
places on each side of the House? 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1083 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition can be, and as often 
does accuse people of saying one thing and doing something else. 
And I ask the Leader of the Opposition, and I ask others, to judge 
the consistency of those statements in ’81 and the actions in 1989. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to all members, if it was 
childish tactics to ring the bells for six hours, is it childish tactics 
to ring the bells for 17 days? If it was a serious threat to 
parliamentary democracy to ring the bells for six hours, is it a 
serious threat to ring the bells for 17 days? And if it was 
parliamentary lawlessness to ring the bells for six hours, is it 
parliamentary lawlessness to ring the bells for 17 days, Mr. 
Speaker? And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I believe it is justified 
for us to look at changing this rule. 
 
There is another important principle of parliamentary practice, 
Mr. Speaker, subordinate, I suggest, to the rule of the majority, 
but it is the right of, Mr. Speaker, members in this House to also 
respect the rights of the opposition and the minority. And we can 
all conjure up various cases by which we could come to grips 
with this one, or examples of it, but let me just give you a couple. 
 
Let’s suppose, Mr. Speaker, that a private member, whether he’s 
from the back bench or whether he’s from the opposition, wishes 
to introduce first reading of a private member’s Bill. And 
suppose that the government members who have a majority say 
no, and it goes to a standing vote or a division, and they vote 
against that member being able to put his private member Bill on 
the Table. That clearly, Mr. Speaker, would be a violation of the 
rights of the members and violation of the rights of the minority. 
Or government could, Mr. Speaker, through tactical mechanisms, 
prevent petitions from being presented in this Assembly, or 
certainly being presented in this Assembly as they have become 
a custom and tradition to do. And I think that, as well, Mr. 
Speaker, would become a violation of it. 
 
But the question we ask ourselves with regard to this motion, Mr. 
Speaker, is does this proposal, and would these rules violate that 
principle of the majority overriding and overrunning the 
minority. Mr. Speaker, if we are to say that they would, we would 
be saying that all jurisdictions in Canada, perhaps with the 
exception of Ontario, and all jurisdictions in the Commonwealth 
also have adopted rules that are unfair to the rights of the 
minority. Mr. Speaker, I suggest that is not in fact the case. 
 
I pose this question to you as well, Mr. Speaker. Has 
obstructionism become a right? Is it a right in our system to be 
obstructionist and to use obstructionist tactics? Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps they work in another forum or in a picket line or on a 
picket line, but Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you they do not work in 
this, a forum for debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would again like to quote from Mr. Barnhart, as 
he addressed this Assembly some six weeks ago. He said: 
 

The parliamentary system is a very delicately balanced and 
fragile institution, and each member has a role and a 
responsibility to strengthen and preserve this institution for 
generations to come. 

I ask you, Mr. Speaker, by increasing obstructionist tactics, do 
we strengthen this institution? And I would suggest to you that 
we do not. 
 
Some members opposite have said that obstructionism and 
obstruction is okay if the polls and public opinion polls say that 
it is okay. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, any person elected to public 
office must be cognizant of what the public opinion is at the time, 
and take that public opinion into any decisions that they might 
take or agenda that they might follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but should we decide each issue, whether it’s a 
budget or every piece of legislation or every action, according to 
what the public opinion polls say? Have we arrived at a point, 
Mr. Speaker, where the pollsters will dictate the agenda of this 
Assembly? And if we have, we must ask ourselves and justify 
ourselves: have we not moved dangerously close to government 
by referendum? 
 
Is it acceptable to ring the bells if a government introduces an 
unpopular budget? Would it be acceptable to ring the bells on 
issues like bilingualism where we understand strongly held views 
by people on both sides? Would it be acceptable to ring the bells 
on issues like capital punishment and let the pollsters decide what 
is the proper course? Would it be appropriate to ring the bells in 
questions like abortion, like immigration policy, like 
nationalization or privatization policies or strategies to deal with 
interest rates or monetary policy? Mr. Speaker, I don’t really 
believe that we, with a long view of this institution, should agree 
to that. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the opposition says, why this way? Why 
not use a traditional process of the legislative committee to look 
at the rules? Mr. Speaker, we did that last year. We attempted to 
find a common ground with regard to limits on bell-ringing, and 
the committee broke down, and unfortunately the committee 
broke down on political lines. 
 
So the question then has to be asked, is it realistic then that we 
could get agreement now? The members opposite, either through 
themselves directly or some of their surrogate members have 
vowed to make this province ungovernable. Members opposite 
have said that they will use every procedure to disrupt this 
legislature. Ironically, Mr. Speaker, that’s the same stated 
purpose that was used to instigate the first bell-ringing by those 
Irishmen back in 1877. And the members opposite are using the 
same proposal now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my 11 years in this Chamber I have not witnessed 
an environment where the distrust, where the rowdiness, where 
the personal bitterness and the inability of people within this 
House, Mr. Speaker, to strike gentlemen’s agreement have been 
at such a low ebb. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Assembly runs not only by the rules but by the 
gentlemanly understanding that members have for each other. 
And institutions like parliament, including this institution, has 
done it that way — the unwritten rules, if you like. Given that 
environment, Mr. Speaker, to suggest that we wait for rule 
changes until all parties have agreed is tantamount to delegating 
to the opposition the 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1084 
 

veto power of dealing with rules. It’s tantamounting to accept 
instructionism for the duration of this. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I still am concerned about this 
concept of the rule changes being introduced this way. And 
before I take my place, I make this point to the hon. members. If 
the opposition will stand in their place and say that the major 
concern they have is the process; the concern that they have with 
this issue is the process, then I ask them to do that. And if process 
is what is wrong with this action today, then I invite the hon. 
member to ask to adjourn this debate, to put together two 
members or three members from the opposition and two to three 
members from the government to go and see if we can’t 
collectively come to a resolve to find what would be a fair rule 
as it relates to bell-ringing. 
 
And I offer that challenge to the members opposite. If they are 
interested, Mr. Speaker, in the tradition, primarily, and in the 
process, Mr. Speaker, they will take up that option. If they reject 
it, Mr. Speaker, then that is saying to me, no, we want to maintain 
the vehicle, the vehicle of obstructionism by bell-ringing. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that is an option that can be dealt with, Mr. 
Speaker, in fairness by this whole House. 
 
We can get into this battle, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps this is an 
opportunity by which together we can preserve the tradition of 
changing the rules, but at the same time bring some discipline to 
the ringing of bells. 
 
I offer that in the interests of all members of this Assembly, and 
as I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, and prior to moving this motion, 
I undertake to listen to the members opposite; to respect their 
right if they so say that no, this is what I believe, or this is what I 
believe; they have the right to say that. But I think they should 
take a long view of this institution, Mr. Speaker, and so should 
we, in the processing of it. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Melfort: 
 

That the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly 
be amended. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I could 
interrupt the proceedings to introduce some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(1515) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Pickering: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me this afternoon to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the legislature, a group of 50 students.

They’re in grade 9, 10, 11, and 12; 25 of these students are from 
Prince Edward Island, 10 of them from Crane Valley, and 15 of 
them from Spring Valley, which is on the west side of my 
constituency. 
 
I would like to inform the visitors from Prince Edward Island that 
yesterday was not a typical Saskatchewan spring day. We do 
have the odd one, being that we’re in the middle of a drought. 
 
I would like to inform the Assembly that I will be meeting with 
them for drinks and pictures at about 4 o’clock, and I would like 
all members to join with me in giving them a warm welcome to 
Saskatchewan and to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Amendments to Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
privilege for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to once again be allowed 
to rise in this Assembly and to participate in today’s debate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a privilege that today we are attempting 
to protect. And that word “privilege,” Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
important in parliamentary democracy, as you are all too well 
aware. And I would like for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to dwell on 
the word privilege itself just for a few moments. 
 
Beauchesne’s, in the Fifth Edition, quotes Erskine May, in the 
19th Edition stating what privilege is. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . Privilege is the sum of . . . peculiar rights enjoyed by 
each House collectively as a constituent part of the High 
Court of Parliament, and by Members of each House 
individually, without which they could not discharge their 
functions . . . 

 
And that reference continues: 
 

The privileges of Parliament are rights which are 
“absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers.” 
They are enjoyed by individual Members, because the 
House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded use 
of the services of its Members; and by each House for the 
protection of its Members and the vindication of its own 
authority and its own dignity. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while I am not today raising a point of 
privilege, I think all of parliamentary practice and the rules of 
parliament are exceedingly important to this debate. If one 
examines the definitions of privilege and the intent of the rules, 
one can see rather quickly that suspending or adjourning a 
Legislative Assembly without the agreement of that Assembly is 
a clear and unequivocal breach of the privileges of that 
Assembly. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the origin of the 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1085 
 

idea of privilege was to prevent parliament from being closed 
without the consent of parliament; to prevent the impedence of 
its legal and proper functioning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one part of the Beauchesne’s reference is very 
important in this regard, and it is the phrase that parliament must 
have “the unimpeded use of the services of its Members”. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, this legislature has been denied the unimpeded use 
of the services of its members in this parliament, and this 
parliament was prohibited from discharging its functions, and 
this was done without the consent of the Assembly or even 
without the debate of this Assembly. 
 
The motion before this House, Mr. Speaker, seeks to set out very 
clear rules to prevent such an attack on the fundamental rights 
and privileges of the Legislative Assembly from ever happening 
again. 
 
Usually when there is a proposed rule change, and particularly 
where there is a division of opinion on that rule change, I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that it is of utmost importance that the reasoning be 
set out and that consistency with the principles and the purposes 
of parliamentary procedure be demonstrated. And to do this we 
must examine what has happened, what has precipitated the need 
for a rule change. And we have to examine the traditions of the 
House and the rules themselves as they have evolved over a 
period of time, even ever since the Magna Carta. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I hope you will accept the 
importance that I attach to the research that I have done into these 
questions of privilege and of the functioning of the House itself. 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the most fundamental privileges a member 
of the Assembly enjoys is the right to take his seat in the 
legislature, to be heard by the Assembly, and to vote on questions 
before the Assembly. 
 
This privilege, Mr. Speaker, is so clearly fundamental — so 
clearly fundamental — that the only way it can be abridged is by 
a vote of the House itself to remove a member from his seat. Yet 
the bell-ringing issue that we are dealing with today 
accomplishes precisely the effect of denying members the right 
to take their seats, denying members the right to be heard by this 
Assembly, and denying members the right to vote. 
 
Indeed, I believe that it is a gross injustice to the intent of the 
division bells that a mechanism has been established to assure 
each member the right to be present and to vote, and that that 
right is applied to the utterly contrary purpose of denying each 
member those rights to vote. That fact alone, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe, is sufficient to compel all hon. members to support the 
motion that we are debating. 
 
And let me underline this fact, Mr. Speaker, for those who may 
be unfamiliar with the way this honourable place works and 
particularly the purpose of the ringing of the bells or the conduct 
of a division, as it is called. And I quote from Beauchesne’s, Fifth 
Edition, page 74: 
 

Should five or more Members rise to request a recorded 
vote, the Speaker says: “Call in the

Members.” The Sergeant-at-Arms ensures that the bells are 
rung; the Whips take (several) steps to assemble their 
Members. 

 
And that’s the end of the quotation. Those, to me, Mr. Speaker, 
are quite clear words. The intent and the purpose of those words 
are clear to me. 
 
If a member wishes to have a recorded vote, he stands here in his 
place. If five such members stand, then the Speaker says, “Call 
in the members.” He does not say that the House is adjourned. 
He does not ask the Leader of the Opposition when he might give 
permission to have the vote taken. He does not announce that the 
Assembly will be suspended for the purpose of political rallies or 
petition gathering. Mr. Speaker, he says, “Call in the members.” 
 
Then Beauchesne’s says that the whips take steps to assemble 
their members. It does not say that politicians disperse their 
members around the province. It does not say that members 
should leave the Assembly and portray the undignifying 
spectacle of leaving the Speaker sitting alone in his chair with 
one Clerk at the table. It says clearly, Mr. Speaker, without 
equivocation, that it is the duty of the whips to call in the 
members to be ready for the vote. Call in the members, assemble 
your members, get into the Assembly and exercise your duty, Mr. 
Speaker, to vote. This is what the bells are for. I don’t feel that it 
could be any clearer than what I have just outlined, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice shared with me an article 
entitled: “Bell-ringing Revisited.” This was published in the 
journal of parliamentary procedure entitled, The Table. And I 
refer all members to that article and for all members to take a 
little bit of guidance from that article. In reading the article, it 
directed the attention to the question of adjournment as it relates 
to the rule that we are debating today. And I quote: 
 

Traditionally following the rules in Beauchesne, an 
unscheduled adjournment could be obtained only by 
presenting a motion to adjourn, and then by winning the 
vote. With the precedent of bell-ringing an entirely new 
method of obtaining an adjournment is created, and it does 
not include the risk of losing a vote . . . This procedure is a 
logical consequence of obstructionist bell-ringing, but is 
completely foreign to Beauchesne or the Standing Orders. 
The procedure seems to destroy the need for the traditional 
procedure. 

 
If one were to attempt to define obstructionist bell-ringing as it 
has developed so far, what would be an accurate description? The 
article supplies the answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, as 
follows. The bell-ringing we have witnessed over the last while 
has exactly the same effect as: 
 

. . . either official whip to rise and inform the Speaker and 
the other Members that the House is adjourned. 

 
Imagine, Mr. Speaker, the implications of this because the 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1086 
 

House has always operated, first and foremost, by the will of its 
members to follow the letter and the spirit of the rules and the 
traditions and practices of parliamentary democracy. This effect 
has not represented a present danger to our democracy. 
 
But in the last number of weeks, Mr. Speaker, that has changed. 
It is not enough to say that in some other year, some other 
opposition rang the bells for six hours. And on that episode, Mr. 
Speaker, the current Leader of the Opposition was quoted in his 
own party publication, the NDP Coffee Row publication, as 
saying, the ringing of the bells by the opposition for six hours 
cost the taxpayers 20,000, and was “unruly and misguided.” 
 
It is not enough to say, Mr. Speaker, that the old opposition did 
it for six hours, so the current opposition can do it for six months, 
or some other group in some other Assembly did it for so many 
days. If you look at the precedents, Mr. Speaker, you will find 
that, indeed, wherever the members have been unable to maintain 
their dedication to the intent of the rules and the intent of the 
traditions in regard to bell-ringing, the legislatures involved have 
acted quickly to bring the rules of their House explicitly in line 
with the intended practice. 
 
I cite the House of Commons as an example of extended 
bell-ringing during the national energy program debate. That 
only serves to reinforce the evidence of my argument. You will 
find today, Mr. Speaker, that the rules of the House of Commons 
do not allow extended bell-ringing. That Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
said that it would not, it could not, risk the attack on such a 
fundamental principle of democracy. 
 
And likewise, Mr. Speaker, in virtually every jurisdiction in the 
world of parliaments, there are no extended bell-ringings. Mr. 
Speaker, the limits imposed on bell-ringing range from, in the 
country of Australia, two minutes, to one hour in Nova Scotia. 
The two remaining parliaments that do not have explicit 
provisions are now proceeding with rules such as we are debating 
today. It is my understanding that the province of Ontario is 
engaged in a very similar review to that which we are 
undertaking here. 
 
And I’d like, Mr. Speaker, to point out one further thing. In the 
last session of this very Legislative Assembly, we here in 
Saskatchewan had in practice virtually the identical rule that we 
are today debating. We had this rule in full operation and full 
effect. Clearly, there was no member at that time who felt that 
the rule was undemocratic, unparliamentary, or an infringement 
on his or her rights. We operated an entire session under the rule. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it worked to the acceptance of all. 
There were no protests; there were no great demonstrations over 
that rule. 
 
I put that forward, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that it is 
incumbent upon members to clarify the distinctions that they may 
make between then and now, between our Assembly and other 
assemblies, between their position last session and today. 
 
As Mr. Tom McMahon says in his article, “Bell-ringing

Revisited,” bell-ringing is a method to prevent the majority of 
members in the legislature from voting on the legislative 
program. Mr. McMahon did a detailed review of various 
obstructionist tactics that are used in legislative assemblies, and 
he found a number that are legitimate and acceptable, but he says: 
 

A review of assorted methods of obstruction shows that 
parliamentary history has been guided by one unbreakable 
rule — the majority must prevail over the minority. 

 
He argues that this is so fundamental that bell-ringing is indeed 
a serious threat to the very principle of democracy, and he quotes 
the esteemed historical authority, Josef Redlich, that bell-ringing 
causes a situation which is: 
 

. . . no longer argument against argument but force against 
force. The fundamental principle of British parliamentary 
government was now at stake, the principle on which its 
framework rested, that of government by the majority. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I feel that there should be no dispute on this 
motion today. There can be no serious argument that the 
opposition’s ability to engage in legitimate obstruction is 
diminished. Indeed, as the opposition in this Assembly has made 
clear, they do have a wide array of tools to hold up the legislature 
and impede the government. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition made this very clear the other 
day in the Regina Leader-Post on May 9 when he told reporters 
he was going to disrupt parliament even more than he had already 
done with the bell-ringing, in spite of the new rule, so clearly is 
he of a mind that he has the tools to be obstructive. 
 
Therefore I believe, Mr. Speaker, there can be no acceptance of 
spurious arguments that this rule would somehow diminish the 
ability of an opposition to do such things. 
 
(1530) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forward a few other 
concepts for members to consider. First, Mr. Speaker, this is their 
sworn constitutional duty. The constitution of our country 
provides that we have a duty — a duty, Mr. Speaker, to meet in 
this Assembly and attend to the business of the Assembly. This 
is not a frivolous concept, but a sworn duty. That the very 
constitution of the country can be undermined by an abuse of the 
division bells, itself is enough to demand that explicit provisions 
be set out for the conduct of a division. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, and I do not say this lightly, world wars 
have been fought so that freely elected legislative assemblies 
could remain open, not so that they could be closed by a minority. 
 
Are the opposition going to seriously argue that if one can 
produce a poll that says public opinion is with them on any given 
issue, then they have the right to suspend the sitting of the 
democratically elected legislature? On this 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1087 
 

basis, Mr. Speaker, never would there have been passed a Bill to 
nationalize the potash industry. 
 
The opposition of the day, led by Senator Davey Steuart, could 
have withdrawn from the Assembly, based on the polls that were 
taken at that time, and refused to allow the Assembly to consider 
the legislative agenda of the majority. Senator Steuart, who was 
not a member of our party, has said that they did not do so 
because it would be alien to parliamentary democracy, and even 
in the strength and depth of the opposition that he felt to the 
government’s action, he had to maintain respect for this 
Assembly. He chose the course of a leader and protested 
vigorously. He fought hard, but he did not close down the 
legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember those days. People in especially 
north-east Saskatchewan who were familiar, very familiar, with 
Davey Steuart — his home was in Prince Albert — remembered 
Davey Steuart and respected him. And they respected his 
vigorous fight, but they also respected that he did not close down 
the legislature. 
 
I believe that it is somewhat sad, Mr. Speaker, that our Assembly 
has sunk so low that the course of leadership seems closed to 
those who feel they must oppose at any cost, at any price, even 
at the expense of the very institution that makes our democracy 
work. The history books will show, Mr. Speaker, who showed 
the courage and who chose the easy, softer way out. 
 
And I would put into this debate just one more quote from that 
article on bell-ringing. It argues that bell-ringing is the coward’s 
way out, the weakling’s first option, because: 
 

. . . it does not take ingenuity nor hard work. It only requires 
one to walk out; it only requires one to boycott. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, no member of this Assembly should ever 
allow that charge to be laid on their account. And to avoid such 
a disgrace to this Assembly and its members, we must ensure that 
the rules are explicit and the rules are enforced. 
 
Our fathers and our grandfathers did not go off to die on foreign 
soil so that we might be subject to the whim of obstructionism. 
They fought so hard that our children might have a parliamentary 
system ensuring that members have the access to the Assembly 
and that the Assembly would legislate by votes of the majority. 
 
Our parents did not come here, Mr. Speaker, to substitute a mild 
form of tyranny for a stronger form; they came to banish tyranny. 
And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that a provision that turns a call to 
come to vote, into a barrier to vote, is the first tentative step on 
the road to tyranny, however mild it may seem. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Speaker, implore all members of the Assembly 
on all sides to put away their disputes for the time being and to 
support this motion with a resolute determination to support our 
Assembly and ensure that it prospers in the environment of 
dignity and democracy, which, for many centuries and millions 
of lives, have

bought for us at a tremendous cost. 
 
It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to second this motion, and I thank 
you for your time today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to join 
into this debate, and I do so first with some remarks about the 
new-found attachment to democracy that the member from 
Melfort and the member from Kindersley have expressed here in 
this legislature. 
 
The new-found democracy, Mr. Speaker, which resulted in an 
election in October of 1986 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — 1981. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And from 1986 election — I’ll come to 1981 
right away — October of 1986 to June of 1987, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for that period of nearly a year, these great democrats 
opposite denied the elected representatives of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan to come to this legislature to ask 
questions and to debate Bills and to make them to account for 
their billion dollar boondoggles that they’ve instituted since that 
period of being elected. That’s what these great democrats have 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, under this government since 
1982, the record will show that there has been no government in 
the history of this province which has refused — I underline the 
word refused — to answer orders of this legislature for a longer 
period of time than this government opposite, the new-found 
democrats from Melfort and Kindersley. 
 
I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that these new-found democrats are 
so profound in their respect for democracy that it took them a 
year before they called a by-election in Saskatoon Eastview, and 
a year to deny the voices of the people of Saskatoon Eastview on 
the fundamental rights to speak in this legislature, these 
new-found democrats did. 
 
These new-found democrats, Mr. Speaker, who believe in this 
great institution of parliament, who have introduced, by the way, 
Bill No. 1, an omnibus Bill giving to them the power, the 
unrestricted power to privatize any department, any agency, any 
Crown corporation of government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, without 
ever coming back to this legislature again, that’s what these 
new-found new democrats are trying to put through this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — These new-found democrats, Mr. Speaker, 
have come to this legislature and they have spent at least $46 
million in the last four years — $46 million on privatization they 
have done, these new democrats, Mr. Speaker, trying to sell their 
concepts of privatization. And they will not even tell the 
opposition, these new-found democrats, what it costs to fund the 
Barber review panel. 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1088 
 

Mr. Speaker, I can make a speech about democracy and how this 
government in the debate on Bill No. 1 . . . I repeat to you, sir, 
and I repeat to the public out there and to the journalists, take a 
look at Bill No. 1. This gives the government the right to privatize 
anything in the province of Saskatchewan without ever coming 
back to this legislature once in defence. That’s the democrats. 
Those are the new democrats, the Minister of Justice and the 
Premier and the Progressive Conservatives opposite. Is that 
democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
And I want to tell you something else about democracy. Yes, they 
applaud; they say it’s democracy. They want us to agree. They 
want to cut off the legislative right of this legislature to agree 
with the introduction of a legislative Bill which would for ever 
put behind the secrecy of the cabinet walls the rights for them to 
make any kind of a deal on privatization with their friends or with 
anybody else without ever again coming before the legislative 
session. That’s democracy? That’s democracy? That’s exactly 
what they do. 
 
That Bill, that Bill No. 1 I’ve mentioned, tabling of Public 
Accounts. I invite the journalists to take a look at this. Take a look 
at Bill No. 1 and take a look at the record. They say you should 
be debating in the hallowed chambers of this Assembly, these 
issues. How many Conservatives have debated Bill No. 1? You 
know how many, Mr. Deputy Speaker? One — the introducer. 
That one . . . maybe two at the most. Nobody else has. 
 
We’ve carried on the debate. We’ve been trying to alert the 
legislature; we’ve been trying to alert the public; we’ve been 
trying to alert the journalists about how aggressive and how 
Draconian this Bill is. We’ve made speech after speech, and I 
want to tell you, the journalists, they won’t even cover what we 
say any more on Bill No. 1. Yes. That’s right. 
 
The hon. member from Rosthern applauds that because this 
brand-new democrat, this brand-new democrat, this new-found 
democrat, the member from Rosthern, the man who personalizes 
attacks, who is in a mudslinging mode; the mudslinger for the 
Conservatives opposite, this new-found democrat wants it that 
way, because if the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
found out what was in Bill No. 1, they would want us to stay out, 
not for 17 days, they’d want this Bill to be stopped . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — What new-found democrats are these, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? What new-found democracy is this? What kind 
of charade is this? What kind of an unprecedented action it is for 
these people to bring forward a motion for rules change without 
consultation — I will say a word about the Minister of Justice’s, 
what I would describe, olive branch, at the end — without any 
consultation from us; out of pique, out of pique. 
 
They know that the people of Saskatchewan oppose what they 
have done and oppose it vigorously, and they wanted the 
opposition to do what was being done, and they’ve gotten beaten 
up. I don’t mean beaten up politically; I don’t care about the 
politics. They got beaten

up on this fundamental policy of theirs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They got beaten up and now they’re coming in and they’re going 
to show us who the bosses are. Again, what kind of democrats 
are these? 
 
I’ll show you who the boss is, is what the Minister of Justice and 
the Premier says. Without consultation and for the first time in 
the record of the province of Saskatchewan, although the olive 
branch of the Minister of Justice is an important consideration, 
they come forward to change the rules of this House in the name 
of democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What kind of a double 
standard is this? 
 
These are the people who say they’re the defenders. If they’re the 
defenders, why didn’t they approach us in this kind of a fashion 
— traditionally — of trying to define the rules in a way that we 
could all accept and agree, these self-proclaimed, new-found 
democrats? I say, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not the New Democrats. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — No. The Deputy Premier says, not New 
Democrats; I can tell you for sure not New Democrats. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s the context in which this motion is to 
be done, and let’s not fool ourselves as to what’s happening here. 
This government, if it was really genuinely committed to 
democracy, would have, as much as it hurt the Minister of 
Justice, as much as he opposed what we did, they would have 
done it in the traditional and normal democratic way. Let’s not 
be fooled about what’s being planned here. 
 
I could say more about the democracy of these shouter-downs 
over there and these name-callers and personal attackers — 
personal attackers. I could say more about the democracy of this, 
but I think that there are members of back-bench in the 
Conservative side who are genuinely ashamed of some of their 
colleagues, and I don’t think they’re all in that same boat, but I’m 
not going to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to make a point about the question of why the opposition 
did what it did. Now this may be, Mr. Speaker, a foreign concept 
to the government, and if I may say so, it may be a foreign 
concept to all now, unfortunately — journalists who cover us and 
the democratic system — but I still firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, 
in the idea that governments get elected with a general and 
specific mandate of what they can and cannot do by the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I still believe that governments enter elections, and political 
parties in opposition enter elections, and they say, if you elect us 
we’re going to do this, or we’re not going to do that, and there is 
a general mandate. I don’t mean so general that it means nothing; 
statements like diversification, in which we all believe, 
statements about the future in which we all believe. I mean 
programs which tell specifically, as much as you can in an 
election campaign, what you’re going to do with taxation policy; 
what the state of the budget is; what you’re going to do for 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1089 
 

economic diversification; what are you going to do for the 
farmers who are undergoing their most severe crisis right now. 
 
I believe that elections are the time when the people who vote for 
us give us a mandate in general and specific terms. Is that such a 
foreign concept of democracy to advocate? I believe that that’s 
what it’s all about. 
 
And if you take a look at the SaskEnergy debate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I say the record shows that at no time in 1986, by any 
stretch of the words used by the members opposite, was the 
privatization of SaskEnergy on the debate before the public. It 
was never a mandate, either in general terms or specific terms. 
And I say that even after the 1986 general election the 
government promised — promised faithfully — that they would 
never privatize SaskEnergy; they would never privatize a public 
utility. 
 
They made those promises in this House, these democrats did, in 
this legislature, on the record, in the face of all of the journalists. 
We ask them the questions and they say, no, they’re not going to 
privatize. I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the entire 
record, this government, either in the election of 1986 or 
subsequently, had no mandate to what it attempted to do, and has 
no mandate of doing what it attempted to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Because these new-found democrats think 
that you can answer any question you want to answer. Just get it 
on out of the way; answer it deceptively; sneak it under here; 
don’t answer it; give the old speech about 1982 and how interest 
rates are going back to 1982. You buffalo the journalists for the 
last seven years. You’re going to buffalo them for the next seven 
years if you do that. You can buffalo the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s what these new-found democrats opposite believe is the 
mandate, and that’s what’s deteriorated this House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — what’s deteriorated this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — There used to be a time in this legislature 
prior to 1982 where members opposite, by the way, were 
contributing in a positive way on this debate. I didn’t agree with 
him where the debate was meaningful. Of course, when a 
member of the opposition gets up and asks a question during 
question period, you don’t expect a government minister to get 
up and say, yes I’m guilty. I mean, he’s going to try to answer 
the question in a defensive way, but there was some attempt to at 
least meet honestly the question posed and the answer given in a 
way which would count; to respect not only this institution but to 
respect the people who put us all here. I came back in 1986 — I 
can’t get an answer from the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan on any issues — none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You know, the name of the game is, I

can ask him that whether or not today is Thursday, May 10 — 
not him, but the government opposite — today is Thursday, May 
10, and they’ll get up and tell me about what we did prior to 1982. 
And they’ll do that over and over again until I take my place, 
because they know that when the journalists have to report, the 
journalists will report what I say, but they also know the 
journalists have to report what the government says — and it’s a 
government line. Forget about the fact that it doesn’t respect 
democracy and there’s no meeting of the minds; forgetting about 
the fact that there’s no attempt to answer, even in a sophisticated 
or subtle way — is there any wonder that the opposition says, 
look, they’re not covering, they’re not answering, they’ve got 
$46 million of advertising. What can we do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We are a lonely band of 26 members here, 
Mr. Speaker, 26 members. We have $46 million of advertising of 
taxpayers’ bucks, my bucks, on privatization, without a mandate. 
We’ve got the Barber commission set up without a mandate. 
We’ve got the Barber commission set up without a budget 
defined, and they simply refuse to tell us. Now they want to 
introduce the bell-ringing motion to come back and to say to us 
that on top of all of this artillery that they’re going to use to 
submerge the opposition — forget about the opposition — and 
submerge the people of the province of Saskatchewan. On top of 
all of that they say, we are going to muzzle you for ever on this 
issue. That is what their new democracy under the Progressive 
Conservatives in Saskatchewan is all about. That’s what the new 
democracy is all about. 
 
Now look, Mr. Speaker, I say that I am still old fashioned enough 
to believe that when you come into an election, you come with a 
general and specific mandate, that you seek the approval or the 
rejection of the public at large. And on SaskEnergy they had not. 
 
I want to say something else though, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 
understand, because I sat on the treasury benches, that not every 
government in every election can foresee in every mandate a set 
of circumstances which would require the government to govern 
from day to day. I know that. If there are external circumstances, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, which arise, which compel the government 
duly elected to act and to respond, I as the Leader of the 
Opposition respect that right. This party respects that right. We 
may disagree as to their response, but they’ve got to govern. 
 
But there was no external set of circumstances on the 
privatization of SaskEnergy. There was no international 
economic set of circumstances changed. There was no Supreme 
Court of Canada decision which took away the right of the 
government to govern or to do what it did. In fact there was no 
external set of circumstances; what there was, pure and simple, 
was a betrayal of their word to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now you put yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in those boots. You put those right here in our 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1090 
 

shoes. If you’re in the opposition, or out there, if you’re a farmer 
or a labourer or a business person who sees a government that 
never campaigned on this in ’86; who sees a government not only 
not having campaigned on it, but promised faithfully that they 
would never privatize; who sees a government spending $46 
million to try to bludgeon us and the public on this approach; who 
sees a government that does not enter into debate; that sees that 
the report of the debate is not carried in the print media or in the 
televised media, because right after question period that’s 
basically it with the television medium. 
 
It doesn’t matter that my colleague makes a one-hour long 
speech. You could disagree with the argument. For the world is 
concerned, he never was in the legislature to speak about it. You 
take all of those things and you come to SaskEnergy and then 
they say that we as the opposition have got to take it. Well I’ve 
got news for the government opposite. This government never 
was elected to do that. It is a rare and occasional thing that any 
opposition should use bell-ringing — rare and occasional. 
 
I believe I’ve never used it for the period that I have, never used 
it for the period that I have except, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this so 
fundamentally offends mandate, people’s power, the right to 
govern in unforeseen circumstances. It is so unfair. It is the 
Goliath over there with their millions of dollars and their 
stacked-deck panel review against the people of Saskatchewan, 
that we had no other choice but to give democracy full bent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to say one thing about potash because 
I keep on hearing this from the members opposite from time to 
time — what did you do in potash? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in potash in 1975 and in 1971 in the New Deal for People which 
I would be pleased to give to every member opposite . . . I don’t 
have a copy with me, but if somebody can get a copy I can read 
the relevant provisions to you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You said explore development. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Look, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan was already established in 1974. We campaigned 
in 1975 on expanding public development on exploration and 
development of the potash industry. And when we got re-elected 
there was another set of unforeseen circumstances. The Supreme 
Court of Canada struck down the right to regulate and to tax the 
potash industry, and we had to act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Those were the circumstances. Those were 
the circumstances. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government opposite has nothing 
like that for a major policy issue, nothing whatsoever. I mean, 
and they think they can continue this deception. They think that 
they can simply say, well, you know, you’re not privatizing 
SaskPower; you know, we’re privatizing SaskEnergy. These 
simplistic deceptions. They can continue to argue that this is all 
some sort of fabrication.

Look, ladies and gentlemen of the government opposite, come to 
reality; come to your senses. You cannot win by deception. Face 
the facts. Get the message. And the message is the people don’t 
want you to privatize SaskEnergy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — You still don’t understand what’s happened 
out there to you. You still don’t understand what’s happened to 
you, do you? Out of touch. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell me about it. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The member from Assiniboia says, tell him 
about it. You’d better listen about it because you’re not going to 
be very long to listen to very much. I’ll tell you about it exactly; 
I’ll tell you exactly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I tell you exactly what happened. In the 
SaskEnergy situation . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us about the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, you tell us about the hospitals. When is 
Gravelbourg going to be built? You tell us about that. You tell 
me about Old Wives Lake. You tell me when Old Wives Lake is 
going to be fixed up. You tell me about those hospitals you 
promised out there. I tell you, when you call this election, when 
your Premier gets the nerve to call this election, you are going to 
be a one-half term member, sir, because of your deceptions to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Yes, yes indeed, yes indeed, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — people who run on deception, people who do not 
understand the principles of democracy, people who still have 
not got the message of what the people of Saskatchewan have 
said to them in this whole dispute. And what they’ve said to them 
is you’ve broken every law and every principle of democracy. 
You do not have the authority to do this; we want you to stop. 
And it worked — you stopped. It worked. 
 
This is the best act of participatory democracy that I’ve seen in 
Saskatchewan since medicare and it worked. It worked! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — The member opposite, the member from 
Justice says, well you know, this is akin to a private member who 
would come in with a private piece of legislation and we 
wouldn’t allow him to read that private legislation on first 
reading. It’s not akin. The private member has a mandate — all 
private members are elected and mandated to advance these 
issues on an individual basis. 
 
The member from Melfort says, well you know, what about the 
abortion issues and capital punishment issues? 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1091 
 

These are issues which cut across all party lines. A variety of 
people from a variety of different views articulate their points of 
view. There are differences. It’s not a matter of public policy 
necessarily; it’s a matter of individual conscience. Privatization 
of SaskEnergy is a government policy and a betrayal. 
 
There’s no parallel here. This a fundamental issue. And I say to 
the government members opposite, they have missed the boat and 
have seriously offended the people of this province. They have 
offended the people in this province by what they did with 
SaskEnergy. They have offended the people of Saskatchewan in 
what they’ve done ever since 1982, in the way they’ve treated 
this legislature. 
 
They don’t have to . . . we don’t have to have any lectures from 
them about democracy in this area. I want to tell you that what 
was done here by the opposition was done only after careful 
consideration. At the end, nobody in this House won, but the 
people won, and in doing so this institution was strengthened 
because the people spoke. That’s what happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Now having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the Minister of Justice has suggested that a committee of two or 
three, as I understand it, from each side, be set up, established in 
the next reasonable while to consider the issues pertained by this 
motion. I think that that’s a suggestion which is worthy of 
consideration, careful consideration, by this opposition. 
 
I would like to see such a committee of two from each side be 
expanded to look at other issues if we’re talking about 
democracy. Should the length of question period be expanded to 
50 minutes? Should we have rules which compel the tabling of 
reports on time and the convening of legislature on time? 
 
I don’t urge all of that, but we’re talking about democracy and 
the spirit of democracy and improving the love of this institution 
which we all have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Perhaps now is the time 
to take a look at all of these issues. 
 
I’m not suggesting that today. What I am suggesting today is that 
we should take the suggestion of the Minister of Justice and we 
should move on to the next phase of seeing how it is that we can 
strengthen not only this institution, but democracy. And I think 
we’d be all well-advised — and I will include myself in this — 
all well-advised if we attempted to play by, as much as we can, 
the concepts of democracy; namely, questions which are 
answered, and tabling of reports on time, and of legislative 
sessions, a legislative session which is vigorous and is reported 
widely so that the people can get its work done through the 
government elected. But we should respect always, always, that 
the people, at the end of the day, are right, through mandates. 
That’s what we should respect. 
 
I think therefore the suggestion of the Minister of Justice bears 
further, very serious consideration. And I’ll undertake to him, as 
Leader of the Opposition, that we will get back to him within the 
next . . . I would hope the government would at least give us over 
the weekend —

tomorrow is Friday . . . to caucus and to consider what he said — 
I missed part of his remarks; read the written transcript; and to 
get back to him by, say, Monday at the latest as to what we would 
suggest in response to his suggestion which, if I may so say so 
and I don’t mean to be argumentative here, I would have liked 
the government to have done before it introduced the motion 
unilaterally. But that’s water under the bridge. Let’s not look at 
the past; let’s look at the future. 
 
I think we’ll take up that suggestion and take an example of it for 
the next two or three days and consider it carefully, and get back 
to the government proponent of the mover, the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
With those few remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in the light of 
the suggestion made by the Minister of Justice, I beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the spirit that we’re 
developing in the House, I want to make one correction. Bill No. 
1, I think the record that I have here is that there were six 
Conservatives who spoke in the debate; I said one. I stand to be 
corrected. Fifteen on this side. 
 
(1600) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When I last had the 
opportunity to speak on this Bill, Bill 20, An Act respecting the 
Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I had 
several remarks to deal with some of the members’ speeches on 
the other side of the House, as well as trying to bring some new 
information into the debate. And I think it’s always important 
when we have debate in this legislature, to provide information 
to people, not just to have conversation and debate for the sake 
of having conversation and debate. But hopefully people can 
learn something from the debates that take place, just as 
hopefully members can learn something from the debates that 
take place in this Chamber. 
 
In the potash Bill itself we find a number of things, Mr. Speaker. 
Some of the major points dealing with the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Bill point out that up to 45 per cent of the potash 
corporation will be open for sale to foreign investors. 
 
Foreign investors in the case of this Bill, Bill 20, mean people 
from outside of Canada. The other 55 per cent, 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1092 
 

Mr. Speaker, is an amount of the share offering which people 
could buy outside of the province of Saskatchewan. It doesn’t 
necessarily have to be within the province; it could be those 
investors from Bay Street or from Montreal or Vancouver — any 
place in Canada — not necessarily to the benefit of Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
And a number of Saskatchewan people have a hard time 
understanding what the government is doing, because currently 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan are 100 per cent 
shareholders of the potash corporation. And with this Bill we 
said, as I said, we find 45 per cent of the shares will leave not 
only the province of Saskatchewan, but are assured of leaving 
this country altogether. And therefore people from Zürich or 
people from New York or people from Tokyo or people from 
Beijing, as far as that goes, could end up having 45 per cent of 
the shares. And we all know very well, Mr. Speaker, that 45 per 
cent of the shares in a corporation that’s valued with assets over 
$1 billion — some estimates might go as high as $2 billion — 
you certainly don’t need 45 per cent to control the actual 
company. 
 
The corporate elite throughout the world have many instances 
where they can control companies with 10 per cent of the shares. 
And the reason that is, Mr. Speaker, is because when the shares 
get out on the stock exchange, you have very little control as to 
where they go. The only thing you can be assured of is the people 
with the most wealth will buy most of the shares, and therefore 
the ordinary Saskatchewan resident very soon will own nothing 
at all of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And that is not 
a good situation for this government to put our fine province into. 
 
The potash corporation has made very handsome returns to the 
province, revenues into the coffers of the province of 
Saskatchewan to deliver health care programs, education 
programs, programs and services that are of benefit to the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as I pointed out in my remarks last Monday evening, the 
Crown investment corporation, which is the banker for Crown 
corporations in the province of Saskatchewan, are putting in $200 
million this year into general revenue to help the Devine 
Conservatives balance their budget. And even with the $200 
million, Mr. Speaker, we find that this government again, for 
every year since 1982, has not been able to balance the budget. 
Even with $200 million coming from Crown investment 
corporation, they’re still going to run a deficit this year. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this 45 per cent foreign ownership, let no one 
be deceived. If any foreign investor buys up 20 per cent or 25 per 
cent or 30 or 35, 40, 45 per cent of the shares of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, it will be that corporation or that 
individual or that investor that all of a sudden becomes the 
controlling interest in the potash corporation. 
 
And people throughout the province of Saskatchewan are very 
concerned about that. We heard that when we were out of this 
legislature allowing the bells to ring in a very democratic way so 
that we could go out and talk to people about what the 
government was doing, get their reaction.

And they told us, we’re concerned that the government has gone 
too far. And where they’ve gone too far is on the public utilities 
that they promised that they would not privatize. They promised 
they would not sell those off. But we are also concerned about 
just the general thrust of the Progressive Conservative 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. We’re concerned 
about the privatization moves, because when they’re done with 
their privatization obsession, there’ll be nothing left for people in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Governments will have to rely on personal income tax, they’ll 
have to rely on tobacco tax, sales tax, and liquor tax, and I don’t 
advocate people drinking more and smoking more, and I 
certainly don’t advocate an increase in the sales tax or personal 
income tax in the province of Saskatchewan. People say that this 
government has gone too far, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill does not ensure or require that a majority 
of the ownership shall remain in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
pointed that out already. 
 
Forty-five per cent to foreign investors — that means outside of 
this country. The other 55 per cent is to residents, but the Bill 
doesn’t say residents of the province of Saskatchewan; residents 
are Canadian residents. And that causes me a great deal of 
concern as an individual member of this legislature. And I think 
that it must cause a great deal of concern to some of the 
back-bench members. 
 
I’m sure they can’t all be obsessed the way the cabinet, the 
Executive Council are, on their move to selling off one of the 
most valuable Crown corporations in the history of the province 
of Saskatchewan, which has literally turned over hundreds of 
millions of dollars to the provincial treasury in the province of 
Saskatchewan. In fact, this Bill does not ensure that any portion 
of ownership of the potash corporation remain in this fine 
province of ours. 
 
Although the Bill specifies, Mr. Speaker, that three directors shall 
be Saskatchewan residents, it does not specify the total number 
of directors. Therefore, if some foreign investor acquires 45 per 
cent of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, they may in 
fact, hypothetically, be able to put into place 12 directors of their 
choosing — don’t even have to be Canadian residents, let alone 
Saskatchewan residents. And this government seems to be 
offering what they would want people think was an olive branch 
or some great grandeur measure by allowing three Saskatchewan 
residents to be directors of the privatized Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well we say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not good enough. This is 
not good enough for people in this province who have enjoyed 
the prosperity of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan since 
its inception in 1976, when there was a great and a strong debate 
in this provincial legislature where members opposite criticized 
the government of the day. There was good debate from both 
sides of the House. 
 
And now we find a government that wants to remove the 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1093 
 

ability to debate this and other important issues by the 
introduction of Bill 1, which is an omnibus kind of privatization 
Bill allowing the cabinet, the Executive Council, to make all 
these decisions behind closed doors without ever having to come 
before this legislature. And I think that that is an atrocity, it’s a 
downgrading of our democratic system. And we want to ensure 
that not only does this Bill be stopped, we want to ensure that the 
privatization Bill for SaskPower and the privatization Bill 1, the 
omnibus Bill, are all stopped, because people in this province do 
not want these Bills to pass. People, in fact the majority of people 
in the province of Saskatchewan want the government to call an 
election on the very important issue of privatization, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is reported to have made more than $100 million 
in 1988. When this privatization proceeds, the profits will flow 
outside of the province of Saskatchewan; they’ll flow outside of 
Canada. In many instances the profits will flow outside of 
Canada. 
 
Right now, Mr. Speaker, when a dividend is declared by the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, that dividend is declared to 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, and the money is 
used on the services, the programs provided by the government. 
Well after privatization would take place — heaven help us if it 
ever does — these dividends would be declared to the 
shareholders. And again I point out, Mr. Speaker, that these 
dividends would go to the shareholders outside the province of 
Saskatchewan — 45 per cent outside of this country of ours, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t know where the rationale and where the common sense is 
in giving money to other countries that was previously money 
used by this province to run the programs and services of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, whether it was a Liberal or a 
Conservative or a New Democrat government, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think that probably the Government of Saskatchewan should be 
ashamed, ashamed of what they’re doing to the heritage and the 
future of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now we’ll all know about the Orient express 
by this point in time, where the Premier of this province went to 
Pacific Rim countries and promised a number of those countries 
that he’d sell them a share in the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. In fact, in some of the news articles that I have 
read, you can see that if he was held to the offers that he made 
while he was on his Orient express, he offered 25 per cent of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to five different countries. 
Now as an economist, I would have thought our Premier would 
have known better than to do that, because most people would 
understand even with basic elementary math, Mr. Speaker, that 
25 per cent five times makes 125 per cent. 
 
And I doubt if he could succeed in selling 125 per cent of the 
shares of the potash corporation because investors would be a 
little more prudent than that. They would only

buy 100 per cent of the shares, because they’re not about to give 
the people of Saskatchewan any bonus. What they want is the 
resources and the wealth from the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, 125 per cent can’t sell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t want to use only the things that have been 
said in this legislature and to use the Public Accounts and the 
records that are audited by the Provincial Auditor. Incidentally, 
when we talk about figures on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, we’re talking about figures that are on record — 
not rhetoric like the government is using; we’re talking about 
record. They’re on record in this building — financial statements 
audited, looked at by the Provincial Auditor who has been 
through three different administrations. He served the Liberals, 
he served the New Democrats, he served the Progressive 
Conservatives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, how can anyone question the audited — 
sometimes by private auditors, all the time accessed to the 
Provincial Auditor — how can members on the government side 
say that those figures are not correct? They are deceiving the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I didn’t want to use only the records here as a source, Mr. 
Speaker, so I took the opportunity of going and finding a few 
copies of The Financial Post 500. Now, Mr. Speaker, The 
Financial Post 500 is not a publication that’s sympathetic to New 
Democrats. It’s a publication that’s independent and serves the 
business community across Canada. And once every year, in the 
spring or summer, usually the summer, The Financial Post puts 
out a article in what’s called The Financial Post 500. 
 
And what The Financial Post 500 does, Mr. Speaker, is that it 
lays out the top 500 companies in Canada, either foreign owned 
or Canadian owned or a combination of those two. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what I did is that I looked at the years ’78-79, ’79-80; I 
looked at 1982; and then I looked at ’83, ’84, ’85, ’86, and ’87, 
the years where the Progressive Conservatives were the 
government in the province of Saskatchewan. And the record is 
not good. The Conservative record is not good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you look back to 1980, in the fiscal year 
ending 1980, Mr. Speaker, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan was ranked by sales — the amount of sales — in 
The Financial Post 500 as the 142nd of the top 500 companies in 
Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at 1983, ’84, ’85, ’86, and ’87, 
ranked by sales. In 1982 . . . pardon me, in 1983, the first full 
year that the Conservative administration was in Saskatchewan, 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan ranked in sales 285th. 
In 1984 the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was ranked by 
sales 259th. 
 
Now here it gets more interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like you 
to listen to this. In 1985 the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
ranked by sales — know what happened, Mr. Speaker? It didn’t 
even make the top 500 companies in Canada; didn’t even make 
the top 500 companies in Canada, ranked by sales. 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1094 
 

Well let’s look at 1986, Mr. Speaker. In 1986 in The Financial 
Post 500, for that year, they didn’t make the list again. They 
weren’t ranked by sales to even make the top 500 companies in 
Canada. Well that’s very interesting. And then after 1986, the 
government gets the idea that they’re going to sell the potash 
corporation, so what do they do? They start marketing potash 
from the potash corporation again. 
 
During the years where the company was run down, the reason it 
didn’t have sales that ranked at the top 500 companies in Canada 
is because they put the emphasis only on private sector 
companies and did not allow the potash that needed to be 
marketed from the potash corporation to be marketed. They 
squashed the company so that the private sector would have the 
upper hand. Private sector companies did quite well, thank you. 
There was no glut on the world market. Lots of countries were 
increasing their production of potash in the very years that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan did not even rank in the top 
500 companies. 
 
But 1987 comes along, after they’ve made the decision to sell the 
potash corporation, and said, well, we can’t sell this unless we 
boost the sales. Any investor in their right mind, if they looked at 
the financial statements, wouldn’t buy this company because it 
would appear to be a dud; it wasn’t making money all of a 
sudden. 
 
So they started increasing the sales of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in 1987, in 1987, Mr. Speaker, 
the company again got into the top 500. The Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan ranked by sales in 1987 as being 311. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find this a shameful performance by a 
Conservative government who’s bent on their ideology of 
privatizing everything that moves in this province. If it moves, 
privatize it; if it loses money, let’s keep it because we’re going to 
be thrown out of government next time and let the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan pay. But we say, Mr. Speaker, that’s not good 
enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what were some of those sales of potash in terms of 
dollars? 1980, the sales for potash through the potash corporation 
were $392,490,000; 1983, first year Conservatives came in, what 
were their value of sales? It had dropped by over $175 million. 
In 1983, sales in dollar terms of the potash corporation were 
$215,737,000. In 1984 the dollar sales, $272,353,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not a good performance. In fact they’re 
playing some games with the figures in the potash corporation. 
And my leader, when he spoke at the initial stage of the second 
reading of the debate on the potash corporation, pointed out the 
statistics he had at that time. And they are accurate statistics. But 
what it pointed out more than anything was that the government 
was trying to ruin the potash corporation just because they didn’t 
believe in it. 
 
In 1987, Mr. Speaker, the sales were actually less than they were 
in 1984, but they got back on to the top 500 companies in Canada 
with sales of $256,198,000. So something else that you have to 
look at, Mr. Speaker, is the ranking by assets of the Potash 
Corporation of

Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1980, Mr. Speaker, ranked by assets in The Financial Post 
500, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was 67th in 
Canada. Only 66 companies in Canada had more assets than the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — only 66 companies. Well 
we find the assets depleting here somewhere. I don’t know 
what’s happened. There was supposed to be an expansion that 
this government went ahead with at Lanigan. They had a chance 
to stop the Lanigan expansion, but still went ahead. And they 
went ahead at a time when they were saying there was a glut on 
the market, and then trying to blame it to the NDP prior to 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s deal with facts, not rhetoric and despise of a 
government that doesn’t care about people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — In 1983, Mr. Speaker, the first year the 
Conservatives had full control of the government in 
Saskatchewan, the ranking dropped by assets to 77th. We lost 10 
places in assets. Although they had a great expansion, assets of 
the company were dropping. Mr. Speaker, in 1984, ranked by 
assets, 73rd. So they picked up a little bit, a little glitch in there. 
 
But let’s go to 1987, Mr. Speaker. In 1987 the ranking by assets 
of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is 87th — dropped 
20 places since New Democrats were operating the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan in 1980. Now that’s not very good, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing it points out is that they’ve 
continually depleted the number of employees working in the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Every year since 
Conservatives have come into government, less people work for 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
They can find money to pay their defeated candidates and 
defeated MLAs and defeated cabinet ministers, but they can’t 
find money to pay employees to give adequate operating 
capability to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. They can’t 
market our potash that’s owned by the people of Saskatchewan, 
but they find a way to market potash through Canpotex for 
International Minerals — International Minerals, a company’s 
head office in Chicago. Is that where our head office for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well they say in the Bill that the potash corporation’s head office 
has to be in Saskatchewan, but it doesn’t describe the head office 
— could be a mail box, it could be a basement suite. We don’t 
know what that means. The head office is only important, Mr. 
Speaker, if it’s the head office where decisions are being made. 
And if decisions are made in Saskatchewan, that’s good. 
 
We maintain and we predict that if we allow this Bill to go 
through, which I don’t want to — we will do everything possible 
to stop the government — but if this Bill happened to go through, 
Mr. Speaker, I predict that we will find the decisions made over 
Saskatchewan potash in 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1095 
 

a board room in Chicago or New York or somewhere on the 
North American continent outside the province of Saskatchewan 
and outside of our country, Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to look at one last thing that I drew from 
The Financial Post, and that is the ranking of the top 500 
companies by net income — net income, Mr. Speaker. In 1980, 
under the management of a New Democrat government, an able 
board of directors, good employees, sound chief executive 
officers and upper management. They rank by net income 17th 
in the entire country. Now this is a more telling story, Mr. 
Speaker. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan ranked 17th 
out of all the companies in Canada according to The Financial 
Post 500. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1983, first full year of Conservatives were the 
government in the province of Saskatchewan, do you know the 
ranking by net income for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? Does anybody want to guess? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll tell you: it ranked 393rd — 393rd. In three short years, from 
17th rank by highest net income, from 17th to 393rd. That’s 
shameful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, in the last year reported in The Financial Post that I had 
the opportunity to look at, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan was ranked, by net income, 395th — 395th, from 
17th in 1980. Your government should be ashamed of that 
dismal, dismal record. 
 
Two of those years, in 1986 and 1985, the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan did not even appear in The Financial Post 500 — 
did not even appear. That’s how bad the ranking by net income 
was — didn’t even show up in one of the most prestigious 
financial magazines in our country. Shame on you. Shame on this 
Progressive Conservative government that is ruining the resource 
base, ruining the history and the future of this province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From 17th in 1980, by net income, to 395th in 1987. What a 
sorry, sorry, dismal performance, Mr. Speaker. That is a 
performance that I’m sure, I’m sure that back-bench members of 
the government have to be ashamed of. They cannot take pride 
in their record of resource management in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They should ask themselves these questions. Where is money 
going to come from to conduct the affairs of this province? Are 
you going to tax the potash companies like Ross Thatcher tried 
to in the 1960s? Ross Thatcher was unsuccessful in taxation to 
the potash companies in Saskatchewan, but he tried, Mr. Speaker, 
he tried. This government won’t try. If anything, the corporate 
tax base has gone down in the province of Saskatchewan while 
personal income tax has gone up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite don’t have a mandate to do 
what they’re doing. You know that, they know that, we know 
that, the public know that. You cannot find in any campaign 
literature of the Progressive Conservative Party any mention of 
privatization of assets of the province of Saskatchewan. You 
can’t find it anywhere in any campaign literature of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. In fact, when 
we look at

campaign literature — my colleagues and I have looked at it — 
we find that the government promised to reduce income tax; they 
promised free phones for senior citizens; they promised to 
remove the gas tax; they promised, they promised. All the 
promises are broken. All the promises are broken. We’re not into 
that debate here this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell you 
that it is a legacy of broken promises that this government has 
left people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now I remember a day, not too long ago, in 
this legislature that a member opposite hollered out: well you 
didn’t tell people you were going to buy the potash mines in 
Saskatchewan; you didn’t tell the people that. Well that’s just one 
more broken . . . You can’t say the word I wanted to say because 
it’s unparliamentary, but that is inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1630) 
 
Why is it inaccurate? Because in 1971 the New Democratic Party 
put out a publication called New Deal for People. And in the 
article, New Deal for People, it talks in here about looking at 
public ownership in the potash industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The government of the day, under Allan 
Blakeney, had looked at the potash industry. They felt that the 
taxation was inadequate on that corporate sector, and so they 
wanted to increase the taxation upon coming into government. 
 
Well they wanted to increase taxation, but the companies 
wouldn’t pay. And when the companies wouldn’t pay, the 
government said: well, we’ll be reasonable; open your books and 
show us how much money you’re making on potash in the 
province of Saskatchewan. How much money are you making? 
 
What was the private sector potash companies’ response at that 
time? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what the response was. 
They say: that’s none of your business; it’s none of your business 
how much money we’re making or how profitable we are. So 
how did we know how much to tax them? 
 
So they were taxed. They refused to pay their taxes. There was 
the Cigol court case, and in the Cigol decision the court ruled 
against the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And you 
can’t question the ruling of the court, just like we can’t question 
the ruling of your Chair, sir. So the government of the day had 
no decision other than to have some public ownership in the 
potash industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Why? One, so they had a window on the industry so they could 
see what was going on in the industry to see really how profitable 
or non-profitable it was. And it was profitable for the private 
companies, and it was profitable for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, owned by the people of Saskatchewan in this very 
province, 100 per cent. No 45 per cent foreign ownership, no 55 
per cent outside of the province of Saskatchewan — 100 per cent 
Canadian ownership. 
 
And people were told. Anyone who cared to read, 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1096 
 

anyone who followed the campaign in 1971 knew that in the New 
Deal for People we would look as a government under Allan 
Blakeney’s leadership at acquiring an interest in the potash 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well during the early 1970s, Mr. Speaker, we did look at public 
ownership in the potash industry in Saskatchewan, but there was 
no action taken. There was no actual action taken, Mr. Speaker, 
because during this period of time we wanted to deal reasonably 
with the private sector in the province of Saskatchewan. Because 
we believe in the private sector. It’s not only hallowed ground for 
Tory administrations to say they’re the great defenders of the 
private sector. In fact, when you start talking to small businesses, 
they feel they’ve been betrayed as much as the wage earners that 
work for them. 
 
We believe in the private sector. We believe that the public sector 
is a very important tool for the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And thirdly, we believe in co-operatives. And 
those three sectors of the economy have to work together in some 
harmony in the province of Saskatchewan. With any one of those 
sectors depleted and weak and not able to function, the private 
sector will dominate. And what will we have? We’ll have a 
limited taxation base. We’ll have no resource revenue, and we’ll 
have a province that is even deeper in poverty than it is today 
because of the administration of the government in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the 1975 election came along, Mr. Speaker, and there was 
New Deal ’75, put out by the Saskatchewan New Democratic 
Party. And what did this say? The same thing, Mr. Speaker. This 
said, in the New Deal ’75, that we would look at and get into 
ownership in the public sector for potash in the province of 
Saskatchewan. So we were up front with people in 1971. We 
were up front with people in 1975. We’re still up front with 
people in this current year. When is the government opposite 
going to be up front with people, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from these 
pamphlets at length a little later on and I’ll come back to them, 
but I don’t want to belabour the commitment that we made to the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan and the commitment that 
we kept with people in the province of Saskatchewan. But I will 
come back to that a little bit later in my remarks. 
 
Now as you know, 1976 is the first year of operation of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. And do you know that, Mr. 
Speaker, in that year, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
paid more than a million dollars in provincial taxes and royalties 
and made a profit of half a million dollars in the first year, in their 
start-up time, Mr. Speaker? How can anyone argue with profits 
like that? 
 
Is this government saying that they would rather tax people in the 
province of Saskatchewan for, in that particular year it would be 
a million dollars in taxes and royalties and a half million dollars 
in profit? Now where else is that money going to come from? I 
cannot believe that this government is going to tax potash 
companies. They’re going to tax people in the province of

Saskatchewan. 
 
Because if you look at the record from 1982 until 1988, personal 
income tax goes up all the time; corporate income tax goes down 
all the time. And so any indication that we have, Mr. Speaker, 
any rational person that follows the argument knows that this 
money would have to be picked up from taxpayers in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have nowhere else to get it from, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the members opposite are clapping, Mr. 
Speaker. I can’t believe that they would agree with increasing the 
tax burden on people in the province of Saskatchewan. I can 
hardly believe that. The members on this side of the House are 
dismayed that some of the members opposite would want to 
increase still further taxation on the people of the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m only talking about the first start-up year in 
1976 of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Let’s look at 
other years. In 1977 taxes and royalties went up to $16 million. 
You’re going to tax people in the province of Saskatchewan for 
that extra $16 million as well? I see the members opposite 
giggling and laughing about that. But we want them to know that 
this is serious, deadly serious, Mr. Speaker, because taxpayers in 
the province don’t want to pay another $16 million in taxes. 
 
In 1977, Mr. Speaker, in 1977 the taxes and royalties not only 
equalled $16 million, but profits topped $1.1 million, Mr. 
Speaker — $1.1 million. In 1978 taxes and royalties went up to 
35 million, and profits went to $25 million. In 1979 more than 
$58 million on royalties and taxes, and the company’s profits 
went up to $78 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1980 the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan paid $90 
million in taxes and royalties, and this money is used for, as I said 
before, programs and services and all the items that people in the 
province are used to having at their disposal because of sound 
management and good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . incidentally, I’m happy you’re keeping 
good control of the House here this afternoon. I even appreciate 
the applause from members opposite when I make good points. 
It’s very good to finally see that some of the back-bench 
members are listening to the arguments against the privatization 
moves of the government that they represent — not long, mind 
you, just when the next election comes. But they can clap because 
they’ll be doing one-handed claps then because the people of 
Saskatchewan will not be returning them to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Yes, $90 million in 1980, and its profits were 
$167 million. And the potash corporation on top of that, in 1980 
I think, for the first time paid a dividend. On top of taxes and 
royalties and the profit, they paid a dividend, a bonus of $50 
million to the province of Saskatchewan. That’s how successful 
the Potash 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1097 
 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was in 1980, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
how successful the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1981 taxes and royalties paid were $71 million. Its profits were 
$141 million, and the company paid a second dividend of $50 
million to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now that was the record of the potash corporation from its 
inception in 1976 until 1982, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a good 
record. And this government opposite keeps saying how much 
money was lost paying for those potash mines they refer to as 
being empty holes in the ground. Well, Mr. Speaker, empty holes 
in the ground don’t return you hundreds of millions of dollars in 
profit, in royalties, in taxes, in dividends. If they’re empty holes, 
they wouldn’t have paid that. 
 
Now the other argument to show that they are not empty holes in 
the ground and a bad investment is, if they were empty holes in 
the ground, what investor would buy a share on the stock 
exchange or through a stockbroker for an empty hole in the 
ground? Come on, Mr. Speaker, this government should give 
investors more credit than to think that they could bamboozle 
them into buying a share in an empty hole in the ground. 
 
Do you think the 45 per cent ownership that might go to China 
or Japan or some company in the United States of America, that 
that 45 per cent foreign ownership would buy empty holes in the 
ground? Oh come on, Mr. Speaker. The government opposite is 
in very big trouble, and I think the member from Kelsey-Tisdale 
should know that. I don’t see how you can be proud of your 
government’s record on the potash corporation or the 
privatization moves. 
 
In fact, instead of having the Barber commission or the Barber 
panel go around the province, why don’t the members of the 
government go out and talk to people around the province as we 
did over a period of time when we had to ring the bells in this 
legislature to preserve democracy and to preserve the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now the member from . . . so seldom I hear 
from him, I can’t . . . Yorkton, the member from Yorkton leaning 
back there. Why don’t you go out and hold meetings around and 
explain the privatization moves of the government? Why do you 
have to spend an estimated $1,150 a day to three panelists to go 
around the province with a megabuck advertising campaign to 
back them up, resources provided by the taxpayers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, plus their per diem; why doesn’t the 
member from Yorkton just go out himself and go and talk to a 
few people. Take a petition in your hand. 
 
(1645) 
 
How you get a petition going, I’d like to explain it. How you get 
a petition going is that you check with the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly and you get the proper wording. There’s possibly 
someone in the Conservative caucus that

would know how to do this, but if there isn’t, just check with the 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, and they will lay out to you 
the wording for a petition that’s acceptable to the rules of the 
legislature. And you don’t want to fill up the whole page with 
this — it’s very important that you don’t fill up the whole page, 
because you have to leave room for signatures. And so then you 
. . . on the space that’s available, you get some lines typed on 
there and number them. And the reason for numbering them is so 
you don’t have to count how many signatures are on your petition 
each time. 
 
You just look, and if the petition’s full and you numbered it down 
to 25, you know you got 25 signatures on the petition. And then 
if you got 100 petitions — but I don’t think you’d get that many 
on your petition anyway — but if you got a hundred, you just 
take 25 times 100; you got 2,500. And that’s how you do a 
petition. 
 
So I hope that I’ve informed you somewhat this afternoon, and I 
challenge the member from Yorkton to go out and . . . even now 
while I’m speaking, if you want to go and get your petition drawn 
up, whatever words you want to put on it, as long as it’s 
acceptable. And you want to make sure it’s acceptable to the 
Legislative Assembly, under the rules, otherwise it will be 
embarrassing for you because when you table your petitions in 
the legislature, the Clerk might have to stand up the next day and 
say that the petition is out of order, that it’s not in the proper form. 
So I encourage you to check the accuracy of your petition. 
 
But anyway, I challenge you now, even if you want to do this 
while I’m speaking, go out and get yourself . . . oh heck, get 
yourself a dozen petitions drawn up. Say whatever you want on 
them in the proper form, and go around and get people to sign it. 
That’s how you get communication with people. You don’t have 
to spent $1,150 a day on per diems, plus megabucks on 
advertising to try and convince people of something they already 
know. They know you’re no good. 
 
They know the plan on privatization needs to be stopped, and 
who’s going to stop that? New Democrats in the province of 
Saskatchewan will stop your plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, the member from Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake says, the people will stop it. That’s accurate. New 
Democrats will lead the charge, and the people of Saskatchewan 
will stop this obsession with privatization. But I would bet that 
you wouldn’t get any signatures on your petition — not very 
many. We’ll have 100,000 names . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Pardon? I beg your pardon? Are you going to speak in this 
debate? When would you like on? When is he coming on? 
 
Okay, as soon as you have your speech ready, you let me know 
and I’ll sit down as soon as I’m done giving my speech, because 
I look forward to your speech on the potash corporation in the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Carry on. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well, thank you very much. The member from 
Regina Wascana asked me to carry on. I’m very 
  



 
May 11, 1989 

 

1098 
 

happy to be able to enlighten you like this, this afternoon in this 
Assembly. 
 
I was wondering . . . I know it’s not regular procedure, but since 
there is some dialogue going back and forth, does anybody want 
any more information on how to draw up a petition and how to 
get it around to the public? If you do, if you do, just put your 
hands up and I can meet with you. I can meet with them. Okay, 
I’ll either meet with you after, or the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, who’s here this afternoon doing a very good 
job himself, will send you over a copy of the petition. And you 
can change words, change words to put it in your slant. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I want to talk about that petition. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Which petition did you want to talk about, sir? 
 
An Hon. Member: — The one up in North Battleford that the 
chamber did on your . . . 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Oh, the one . . . the chamber in North 
Battleford. Well, the chamber in North Battleford are a fine group 
of business . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The Bill before 
the House is Bill No. 20, the potash Bill, and I’d ask the member 
to relate his comments to Bill No. 20. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well you made me lose my train of thought 
there, Mr. Speaker. I was so much into the debate with the 
members opposite, and I know that we’ve talked about the 
chamber of commerce many times in the past, and I thought 
maybe you’d allow us to maybe talk a bit about that again, about 
the fine business people in North Battleford who make that one 
of the most buoyant communities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that there’s been some 
communication between the House leaders. I understand that 
they’ve agreed not to sit this evening, and therefore I’d move to 
adjourn the debate on this Bill 20. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:51 p.m. 
 
 


