


















































May 23, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 23, 1989 
 

1295 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you and to the members of the House, nine Girl Guides 
accompanied by two of their instructors; Girl Guide Company 
No. 19. And they are, as I say, nine of them and they are 
accompanied by Nancy Hordern and Dorothy Schuster. 
 
Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. I’ll have an opportunity 
to meet with you at 7:45, I understand, and we’ll have a picture 
taken. And meanwhile enjoy yourself in the House for the next 
little while and I’ll see you a little later. Please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE (continued) 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was relating to the 
Assembly before the 5 o’clock adjournment, we’re dealing 
today with a very, very serious crisis that the government has 
brought upon themselves. We’re dealing with the fact that a 
minister attacked an officer of the Legislative Assembly in a 
very scurrilous, unfounded manner. 
 
This attack by the member for Kindersley has brought about a, 
as you ruled, a prima facie case of privilege that we are 
addressing here in the legislature dealing with the impropriety 
of the member for Kindersley and what his allegations of the 
Provincial Auditor were. 
 
I had mentioned before 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, that in the short 
time I have been a member of this Legislative Assembly I have 
not seen so serious a charge brought against a minister, 
certainly not a charge that is so patently true and so proven in 
document after document after document that subsequent 
speakers to me will be laying out in even greater detail than 
what I do. 
 
Not only are we dealing with a very, very serious matter, but 
we’ve got, not one, but two questions of privilege before this 
Legislative Assembly right now. And it’s truly a sad 
commentary on the state of affairs that our Legislative 
Assembly has come to this at this stage in our session, or at any 
stage for that matter. 
 
It gives me no pleasure whatever to be participating in this 
particular matter. Indeed we should not be debating this if the 
member for Kindersley had at least got his facts straight or 
stuck with pure facts and not made some wild allegations that 
not only are not founded, but that we will be proving are 
unfounded in documents such as the special report by the 
provincial auditor tabled here just at about two minutes to 5. I 
was interrupted as I was speaking then, so you could properly 
table that report. 
 
That report I’ve had an opportunity to peruse, and it just lays 
out in spades the things that New Democrats have been saying 
now. I can truly appreciate the silence from members opposite 
because you know you’ve got caught with your hand in the 
cookie jar. You know, you know, 

that the Minister of Justice, the member for Kindersley, has not 
been acting in good faith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was quoting from a Leader-Post article dated 
May 23. I’m going to briefly, very briefly summarize the 
highlights of what I had read there, and then pick up where I 
had left off. 
 
The article starts by saying: 
 

It wasn’t until Friday morning that Saskatchewan truly 
discovered how distant from reality a government can 
become midway through its term. 
 

And then it talks a bit about the affairs of the Legislative 
Assembly on Friday when the attack on the Provincial Auditor 
were made. It goes on . . . And the member for Regina Wascana 
. . . Star-Phoenix, May 23 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 
the member for Mayfair says who read it to me. At least I can 
read my own material. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina South. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Regina South. Whatever. Whatever. I think they 
ran out of think-and-do books on the other side at any rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article goes on and points out that the 
Provincial Auditor, if he is correct, there is three and one-half 
billion dollars that the Provincial Auditor has not been able to 
account for — three and a half billion dollars of provincial 
spending between the government and the Crown corporations 
that the Provincial Auditor feels he should be covering. 
 
Then the article deals with Friday, which is what we are dealing 
with here in this instance. And the article is really questioning 
what the Minister of Justice, the member for Kindersley, was 
really trying to do. The end of the paragraph says: 
 

Either Andrew believed no one would ever see the full text 
of the letter or somebody convinced him an overnight 
epidemic of illiteracy had gripped Saskatchewan and only 
cabinet ministers from Kindersley were immune. 
 

And I think that pretty much sums up what should be put to the 
statements that the Minister of Justice made on Friday. In 
Hansard, page 1246, at one point he said — and he was listing 
the points addressed in the letter — and he said, I quote: 
 

Number three, Mr. Speaker, is, and I will read: 
 
That he would of course expect to receive, on retirement, 
the same allowance and economic adjustments that are 
provided to deputy ministers. 
 

That sounds pretty damning. It sounds like the Provincial 
Auditor was merely trying to look after his retirement. But what 
is the truth, in the letter dated April 20th to Mr. Larry Kyle from 
Mr. G.J.K. Neill, the letter said: 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1296 
 

He would, of course, expect to receive on retirement the 
same allowances and economic adjustments that are 
provided Deputy Ministers in accordance with The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 

In according with existing legislation, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it 
amazing what leaving out seven words will do. It is . . . seven 
words completely turned that sentence around, make what is 
outlined in law seem like the Provincial Auditor is asking for 
some special consideration. No special favours asked here at all, 
simply a confirmation that the law will be followed and his 
normal retirement will take place. 
 
The second part, in answer to the same question the Minister of 
Justice said, and I quote: 
 

Number four, Mr. Speaker: he also recommends that his 
successor be appointed internally — in other words, that he 
has a say in who his successor is. 
 

Well let me point out what the next sentence of the April 20 
letter said, and this is a quote from the letter: 
 

He also recommended that his successor be appointed 
internally in accordance with the convention that has been 
established in this province, Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, 
P.E.I., Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia. 
 

But the most important, “in this province”. So the auditor is 
simply saying, for heaven’s sakes, let’s do what we have done 
— let’s keep the appointment of an auditor out of the hands of 
Executive Council, out of the hands of cabinet alone. Let the 
Provincial Auditor deal with that. 
 
The third allegation that the member for Kindersley made in 
answer to a subsequent question, and I quote. Again he quoted 
this from the April 20 letter: 
 

I am advised if speedy acceptance of this proposal is 
confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor will amend 
his report to reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken 
(to negotiate the deal.) 
 

Well, let’s see what the letter says. It says: 
 

I am advised that if speedy acceptance of both these 
proposals is confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor 
will amend his Report to reflect that satisfactory steps have 
been negotiated to answer his concerns. 
 

These legitimate concerns that the Provincial Auditor raised 
earlier, and that indeed, in the conversation that the government 
had initiated, Mr. Speaker. So we have a dastardly attack by the 
Minister of Justice on an officer of this institution, an officer 
that we in the opposition have been asking . . . Bring the 
Provincial Auditor before the bar in this very Legislative 
Assembly Chamber. Let’s find out what happened. All of the 
documentation that has come our way just reaffirms in spades 
what we have been saying. It confirms that the Minister of 
Justice is not in order in his attacks on the Provincial Auditor. 

Mr. Speaker, what we’re dealing with today is an 11-year 
veteran of this Legislative Assembly in his second term as a 
cabinet minister, not some rookie. Eleven years in this 
Legislative Assembly in his second term as a cabinet minister, 
and yet he goes about making statements that are unfounded, 
such as the one that appeared in the Kindersley Clarion last 
summer, and this is from the same article that I was reading. 
 

“Auditors are people,” (and I’m quoting from the member 
for Kindersley), “Auditors are people who bump against 
reality once a year,” he told the Kindersley Clarion last 
summer. “They live in that jungle zoo and call themselves 
bureaucrats. They wear thick glasses because they’re 
looking at the fine print to see if every “i” is dotted.” 
 

So clearly, you’ve got a minister that has no feel for what the 
honourable profession of auditing is all about. We have a 
Minister of Justice who thinks for all the world . . . he states for 
all the world to hear that auditors are not even a necessary evil. 
He thinks they’re unnecessary. He thinks all they’re looking for 
is to make sure the i’s are dotted and the t’s are crossed. 
 
That is not, as any auditor would tell you, that is not what the 
profession is all about. And in this particular instance, the 
Provincial Auditor, the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, has to 
report, is the watch-dog for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 
We are asking in this instance for some simple fairness to be 
presented. Fairness, that’s all we ask, fairness. 
 
The letter . . . or pardon me, the article that I have been referring 
to, I just want to read the last two paragraphs, Mr. Speaker, and 
then I’ll move on to other things. And it says, I quote: 
 

Andrew, one assumes, is either preparing an apology or 
compiling documentation to back up a grave insinuation he 
has made about a non-partisan servant of the legislative 
assembly. 
 
Come Tuesday afternoon when MLAs return to their 
desks, Andrew will need more than the misinterpretation of 
one letter to survive the debate he has brought on himself. 
 

I think that that article was very well written. I commend Ron 
Petrie for it, and I commend members opposite to take the time 
to read a newspaper instead of the funny papers and they would 
quickly come to see how serious this matter is. 
 
(1915) 
 
It’s truly not a laughing matter, Mr. Speaker, we’re dealing with 
a very serious allegation; we’re asking for some very serious 
results, if you will, from this motion. And I hope, it is my 
sincere hope that as long as I’m ever in this Legislative 
Assembly that we never deal, we never have to deal with such 
an issue again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now to deal with the special report by 
the Provincial Auditor that was tabled just minutes before 5 
o’clock. I’m not dealing with the whole 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1297 
 

article, of course, I’m simply going to be referring to the parts 
that are germane to the case that we are making against the 
member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has caused a crisis, and it is a 
crisis entirely, entirely of its own making. The annual report of 
the Provincial Auditor was a damning indictment of the PC 
government’s waste and mismanagement. Indeed, the 
Provincial Auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker, is probably the 
harshest Provincial Auditor report that any government in 
Saskatchewan has ever received. Small wonder that government 
members opposite, after seven sorry, Tory years, want to 
discredit the Provincial Auditor. Small wonder that they want to 
hide from this Provincial Auditor’s report. But it can’t be done. 
You can run but you can’t hide, and they’re finding that out. 
 
So rather than acknowledge their shortcomings, rather than 
move swiftly to clean up its act, instead of heeding the message, 
the government attacks the messenger. And in doing so, the 
Minister of Justice and the Premier, who has fully supported 
this minister, the Premier who at every step of this fiasco has 
totally supported the Minister of Justice — the Premier and the 
Minister of Justice have therefore made some serious 
allegations of misconduct and impropriety on the part of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The allegations themselves were so improper, so unacceptable, 
so outrageous an assault on an officer of this legislature that the 
Speaker, you, sir, have ruled there is a prima facie case of 
privilege. 
 
On Friday, and again on Tuesday, the minister tabled certain 
correspondence which he claimed backed up and supported his 
allegations. In fact, as recent history has shown, the minister 
tabled only a very small fraction of the relevant correspondence. 
Moreover, the minister misquoted and misrepresented the little 
bit of correspondence that he did table in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The article that I have just quoted rather extensively from, 
points that out. And I couldn’t agree more with that article and 
everything else that has come our way. Everything I’ve been 
able to get my hands on supports the fact that the minister 
misquoted and misrepresented what little correspondence he did 
table. 
 
Therefore late today, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor took 
an unprecedented, extraordinary step by providing to all 
members of the legislature here in this Assembly this special 
report, sir. And all members should note, and the public should 
note three very important features in this special report. 
 
First, it’s been prepared and submitted in accordance with the 
law — legally submitted to the proper place. 
 
Second, this special report has been submitted to all members of 
the legislature —- 64 members of the legislature — because the 
Provincial Auditor is responsible to the legislature as a whole, 
not to the cabinet, and certainly not only to the government of 
the day. 

The third thing that is worthy of note is this special report 
appears to include all of the relevant correspondence between 
the government and the auditor, not just selected portions, 
selected at the whim of the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that I’ve had an opportunity to review 
this special report very briefly — as you can well understand 
having received it a scant two hours and 20 minutes ago — but 
I’d like to note the following points in this special report, and 
I’ll do it chronologically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On page 2, section 1.01, that clearly shows that this particular 
process that we’ve been talking about was initiated by the 
government representative, Mr. Kyle — clearly, section 1.01, 
page 2. Section 1.03, it was for Mr. Kyle who first proposed 
three specific issues for negotiation. They are: one, joint audits; 
two, amendments to The (Provincial) Auditor’s Act; and three, 
the auditor’s retirement and participation in naming his 
successor. Very clearly there. 
 
We go to page 3, Mr. Speaker, again selecting the sections that 
are pertinent to this particular case that we’re dealing with 
today. On page 3, section 1.07, the minister has made a great 
deal about the package, this package referred to in a letter of 
April 14th, and the auditor included that package in this report 
as Appendix V to the report. The package is right there in black 
and white for any of the government members that know how to 
read. It’s there for all the rest of us, too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, colleagues of mine on this side of the House will 
be referring in greater detail, I’m sure, to those sections. I just 
simply want to point it out so that some of the, particularly the 
back-benchers opposite will have an opportunity to look 
through it. 
 
We’re trying to lead you through this whole dirty process step 
by step. Have a chance to look at it. Formulate your own 
opinion. You were elected as representatives for your own 
constituencies. Certainly you were elected as Conservatives, but 
your first obligation is to represent your constituencies, and 
your constituencies will be well served if you take this matter 
very, very seriously. 
 
Come to whatever conclusions you can, come . . . the member 
for Saltcoats muttering from his seat. I look forward to hearing 
him enter this debate. I simply urge that members opposite look 
through the information, come to whatever conclusion you can 
on your own, honestly. But I’m pleading that this is important 
enough that you at least satisfy yourselves, rather than simply 
falling into line with what the party line is. 
 
On page 3, section 1.08, that so-called package, Mr. Speaker, 
essentially deals only with the issues that had been raised by the 
government’s representative in the first place. Nothing new, 
nothing new there at all. 
 
Then we go to page 4, and as an act of good faith, the auditor 
went so far as to offer to place his retirement letter in escrow in 
order to demonstrate his good faith. And it’s a short sentence 
and I will read it, middle of page four: 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1298 
 

In order to allay any fears that I might not retire, as I 
offered, I suggested my retirement letter be placed in 
escrow. 
 

And he did so. Also on page 4, Mr. Speaker, section 1.10, the 
letter of April 20 tabled by the minister last Friday contained 
two attachments; this special report includes both of those 
attachments. Both the attachments support what members on 
this side of the Legislative Assembly have been saying all 
along, and that is that the Minister of Justice has attacked an 
officer of this Legislative Assembly, and it is not in the least bit 
acceptable. We want that officer of the Legislative Assembly to 
come here before the legislature and defend himself and defend 
his office. 
 
I think that is only a fair thing to do, Mr. Speaker, when I look 
at all of the evidence that has been mounted, all of the things 
that have come our way, it all supports what we have been 
saying, that the member for Kindersley has acted with a great 
deal of impropriety. The member for Kindersley has viciously, 
maliciously attacked an officer of the Legislative Assembly, 
and it’s not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the special report as a whole, and every single 
piece of correspondence in it taken individually, demonstrates 
beyond a shadow of a doubt that the Provincial Auditor has 
consistently acted professionally, honourably, and in order to 
protect the integrity of his office and to protect the public 
interest. We would expect no more from a person in that high 
office. We would not expect anything less either, but we can’t 
expect anything more than to consistently, continually act in 
good faith. 
 
The minister’s allegations are clearly not based in fact but based 
in political desperation. 
 
I liken it to somebody who has had a pounding migraine for two 
weeks straight, just a throbbing migraine headache, and they 
will do anything, anything for 10 seconds of relief. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, I submit, is what the member for Kindersley did 
Friday last in question period; he trotted out excerpts of a letter. 
Surely the member for Kindersley is not that incompetent. 
Surely he knew that when he tabled the letter we would see it, 
the media would see it, he would get articles like the one I 
quoted from. Surely the member for Kindersley was behaving 
just like that person that’s had a two-week migraine and just 
would do anything for 10 seconds of relief from that throbbing 
headache. And that’s what has happened in this case. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is in a large part why the minister’s 
comments do indeed constitute a grievous breach of privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I close I would like to briefly, very briefly, 
hit the highlights, I think, of what I said. And I want to also deal 
with the Deputy Premier’s remarks when he had his brief 
intervention into this debate. He talked about Saskoil, and he 
talked about why the Provincial Auditor was off base in calling 
for the Saskoil report. 
 
But I want to refer briefly to the Provincial Auditor’s report, 
Appendix III: the following audits were not fully completed at 
March 24, 1989, and he lists 26 of them. 

Nowhere does Saskoil appear. 
 

Appendix IV, List of (the) Financial Statements and/or 
Annual Reports Not Tabled in The Legislative Assembly 
in (a) Manner Required by Law 
 

And there are 64 financial statements and/or annual reports not 
tabled — some two pages’ worth — that include Crown 
Investments Corporation, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
public employees’ superannuation fund, SaskTel, Sask Pension 
Plan. But nowhere, Mr. Speaker, does it mention Saskoil — 
nowhere. 
 
So I think the Deputy Premier’s remarks were completely off 
the mark, as has been virtually all of the weak defence of the 
member for Kindersley. All of the defence has been very, if I 
might put it, so very inept. But perhaps I’m choosing the wrong 
word, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps inept is not the correct word. 
 
It is very difficult; in fact, it is almost impossible to defend the 
indefensible, and I think that’s why we have seen such weak 
defence from members opposite. It is impossible to defend the 
indefensible. When you’re on track, when you’re on the proper 
side of an issue, you can make your points and you can make 
them fairly succinctly, Mr. Speaker. But when you’re on the 
wrong side of an issue, it becomes very difficult. 
 
(1930) 
 
So we’ve had a situation where the member for Kindersley 
quoted from an April 20 letter, quoted it out of context in every 
instance, clearly quoted it out of context. We caught him with 
that. The whole world, you might say, caught him with that. So 
then today we witness him talking about some other 
information that only he was privileged to, only he was 
privileged to, and then now we have that in the Special Report 
By The Provincial Auditor. 
 
That special report — I’m unaware of a Provincial Auditor ever 
before having made a special report as in this instance. I’m just 
simply unaware, Mr. Speaker, of it ever having taken place in 
. . . certainly in Saskatchewan history, but I’m unaware of it 
anywhere else for that matter. 
 
We have a desperate government driven to desperate measures, 
desperate acts from desperate people, trying desperately to 
make something other than their record an issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I simply want to again urge members 
opposite to consider the facts; look at them. If you want to see 
the letters from which we’re quoting — most of them you have, 
but if you want to get copies of it, either ask the member for 
Kindersley, ask the Deputy Premier. Come on over; ask us in an 
aside. We’ll show it to you; we’ll take you through it step by 
step, but I ask you to look at this matter very, very seriously. 
 
It is not the first time the member for Kindersley has attacked 
an officer of this legislature. The member for Regina Centre has 
pointed out at least three occasions 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1299 
 

previously where that has happened. At some point that has to 
stop. We’re urging that that point be now, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore, it’s with a great deal of mixed feelings, I guess, 
because as I pointed out I’d rather not be talking with . . . rather 
not be dealing with this issue, because I wish the issue weren’t 
there to deal with. 
 
In closing, I am totally supportive of the motion made by the 
member for Quill Lakes, seconded by my colleague from 
Regina Centre. And I urge all hon. members to consider this 
matter very, very carefully and support the motion of my 
colleagues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few 
words with regards to this motion by the hon. member from 
Quill Lakes, bringing a motion of censure against me, asking 
for me to resign, Mr. Speaker, asking me to apologize, Mr. 
Speaker, to this Assembly. And I would, in my own defence, 
Mr. Speaker, offer the following explanation and argument. 
 
I will refer hon. members to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I believe that we should 
allow the Minister of Justice to proceed with his remarks and 
give him the courtesy of not interrupting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
first of all . . . that the motion of privilege is brought, as I 
understand from the motion today, with regards to what I said 
in the House on Friday last. So before we go into the various 
arguments, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer you and all 
members to exactly what was said in the written record of this 
Assembly last Friday. 
 
I do not intend to read the entire question period. In that 
question period there was a number of questions posed by the 
Leader of the Opposition and responses given by myself. 
 
The first question dealt with the Report of the Provincial 
Auditor, and the response that I gave to that dealt with the fact 
that we had not denied information from some Crown 
corporations. And I went through Saskoil, SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), etc. And I 
don’t think that’s what the hon. member was referring to with 
regards to his point today. 
 
A second question was raised. Again I responded to that 
question, the second question, by saying, Mr. Speaker, the 
proper forum in which to call witnesses is the Public Accounts 
Committee. Now I still hold that view that Public Accounts 
Committee is where you deal with the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. That has been the case for some time. Public Accounts 
Committee which is now, I might add, open to the media, which 
wasn’t prior to 1982, have the right to call witnesses to deal 
with the questions. They can call the Provincial Auditor, they 
can call anyone else they wish, Mr. Speaker, and the members 
of this side of the House stand ready, willing to call anyone to 
the Public Accounts Committee to deal with this particular 
auditor’s report. 
 
Now I take it that there’s nothing defamatory or improper 

about that statement. I think it properly states, Mr. Speaker, 
what in fact the rules of this House have been for Public 
Accounts for some time now. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition then goes on to pose a question. 
To that I respond and I will read verbatim. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in response to that question, I would hope 
that you will allow me some latitude to read into the record 
today a letter sent to the lawyer by CIC by the lawyer for 
the Provincial Auditor . . . In that letter — and I will 
answer the question if the hon. member is prepared to 
listen. In this letter, which I will table in this legislature as 
the rules require, following question period. 
 
The lawyer for the Provincial Auditor sets out in a letter to 
the lawyers for CIC, four conditions that he wishes to see 
action taken on. The conditions are: number one, that he be 
allowed to go to the Board of Internal Economy to get his 
budget; that he doesn’t have to go to treasury board; that 
his estimates are not debated in this House. 
 

Now, is that in not in fact the case, when people go to the Board 
of Internal Economy, of which you are the chairman, Mr. 
Speaker, estimates are prepared, as you know full well. You 
members from the opposition, members from the government 
go through the budget. At this point in time we go through the 
budgets of the Legislative Assembly. We go through the 
budgets of members, and members’ services, and we go through 
the budget of the Provincial Library. Those budgets are then 
transmitted to the Department of Finance and are included in a 
budget. Those estimates, Mr. Speaker, are not debated in this 
Chamber. They are referred out to a standing committee of this 
Chamber on estimates and are not debated in here. 
 
Now I have a view, and while I’m here speaking on that 
particular question if I might, that Board of Internal Economy, 
which I and other members of this House were instrumental in 
having adopted in this Assembly back in 1981, and that is to 
deal with members’ services. I don’t know what the budget is 
now. I suspect it’s 10, $12 million, although I perhaps am 
wrong there. 
 
But if we are to add . . . Pardon me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Eight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Eight million dollars. If we are to add to 
that the Provincial Auditor’s budget and the others that have 
requested to go there, the provincial Ombudsman, the Human 
Rights Commission, and a series of others, we run a budget up 
to 25, perhaps $25 million, which we have no basic analysts in 
there, as you know, Mr. Speaker; the analysts are the elected six 
members that sit on that Board of Internal Economy, and they 
are the ones that determine what in fact the budget should be. 
 
Now I happen to be one that doesn’t believe that that Board of 
Internal Economy should go beyond what we’re doing now. 
Others perhaps have a different view. That view is what I have, 
and, Mr. Speaker, in referring to that 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1300 
 

particular question I think that’s worth looking at. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker . . . So anything I said there, I hardly 
would find that to be a breach of privilege. 
 

Point number two, Mr. Speaker: that he be able to audit, 
either jointly or by himself, all departments of government, 
which is allowed now, and all Crown corporations, which 
has been the case since 1978. 
 

Now is that offensive, Mr. Speaker, to say that? 
 

Number three, Mr. Speaker, is, and I will read: 
 
That he would of course expect to receive, on retirement, 
the same allowance and economic adjustments provided to 
deputy ministers. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor is entitled to a salary 
equivalent to, Mr. Speaker, equivalent to the average of deputy 
ministers. I know that; I brought in the legislation in 1983. Prior 
to that, Mr. Speaker, the salary of the Provincial Auditor was as 
set by Executive Council or by cabinet. We changed it, Mr. 
Speaker, when we came to government in 1983. We changed it 
to tie it to deputy ministers on a long-standing request to the 
Provincial Auditor . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The minister is attempting to make his 
remarks, and he’s once more being interrupted, and I ask the 
hon. members to allow him to continue. I think he has that right 
and privilege. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — So it’s tied to deputy ministers, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s by law. And by law his salary is set 
according to what the average of deputy ministers are as of 
April of each year. That amendment I brought forward 
personally in response to the Provincial Auditor’s request while 
I was in Finance. The reason, Mr. Speaker, is to provide the 
Provincial Auditor with the sense of independence that he did 
not have to be beholding to cabinet in order to determine what 
his salary is. And why? So there could be no sense, Mr. 
Speaker, that somehow cabinet would hold over him a salary 
increase or no increase according to what his report might be. 
That’s the fundamental basis of that amendment in 1983. So it 
refers to that. 
 

Number four, Mr. Speaker: he also recommends that his 
successor be appointed internally — in other words, that he 
has a say in who his successor is. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the legislation, the law is clear. When a Provincial 
Auditor retires, his replacement is selected by Lieutenant 
Governor in Council on the advice or after consulting the Public 
Accounts Committee — the Public Accounts Committee. So 
it’s not quite like you would have in the case of the Clerk of the 
legislature, which is a different rule, I believe, than that, and 
we’ve been through that in the Board of Internal Economy as 
well. But it is to be appointed by Lieutenant Governor in 
Council on the advice of the Public Accounts Committee. 
Okay? 
 
Now I would find it improper for anybody to sit down and 

say, we are about to determine who the next Provincial Auditor 
is. That is nobody’s job except Lieutenant Governor in Council 
on the advice of the Public Accounts Committee, and that 
should not be involved in any kind of consultation or 
negotiations, Mr. Speaker, into some kind of a deal as to where 
that individual would be. 
 
Number four, he also . . . Okay. Then we go on to Mr. 
Romanow’s next question which I will not read, Mr. Speaker, in 
order to save time. Then I go on: 
 

In response, Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the final paragraph. And 
what it says is: “I’m advised . . . 
 
“(The Speaker) — Order, order . . .” 
 
What I am about to read, Mr. Speaker, is directly related to 
what the Leader of the Opposition has said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(Now) I am advised (that) if speedy acceptance of this 
proposal is confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor 
will amend his report to reflect that satisfactory steps have 
been taken (to negotiate the deal.) 
 

(1945) 
 
I then go on to say: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if a Provincial Auditor says, I will change my 
report if you do this, (or I will change my report) if you do 
this, (or) if I have a proper retirement package and if I can 
determine who my successor is going to be, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest that is improper. My question to the Leader of the 
Opposition . . . (And then there is — hold it, hold it, hold 
it) 
 

To which the minister, or the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
says: “Your minister . . .” quoting to what I have just said. And 
I’ll quote it to you again: 
 

“I will change my report if you do this . . . if I can 
determine who my successor is going to be . . . if I have a 
proper retirement package . . .” 
 

That’s exactly what is said there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition then, accusing me of 
inflammatory words against the auditor, accusing me of 
scurrilous and all these other words, here’s what he says: 
 

Your minister has in effect made a serious allegation in 
this legislature pertaining to the Provincial Auditor, the 
allegation being that the Provincial Auditor’s report is 
conditioned upon arrangements being made for the 
Provincial Auditor’s personal situation, in part, and that 
therefore is fraudulent. 
 

Was it me that said it was fraudulent, Mr. Speaker? Was it me 
that stood in the record . . . Does the record show that it was me, 
Mr. Speaker, that said this was a fraudulent activity? Nobody 
has heard me say . . . and I say to anybody, read the record 
talking about fraudulence. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1301 
 

The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is the one that said 
that constitutes fraudulence. Not me, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 
the Opposition! 
 
So then I go on, Mr. Speaker; I go on, Mr. Speaker. The 
solicitor has suggested that the Provincial Auditor will amend 
his report on certain conditions being put forward. Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t know why the members opposite are going to yell. I’m 
simply advancing my case when they are accusing me of 
privilege. Why should one not be allowed to do that in the 
House? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that solicitor has suggested that the Provincial 
Auditor will amend his report upon certain conditions being put 
forward. In that letter he sets out four things that he is 
concerned with. Number one, whether he should report and get 
his budget from the Board of Internal Economy. That decision, 
Mr. Speaker, is for this Assembly. And I believe that strongly, 
that that decision as to who will have their budgets in the Board 
of Internal Economy should belong to the Board of Internal 
Economy and should belong collectively to this Assembly, and 
should not be negotiated somewhere outside of this Assembly. 
 
He makes reference to who his successor will be. That is not — 
and this is quoting, Mr. Speaker — that is not his function. That 
is the function of the government and the Assembly and the 
Public Accounts Committee. Is that privileged, Mr. Speaker, to 
say that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say, he makes reference — and I ask 
why — reference to what his severance will be on his 
retirement. What has that got to do with his report? Why is it 
even contained in the letter? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the Provincial Auditor is sitting down 
determining whether or not his report is going to be modified to 
the question of accountability, is it not improper, Mr. Speaker, 
to throw into that equation what his final retirement severance 
is going to be? His retirement severance, as I indicated before, 
is clearly set out in law. He is entitled to what he is entitled to. 
Why bring that into the equation of what his report is going to 
say? 
 
Clearly that says, Mr. Speaker, clearly that says that I am 
concerned that I’m not going to get this money. Why would one 
do that? One has to look at, I believe, in that function in that 
job, Mr. Speaker, two dimensions to it. There’s the office of the 
Provincial Auditor, who makes Provincial Auditor’s reports; 
and then there is the individual, Willard Lutz, who has served in 
this government in this province for almost some 30 years. 
 
Now the individual has a right to whatever is entitled to him, 
and he is going to get that, Mr. Speaker. Never denied that, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, if you go to the report he filed in this House 
today, he says: last fall, I determined I would retire and I 
submitted to the Department of Finance and treasury board a 
request in my budget for $112,000 — in his budget. 
 
And what did he respond to it? He responds that that is not done 
that way, and that if he so wishes to retire then a 

special warrant would be issued to cover that off. You don’t 
budget for people to retire and set that out in the spending 
estimates of the House; and that’s just a tradition of the 
Department of Finance of doing that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, clearly from here he says, one, I intend to 
retire in 1989. Okay, that was in the fall; that was in the fall 
before any allegations by the Leader of the Opposition that I 
was trying somehow to get rid of this guy. He’s going to retire, 
Mr. Speaker, because he’s coming 65 this year; and he’s going 
to retire because he is at age 65, and that’s not uncommon in 
this province, or any other province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if he submitted that, if they said when it’s time for you 
retire we will cover it off by a special warrant, then I ask the 
question: why would this be involved in negotiations on a total 
package to deal with the Public Accounts, or with the Provincial 
Auditor’s report? Surely that’s mixing his individual personal 
elements with his office as the Provincial Auditor. And clearly 
there is a difference between the two, Mr. Speaker; clearly, 
there becomes a difference between the two. 
 
So that’s what I said, Mr. Speaker. Why make reference, and I 
ask why the reference and what his severance will be to 
retirement. What has that got to do with the report? What has 
that got to do with the Provincial Auditor’s report, and why is it 
even contained there? And I still pose that question, Mr. 
Speaker. Why? Why would somebody want to take their 
professional position with regard to their report and tie into that 
the question of what their severance would be? And, Mr. 
Speaker, let’s carry the logic of that down the road. 
 
What if somebody had said — and perhaps it is the case; I 
couldn’t know it one way or the other — what if somebody was 
to say and ask, well you’re really not entitled to $112,000 on 
retirement, you’re only entitled to $100,000 or less than that. 
Then where are you? Then you are clearly in the position of 
saying, we are bargaining now as to what your package will be. 
And, Mr. Speaker, is that proper? Is that a proper way by which 
to conduct what we call as this official of this office? And I 
argue, Mr. Speaker, that it is not. 
 
The question I have, Mr. Speaker, to carry on now, the question 
I have, Mr. Speaker, the question I have to be asked, Mr. 
Speaker: has the hon. member talked to the provincial . . . 
(inaudible) . . . I got into the hon. member talking to the 
Provincial Auditor, and there’s nothing there that’s of 
significant . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I would like to ask the 
hon. member to refrain from interrupting. She’s been doing it 
for a while, and I’ve indicated that we don’t want that. The hon. 
member has been charged of certain allegations, and I think the 
House owes him the courtesy of allowing him to make his 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I go on to page 1248 in 
which . . . and I will quote . . . I’m quoting again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

What this letter leaves as an inference, Mr. Speaker, leaves 
as an inference is that he wants 

  



 
May 23, 1989 

1302 
 

four conditions. He says . . . I want to have to my estimates 
prepared by the Board of Internal Economy, not by 
treasury board. And I want my estimates . . . in effect what 
he’s saying . . . I want my estimates not in this committee. 
 

Then I go on to talk about the cost of audits, him versus 
someone else. 
 
Then the final quote, Mr. Speaker, from the question period, is: 
 

The question, Mr. Speaker, the question, Mr. Speaker, is 
this: does the Leader of the Opposition, does the Leader of 
the Opposition condone the solicitor for the Provincial 
Auditor in letter form suggesting that “I will amend my 
report to reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken,” if 
you do this? Does the Leader of the Opposition condone 
the . . . Auditor through his counsel requesting that he . . . 
amend his report if this is done? Does the hon. member 
condone that (type) . . . of action? 
 

Now that is what I said on Friday in the House, Mr. Speaker, 
and I ask you to carefully review, and all members to carefully 
review the verbatim of what I said. Mr. Speaker, the verbatim 
of what I said can be put in this term. I do not believe it is 
proper, I do not believe it proper for the Provincial Auditor to 
sit down in negotiations and say, I will amend my report, as it 
says in his own special report he files today; I will amend my 
report if: 
 

— letter from the Minister of Finance is issued; 
 
— the enactment of the legislative amendment; 
  (That means that his estimates go to the Board of 
Internal Economy.) 
 
— the Order-in-Council for the appointment of Mr. 
Wendel issued; and 
 
— the special warrant is received. (That refers to the 
special warrant of $112,000) 
 
— letter from the Minister of Finance is issued; 
 
If these things are done or a written undertaking is received 
with regard to the legislative amendment and the special 
warrant, I will consider this part of the accountability 
process repaired. (Mr. Speaker,) I will report accordingly 
and I will retire. 
 

Retire, Mr. Speaker, he says. Now the question I pose is that 
you now have me on trial in this Assembly for privilege. For 
privilege of saying what? Mr. Speaker, for privilege of saying 
what the auditor says in his report and questioning the propriety 
of that. That’s exactly what I said, Mr. Speaker. And why 
should one individual member not have the right to question the 
propriety of that? Why? 
 
If I do not believe that a member should mix, or a person should 
mix his professional office with his personal package of 
retirement, should that not be said? Why should one not be able 
to state that in this Assembly? 
 
If I do not believe that he should determine that Fred Wendel is 
the next provincial auditor, should I not be 

entitled to say that, Mr. Speaker? Do I not have a right to say 
that? And to say so, does that mean I’m making scurrilous and 
false attacks on this individual? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I am to say that I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, 
that the hon. member or the Auditor General should determine 
that the Board of Internal Economy will determine the 
estimates, and if I firmly believe that should be a decision of the 
Board of Internal Economy in this Assembly, should I not have 
the right to say that? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the first item, with regards to 
a statement to be sent out by the Minister of Finance, saying 
what? Saying let’s get along, Provincial Auditor and appointed 
auditors. I have nothing wrong with that; I see nothing wrong 
with that. 
 
For that, Mr. Speaker, I am being asked to resign? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And the members say yes; say yes, Mr. 
Speaker, for what? For what, Mr. Speaker? For the right to 
question the judgement of this individual, the right to question 
the judgement of this individual, Mr. Speaker? And it wasn’t 
me. I defy anybody to say that I said that the Provincial Auditor 
was breaking the law, was involved in a crime . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Improper. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Improper he says, improper. What is 
wrong with the word improper, Mr. Speaker? If I believe that 
his conduct is improper, then I have a right to say that, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s not to say somehow that the Provincial 
Auditor should go to jail or has broken the law. I simply said it 
is improper. Is it proper judgement to do what he did? And I 
don’t believe it is. Is it conduct becoming his office? I don’t 
believe it is. And, Mr. Speaker, I am denied the right to say that, 
and for me to say that, somehow I have breached the privileges 
of this House and this institution. Mr. Speaker, be clear and be 
serious about this. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the right to question the judgement of the 
Provincial Auditor. I do not have the right, and I do not make 
the innuendo or the inference of what he was doing was 
fraudulent. That was not me; that was the Leader of the 
Opposition. Mr. Speaker, that was not me, that was him. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we are talking about before this 
Assembly today, and this motion is a breach of privilege — the 
motion saying that I should apologize to this House. Apologize 
for what? For stating what I believe to be the case of 
impropriety. And asked to resign for doing what? For stating 
what I believe is not a right direction to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Provincial Auditor would in fact say, 
Mr. Speaker, if he was to reflect, that I wished that I hadn’t 
have tied together my retirement and my discussions on the 
auditor’s report. I wished I hadn’t have done that. In fairness to 
the man, and I’ve known the man 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1303 
 

for 11 years since I’ve been here, chairman of Public Accounts 
Committee, Mr. Speaker, I believe he wished he hadn’t have 
done that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is the law what his retirement will be. It is 
the law how his successor will be appointed. And it is the law 
who and who does not go to the Board of Internal Economy. If, 
Mr. Speaker, we can find a way for the auditor . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The member for Regina North 
West made several interventions and I have asked him to 
refrain. I’m once more asking him to refrain and allow the 
Minister of Justice to continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I believe what we need in 
this province is the existence of private auditors, appointed 
auditors and the Provincial Auditor to get along. 
 
Now members opposite would have us believe that somehow 
appointed auditors were a creature of us in the last year or so. 
Appointed auditors first began and first came into existence in 
1978. All right? And that’s when they came into existence — 
potash corporation, SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation) and Saskoil. And there was concern 
raised at that point, Mr. Speaker, very often by me. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, as time has gone on it is proven that 
those people have done a fair and reasoned audit. The problem, 
Mr. Speaker, was the level — and I suspect it is because of a 
significant shift in a number of other Crowns that are now being 
done in a corresponding reduction of Provincial Auditor’s 
budget. Anyway there became some bad blood out there and 
that bad blood has to be repaired. But, Mr. Speaker, it should be 
repaired in isolation to the problem. It should not be jammed 
together in a package. 
 
Now that’s my criticism of this, Mr. Speaker, because I think it 
leaves you open as an auditor, and I believe it leaves his office 
open to speculation, to pressures. The exact thing, Mr. Speaker 
. . . he always complained about as to how his salary was set. 
That I fixed, Mr. Speaker. That I fixed back in 1983. 
 
So what you’re looking at on privilege . . . On privilege, Mr. 
Speaker, what you are looking at is asking for my apology and 
asking for my resignation for what, Mr. Speaker? For being 
able to state what I believe to be the case, and what I believe to 
be the facts. Mr. Speaker, I stand by what I said; this report 
substantiates what I said. Mr. Speaker, I do not intend to resign; 
I do not intend to apologize; and I do not believe I’m in breach 
of any rule of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, he does not intend to resign. 
This is an incredible performance that we’ve just heard as the 
minister attempts to rewrite the history of the last few days; to 
place the things that have happened, which everyone has heard, 
which everyone has understood, which the media have been 
reporting on. He tries to pretend that none of that exists at all 
and that the 

facts are something entirely different, as though it were just the 
innocent little minister commenting in an innocent little way on 
some report that had no weight, no moment, no significance, no 
importance at all. 
 
The document is here for everyone to see. The document is as 
plain as it can possibly be. The document, when looked at in 
context with the minister’s statement of May 19, just lays the 
case before this House in the clearest possible terms. 
 
Let me review it, Mr. Speaker. It’s been reviewed before, but in 
the light of what the minister has just said, let’s go over it again. 
First of all, let me observe that the minister’s outburst with 
respect to the contents of this letter was not solicited. It was a 
gratuitous comment by him in response to a question which 
went to an entirely different point, and that was the question of 
whether, in light of all of the circumstances outlined in the 
auditor’s report, the question was whether or not we have any 
more a Provincial Auditor in the province of Saskatchewan and 
what you people are doing by stonewalling the information to 
the auditor. 
 
That was the substance of the question asked by the Leader of 
the Opposition. In response to that, Mr. Speaker, you got an 
answer that had nothing to do with that question, but which 
gratuitously introduced, or purported to introduce, the substance 
of this letter. 
 
Now did it do that, Minister? First, let me tell you what the 
minister said — this letter said. The minister said that this letter 
raised four conditions, four conditions that he wishes to see 
action taken on. 
 
Condition number one was that he be allowed to go to the 
Board of Internal Economy to get his budget — and I’ll come 
back to that in a moment, Mr. Speaker — but that was the first 
condition. 
 

Point number two . . .: that he be able to audit, either 
jointly or by himself, all departments of government . . . 
 

That was number two. Condition number three, according to the 
minister, was, and he quoted from the letter: 
 

That he would of course expect to receive, on retirement, 
the same allowance and economic adjustments that are 
provided to deputy ministers. 
 
(And condition) Number four . . .: he also recommends that 
his success or be appointed internally — in other words, 
that he has a say in who his successor is. 
 

Now that’s what the minister said the four conditions were that 
were set out in the letter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is not correct. That is a gross, deliberate 
inaccuracy. It missed entirely the main point of the letter of 
April 20. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I think that if the hon. member 
is . . . The hon. member is making a statement 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1304 
 

that I won’t necessarily say is unparliamentary, but it is 
certainly very, very, very close, and I’d like to bring that to his 
attention. 
 
Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d like to ask the member from 
Quill Lake to refrain. I’ve simply made a statement that those 
types of inflammatory statements are not acceptable, and words 
other than unparliamentary words are not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Mr. Speaker, I got carried away. I did not 
mean to say a deliberate inaccuracy. I am entitled to say though 
that it was inaccurate. And I do repeat that it was inaccurate. 
 
The main point of the letter of April 20, as everyone knows who 
has read this letter, including my friends opposite, is that the 
auditor, the Provincial Auditor, was looking for a direction from 
the executive to all concerned, including the Crown 
corporations, that they are required by law to furnish the 
information that the Provincial Auditor deems necessary to 
fulfil his duties. That was the main point that the auditor was 
looking for. And, as I say, anyone who has read this letter of 
April 20 can’t help but understand that that was the main thrust 
of that letter. 
 
And yet, when the Minister of Justice set out the four 
conditions, which he purported were the substance of that letter, 
he neglected to mention the most important one, the key one, 
the utterly . . . the centre-piece, the reason for the letter of April 
20. And there is just simply no question about that. 
 
Now the other inaccuracy that the minister persisted with, to 
and including his statement just made to the House tonight, is 
the reference to the Board of Internal Economy as though the 
auditor, the Provincial Auditor, were trying to bypass the 
normal budgetary procedures that are in effect with respect to 
this legislature and to substitute some other system. And that’s 
not correct, Mr. Speaker. That’s not correct, and that was made 
perfectly plain by the special report that was filed this afternoon 
by the Auditor General. 
 
And I would refer you to Appendix V of that report, under item 
A.1, where the Provincial Auditor sets out quite precisely the 
plan he had in mind, the scheme he had in mind for approving 
his own budget. And just let me review it, Mr. Speaker, because 
it’s extremely important. 
 
He asks for a legislative amendment to The Provincial Auditor 
Act, and it would have the following effect so far as his 
estimates are concerned. First, the Provincial Auditor would 
present to the Board of Internal Economy the estimates of his 
department. 
 
Second, the Board of Internal Economy would review those 
estimates and make any alterations that it considered proper — 
make any alterations that it considered proper — and shall 
thereafter concur in the estimates. 
 
And thirdly, the Speaker, you, Mr. Speaker, as chair of the 
Board of Internal Economy would cause those estimates to be 
laid before this Assembly. And this Assembly may 

refer those estimates to a standing committee pursuant to the 
rules of the Legislative Assembly; or if they are not referred to 
a standing committee, they are to be considered in the 
Committee of Finance, like any other estimate that comes 
before this House for approval. And those estimates are to be 
defended by a member of the Executive Council, who is a 
member of the Board of Internal Economy, and designated by 
you, Mr. Speaker. That is the minister who is to defend it. 
 
And then, finally it deals with the question of special warrants 
that may be required under section 33 of The Financial 
Administration Act and how that would work. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is there in this proposal that so offends 
the Minister of Justice? And why would he have us believe, as 
he tried to last week and as he tried again tonight, to find 
something radically different about the Provincial Auditor’s 
proposal with respect to the approval of his estimates. When 
you get right down to it, his proposal is a proper proposal 
designed to follow the accepted and established procedures of 
this House. It all ends up right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — It all ends up right here before Committee of 
Finance unless we should determine that it should be referred to 
some other standing committee. And it’s not an attempt to 
bypass this House. And it’s not an attempt to do anything at all 
improper. Nothing improper about it at all, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m surprised that my friend, the minister, would persist in his 
attempt to make it out to this House and to the public that there 
was something sinister or unusual or unacceptable about the 
proposal of the Provincial Auditor with respect to his budget. 
 
The second thing about what the minister said that is 
disconcerting, is his use of the term, “change my report”. That 
was the whole substance of his answers to the Leader of the 
Opposition last Friday. That was the whole substance of what 
he thought . . . what he suggested was improper. It was the 
Provincial Auditor saying, I will change my report if you do 
this, do that, or do the other thing. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look through these documents, if you 
look through particularly the letter of April 20, 1989, you 
realize that’s not what the Provincial Auditor was saying at all. 
And if you look through the document that was tabled today, 
the Special Report by the Provincial Auditor, then you 
understand very, very clearly that that is not what the Provincial 
Auditor was referring to at all. 
 
(2015) 
 
He wasn’t trying to make a deal on the basis of which he would 
change his report. He wasn’t doing anything that would excite 
the interest of the professional association in any way, shape, or 
form; nor should it excite the interest of this minister. 
 
What the Provincial Auditor was saying was simply this: make 
this problem of interfering with my duties go away. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1305 
 

Make this problem go away by telling the Crown corporations 
that they have to provide me with the information that I request. 
Make it possible, by whatever means you two choose, whether 
it’s a joint audit with the outside chartered accountant firm, or 
whether it’s by my own audit, or whatever, but tell the Crown 
corporations that they have to co-operate with me. Tell the 
Crown corporations that they have to answer my questions. 
 
And if you will do that, if you will tell the Crown corporations 
that, then I won’t have to report that you refused to do that. I’ll 
report that the problem about reporting, the problem about 
complying with the law, has been resolved, and the Minister of 
Finance has resolved it by telling the Crown corporations to 
shape up and do it right and provide the Provincial Auditor with 
the information that he requires. 
 
Now that’s all the Provincial Auditor was suggesting. That’s all 
he was suggesting in his letter of April 20th, which is the 
subject of the motion before you. And that’s all he says in this 
document, Special Report by the Provincial Auditor, which he 
filed today. And it is quite, quite out of line for this minister to 
make the allegations that he did indicating that in some 
improper and underhanded way the auditor was trying to make 
a deal to change his report in some way. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
not at all what the auditor intended. That’s made very, very 
plain on page 2 of this letter from the Provincial Auditor’s 
lawyer, this letter of April 20th that we’re talking about. 
 
That letter sends two documents, two documents over to the 
lawyer for the government. The first document was a draft 
letter, a draft letter that was to go from the Minister of Finance 
to the heads of the Crown corporations, and other officials, 
instructing them about co-operating with the Provincial Auditor 
— that was the first proposal. The second proposal was a draft 
of the statutory provision about the approval of his estimates, 
which I have just summarized for you, Mr. Speaker, earlier in 
my remarks. 
 
Those were the two proposals that were being made by the 
Provincial Auditor to the government through their lawyers in 
this letter of April 20. And the Provincial Auditor says this: 
 

I am advised that if speedy acceptance of both these 
proposals is confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor 
will amend his report to reflect that satisfactory steps have 
been negotiated to answer his concerns . . . 
 

Now what could be more plain than that, Mr. Speaker, and what 
person in this House, acting in good faith, could possibly read 
those words and say the things that were said by the Minister of 
Justice in this House last Friday? With respect, Mr. Speaker, 
with all due respect, no member of this House could read those 
words and come to the conclusion that the Minister of Justice 
uttered in question period last Friday. 
 
Now I come to the question of the retirement severance. Now 
that is referred to in the letter of April 20, but it is as clear, as 
clear could be, as plain as the nose on the minister’s face, that 
that had nothing to do with the proposals that were being made 
and on the basis of which 

the Provincial Auditor would alter his report to reflect the fact 
that this problem about reporting had gone away. Clearly this 
was a different issue, a side issue, another matter altogether. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is quite outrageous for the minister to be 
suggesting, in light of the documentation that is now before the 
House, that that question of severance benefits or retirement 
benefits or the conditions of retirement were introduced by the 
Provincial Auditor. It is now perfectly plain and perfectly clear 
that the initiative with respect to the retirement question came 
from the government lawyer. There’s absolutely no question 
about that at all. 
 
I refer you to page 3 of the special report, the last paragraph, 
paragraph 1.08, subsection 4, where the Provincial Auditor 
says: 
 

The question of my retirement was raised by Mr. Kyle. I 
was prepared to retire effective July, 1989 if this, in the 
opinion of the executive government, would create a more 
harmonious relationship between my office and the 
executive government. 
 

That’s what the Provincial Auditor had to say about that 
question. But that’s not all that he had to say about the question. 
 
It also was raised on page 4 in article 1.09. He’s referring there 
to the instructions that he gave to Mr. Neill that led to the 
writing of the letter dated April 20. And he says this: 
 

Accordingly, I instructed Mr. Neill to make the proposal 
contained in the letter of April 20, 1989, because my 
retirement was not in issue (was not in issue). 
 

Now what could be more plain than that and is perfectly 
consistent with all of the documentation that is before this 
House? 
 
Now why are we in this pickle? I mean, what we had going on 
in this House on Friday was the contents of the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, which has been observed by people on this 
side of the House and by the press as the most drastic, the most 
drastic report ever delivered by a Provincial Auditor in this 
province, and, so far as anyone knows, the most drastic report 
ever delivered by a person in that position in any jurisdiction 
ever — ever. This government was plainly accused by the 
Provincial Auditor of breaking the law — of breaking the law. 
 
And my leader in the question period last Friday began to ask 
questions about how it was that the government could condone 
these breaches of the law. Now the minister has reviewed in a 
very cursory way what questions were asked and what answers 
were given. And it is plain on looking over those questions and 
answers, Mr. Speaker, that it had to do with the general 
question of the Provincial Auditor’s report and the thrust of that 
report so far as the actions of the government were concerned, 
or more specifically, the inaction of the government in dealing 
with this question of the deliberate breaking of the law by 
Crown corporations and others. 
 
Now why were not answers, plain answers given to those 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1306 
 

questions? I mean, if you look at the answers which the minister 
gave to those questions, they were always quite beside the point 
being raised by the minister. And we went through three such 
exercises, and finally the minister seemed unable to contain 
himself any longer and he launched into this letter — this letter 
which has nothing whatever to do with the question raised by 
the Leader of the Opposition, which was quite beside the point. 
 
Now if you look at the letter of April 20, and particularly the 
first paragraph, Mr. Speaker, you will notice Mr. Neill’s words: 
 

You initiated this process . . . 
 

And by that he is referring to the process then going on between 
he and Mr. Kyle in their exchange of letters and in their 
meetings. 
 

You initiated this process to see if there was some common 
ground which would result in the Provincial Auditor being 
able to fulfil his statutory duties with the full co-operation 
of the executive government without impairing 
accountability. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that is a crucially important sentence. It is a 
sentence which is nowhere denied by Mr. Kyle; nowhere is it 
denied by Mr. Kyle. That was the case. There seems to be no 
doubt at all that Mr. Kyle did initiate the process and that the 
purpose was to see if there was some common ground which 
would result in the Provincial Auditor being able to fulfil his 
statutory duties with the full co-operation of the executive 
government. That was the purpose. 
 
Now in the next sentence you will note the words: 
 

My client has suggested that joint audits of the crown 
corporations and crown-controlled corporations would go a 
long way to overcoming some of the difficulties. This was 
rejected by your side. 
 

And from the material that is included in the Special Report by 
the Provincial Auditor which was filed today, it is clear, Mr. 
Speaker, that that was a proposal from the Provincial Auditor 
which did propose a joint audit of the Crown corporations, and 
the Crown Corporations by the Provincial Auditor and by the 
outside chartered accountants. 
 
And it was only after the rejection of that suggestion, that the 
next sentence comes into play. Mr. Neill says: 
 

My client has suggested that the executive government 
ensure that he has full access to whatever information he 
deems necessary (as his Act provides) together with a 
statutory amendment to allow for the review of his budget 
by the Board of Internal Economy rather than the present 
system. 
 

That was the meat and potatoes of the whole proposal, Mr. 
Speaker. That was the whole thrust of the lawyer’s proposal. 
And that is what in the end apparently was not 

accepted. 
 
Now there is no document in the material indicating that the 
government ever rejects that proposal. Rather it seems that they 
chose not to respond to it at all, with the result that the 
Provincial Auditor filed the report that he did, which, as I have 
said, is generally regarded inside this House and outside this 
House as the most drastic report ever prepared and filed by a 
provincial auditor or person in the position of a provincial 
auditor with respect to any government in any jurisdiction in 
this country at any time. 
 
And I repeat the question: why are we in this position? Why are 
we not dealing with the substance of the Provincial Auditor’s 
report in the way that we normally deal with it? Why do we see 
instead, by way of a violent counter-attack, really a violent 
counter-attack upon the person of the Provincial Auditor? What 
could be the purpose of that? 
 
Is the implication that what the Provincial Auditor says is not 
true? Is it suggested that when he says in his report that he was 
unable to get a certain kind of information from the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation that that’s not 
correct? I don’t think that to be the case. I don’t think that to be 
the case at all. 
 
I found myself in astonishment last Friday when I heard the 
attack launched by the minister. And there’s no other way to 
characterize it. You, yourself, have I think agreed with that by 
the effect of your ruling, Mr. Speaker. I mean, obviously it was 
an attack upon the person of the Provincial Auditor. And I ask 
myself why, then? 
 
And I come to this House again this morning and I hear the 
minister not the least bit repentant, not the least bit apologetic, 
trying not to back down one single inch — although the whole 
world is shouting at him that he’s out of line — insisting that 
he’s right. 
 
And again the question is, why? Why in the world is the 
minister attacking the person of the Provincial Auditor? Either 
his report is correct or it is not correct. If it is not correct, then 
let’s hear the correct version. If it is correct, then let’s remedy 
it. 
 
But why this attack on the person of the Provincial Auditor? 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is a question that no one on the other 
side of the House has yet addressed. No one on the other side of 
the House has yet said why it is that they have launched this 
personal attack upon an officer of this Assembly, and I think 
that is a sad thing; that is a very, very unfortunate thing. This 
House will have to live with this precedent and somehow cope 
with it, and let’s hope that never again will we see the likes of it 
come before us. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude my remarks, but I want 
to conclude by moving an amendment to the motion introduced 
into the House by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley and 
seconded by the member from Melfort. And I would like to 
move, seconded by the hon. member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
the following: 
 
(2030) 
 

That the amendment moved by the member for 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1307 
 

Indian Head-Wolseley be amended by adding the 
following words after 1989, “and the Provincial Auditor’s 
Special Report of May 23, 1989, and all related 
correspondence and documentation”, and further by adding 
the following after the word “breached” in the last line, 
“and these matters be referred to the said committee 
forthwith.” 
 

I would like to move that amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In some 
ways I’m not very pleased to have to enter into this debate, but 
as a result of some of the circumstances that have arisen in the 
last couple of days, we are now in a position where we are 
debating a motion that was put forward this morning by my 
colleague, the member from the Quill Lakes. 
 
I want to review a summary of the current events that have lead 
up to the situation where we have placed before this Legislative 
Assembly the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this Legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the Minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council, and further, that this Assembly 
reaffirms the importance of the office of the Provincial 
Auditor as an officer of this Legislature. 
 

And then this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the member from Indian 
Head-Wolseley amended that original motion put forward by 
the member from Quill Lakes and asked that certain 
correspondence tabled by the Minister of Justice on Friday, 
May 19, and today, Tuesday, May 23, and any other associated 
circumstances be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges and Elections for their immediate investigation, and 
report as to whether or not the privileges of the Legislative 
Assembly have been breached. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go through some of the 
events that have led up to this situation, where we have these 
motions, and amendment, and subamendment before us. 
 
The Provincial Auditor, who is an employee or an officer of this 
Legislative Assembly, tabled through yourself on Wednesday, 
May 17, the Report of the Provincial Auditor. And it was the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor for the year ending March 31, 
1988, over one year ago. 
 
And this report outlines the auditor’s opinion as to the way the 
government that the people of Saskatchewan have elected is 
spending the people’s money. And the auditor, Mr. Lutz, on 
page 4 of this report says the following, and I quote: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. I 
recommend the process be repaired to require that 
appointed auditors and the Provincial Auditor work 
together on crown corporation audits as join auditors or 
with some similar 

arrangement. 
 

And then the auditor goes on a little bit later on the same page: 
 

In my view, the Legislative Assembly requires more 
information about crown corporations, crown-controlled 
corporations and mixed corporations. 
 
The public accounts are not complete, correct or timely. 
 
There were a number of cases where the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

And then, Mr. Speaker, this auditor’s report goes on, and on 
page 9 the Provincial Auditor says that he can no longer 
effectively serve the Legislative Assembly because: 
 

— he now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per 
cent of the public spending; 
 
— when reliance on an appointed auditor is not justified, it 
is no longer possible to carry out the work not done by the 
appointed auditor; and 

 
— I am being denied access to information. 

                
As a result of this Provincial Auditor’s report which in many 
respects indicates to the Legislative Assembly and to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan that this government has gone awry, 
that it’s violating some of the very laws that it has created, that 
this auditor’s report was a real concern to the members on this 
side of the House. And so on Thursday we introduced a motion 
where we thought it important to debate the contents of this 
auditor’s report. 
 
And at the same time my colleague, the member from Regina 
Lakeview, brought to the attention of the House some of the 
remarks of the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Justice, who 
we are now debating tonight — and his behaviour — some of 
his remarks as it pertained to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been a member of this legislature for 
two and a half years, and I suppose as any new parliamentary, 
you don’t really come to appreciate the people that are 
associated with this Legislative Assembly, particularly the 
officers of the Legislative Assembly, until you’ve been in this 
House for some time. 
 
And I note with interest that this member that we are discussing 
tonight, the Minister of Justice, the member from Kindersley, 
has on three other occasions, in my view, attacked the 
credibility and respectability of officers of this Assembly. And I 
refer specifically to David Tickell, who was our former 
ombudsmen; and the Minister of Justice chose, because he 
didn’t like a report that was issued by the former ombudsman, 
chose to attack the ombudsman. 
 
The Minister of Justice chose to attack Merrilee Rasmussen, 
who was our former law clerk, legislative law 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1308 
 

clerk, a person employed by this Legislative Assembly. Last 
year I recall that the Minister of Justice also cast some 
aspersions on the character of the Provincial Auditor. And now 
this past week and last week, the Minister of Justice has again 
attacked the credibility of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on Friday you ruled that we did have a case, 
a prima facie case, and then again today, Mr. Speaker, you ruled 
that we had another prima facie privilege case. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, the precedents, I understand, reveal that no similar 
occurrence of two prima facie privilege cases have been found 
in this Legislative Assembly, the history of this Legislative 
Assembly, on two consecutive days. And so we have a situation 
where, on two consecutive days of this legislative sitting, we 
are debating a prima facie case of privilege. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about some of the concerns 
that have been raised. Last Friday in question period, the Leader 
of the Opposition raised with the Justice minister his concerns 
about the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 
Now the minister’s assault on the Provincial Auditor appeared 
to be premeditated in that he brought a letter into question 
period and he began to refer to it quite apart from the substance 
or the thrust of the question which he was responding to. 
Throughout the Minister of Justice’s remarks he repeatedly 
implied and inferred improper conduct on the part of the 
auditor. And on page 1247 of Hansard he went so far as to 
state, “Mr. Speaker, I suggest that this is improper.” 
 
Now let me just read into the record what the Minister of 
Justice suggested was improper. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
minister read into the record his version of a letter from the 
lawyer Mr. Neill, to Mr. Kyle, the lawyer who was acting on 
behalf of the Crown investments corporation. And the lawyer 
for the Provincial Auditor, according to the Minister of Justice, 
set out in his letter four conditions that he wished the auditor to 
take action on. And the conditions were: 
 

Number one, that he be allowed to go to the Board of 
Internal Economy to get his budget (and I’m quoting the 
Minister of Justice); that he doesn’t have to go to treasury 
board; that his estimates are not debated in this House. 
Point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker: that he be able to audit, 
either jointly or by himself, all departments of government, 
which is allowed now, and all Crown corporations, which 
has not been the case since 1978. 
 
Number three (I’m continuing to quote), Mr. Speaker, is, 
and I will read: 
 
That he would of course expect to receive, on retirement, 
the same allowance and economic adjustments that are 
provided to deputy ministers. 
 
Number four, Mr. Speaker: he also recommends that his 
successor be appointed internally — in 

other words, that he has a say in who his successor is. 
 

And then the Minister of Justice went on upon further 
questioning by the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Riversdale. He said: 
 

I am advised (and he’s quoting from this letter supposedly) 
if speedy acceptance of this proposal is confirmed in 
writing, the Provincial Auditor will amend his report to 
reflect that satisfactory steps have been taken (to negotiate 
the deal). 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is not what the letter from Mr. Neill 
said to Mr. Kyle. And I would like to read into the record for 
those people who have just tuned into the proceedings tonight 
exactly what the letter from Mr. Neill said to Mr. Kyle, and I 
quote: 
 

My client has suggested that joint audits of the crown 
corporations and crown-controlled corporations would go a 
long way to overcoming some of the difficulties. This was 
rejected by your side. My client has suggested that the 
executive government ensure that he has full access to 
whatever information he deems necessary (as his Act 
provides) together with a statutory amendment to allow for 
the review of his budget by the Board of Internal Economy 
rather than (by) the present system. If this were done he 
indicated that he could retire quietly upon the appointment 
of his successor, knowing that his successor would be able 
to fulfil the responsibilities of the office in a more 
harmonious atmosphere. He would, of course, expect to 
receive on retirement the same allowances and economic 
adjustments that are provided Deputy Ministers in 
accordance with The Provincial Auditor Act. He also 
recommended that his successor be appointed internally in 
accordance with the convention that has been established 
in this province, Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, P.E.I., 
Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia. These proposals (were) 
rejected by you. You have made no counter proposal. 
 

And the letter goes on: 
 

The Provincial Auditor is prepared to continue in office so 
the appointment of a successor is not emergent. All that is 
required to overcome the difficulties is a directive from the 
executive to all concerned that they are required by law to 
furnish the information that the Provincial Auditor deems 
necessary to fulfil his duties and that his estimates be 
reviewed by the Board of Internal Economy. 
 
I am enclosing: 
 
1) A draft letter with respect to the former, and 
 
2) A draft of the statutory provision with respect to the 
latter, for your consideration. 

 1)          
I am advised that if speedy acceptance of both these 
proposals is confirmed in writing, the Provincial Auditor 
will amend his Report to reflect 

  



 
May 23, 1989 

1309 
 

that satisfactory steps have been negotiated to answer his 
concerns. He is also prepared to consider alternative 
wording of the enclosed drafts to accomplish the same 
objective. However, any changes in the Report will have to 
be made before the Audit Committee review of Tuesday, 
April 25, 1989. 
 

Now I’ve read into the record exactly the contents of the 
lawyer, Mr. Neill, representing the Provincial Auditor, to the 
lawyer, Larry Kyle, representing the Crown investments 
corporation. And the question that has not yet been answered in 
all of this debate is: why was the lawyer for the Crown 
investments corporation negotiating, negotiating with the 
Provincial Auditor on matters that, in my view, have a great 
deal to do with this Legislative Assembly? 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Kyle is not the lawyer for the Department of Finance; he is 
not the lawyer for the Board of Internal Economy; he is not the 
lawyer for the Legislative Assembly; but he is the lawyer for 
the Crown investments corporation. 
 
Another question that I’d like to know is: why would a lawyer 
for the Crown investments corporation be discussing the 
Provincial Auditor’s retirement? That, in my judgement, is not 
something that a lawyer who initially got into this debate, I 
understand on the Provincial Auditor, who was representing the 
Crown investments corporation regarding the interpretation of 
The Crown Corporations Act, 1978, relevant to the payment of 
$2.7 million reported in 5.05 of the 1988 annual report. 
 
Why, then, would that lawyer, Mr. Kyle, who represents the 
Crown investments corporation have anything to do with the 
Provincial Auditor’s retirement, and why would he raise the 
question in the first place? Because I understand from the 
material that the Provincial Auditor provided us late this 
afternoon, that it was Mr. Kyle who raised the early retirement, 
not Mr. Lutz, not Mr. Neill, the lawyer acting on behalf of Mr. 
Lutz, but Mr. Kyle, the lawyer acting on behalf of the Crown 
investments corporation, over the payment of $2.7 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, today again in this Legislative 
Assembly we witnessed the Minister of Justice in response to 
further questions, through innuendo, insinuate that the 
Provincial Auditor had a package, has some sort of package that 
he had put together, and that because there was some agreement 
between the lawyers that this wouldn’t be released, that this 
couldn’t be released to the Legislative Assembly. The Minister 
said that he had never seen this package of material. He said 
that all he knew was that Wolfgang Wolff, I gather, the 
chairman of the Crown investments corporation, Larry Kyle, 
the lawyer for the Crown investments corporation, and Mr. 
Kyle’s secretary has seen this information. And without ever 
having seen the information, the Minister of Justice implied that 
the Provincial Auditor was doing something improper. 
 
The Provincial Auditor today, before we left this Assembly at 5 
o’clock, provided this Assembly with a 

special report on this very matter, and he also provided this 
Assembly what that package was about. And I just want to 
review for the record what the package was about, because I 
think it’s important that the people of Saskatchewan understand 
and know exactly what this situation is here. 
 
This Minister of Justice has done a good job on the Provincial 
Auditor. He said here moments ago that he had the right to do a 
job on the Provincial Auditor. But in my view, he doesn’t have 
the right. That right belongs to this Legislative Assembly, for 
all of us as a group, not for individual members. And I just want 
to review what the package said. 
 
This package, as the minister calls it, discussed five areas. And 
I just wanted to briefly go through them. 
 

I propose, (the Provincial Auditor says) the following 
solution to my concerns about interference with the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
(He proposes) a legislative amendment to The Provincial 
Auditor Act that calls for the Provincial Auditor to have 
his Estimates set by the Board of Internal Economy, in the 
following form: 
 

And he lists the form that he wants his spending estimates to be 
set. 
 
And as all of us in this Assembly are aware, the Provincial 
Auditor has had his budget cut back in the last several years 
under this government, as have a number of other watch-dog 
agencies that work on behalf of the Legislative Assembly. Not 
just the government, but all members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The second thing that the Provincial Auditor put into this 
package was a letter, a proposed letter that the Minister of 
Finance could sign, to the Provincial Auditor, to all appointed 
auditors, to all Crown agencies and Crown-controlled 
corporations requiring the co-operation of all parties in the 
following form. And the Provincial Auditor outlines in letter, a 
draft letter form, for the Minister of Finance, the member from 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, to sign. 
 
Then the Provincial Auditor says that he wishes to retire 
quietly. And he says: 
 

There has always been internal succession in the office. 
 

Always, in the history of our province there has always been 
internal succession in the office. 
 

In the past, the Provincial Auditor has recommended his 
successor. 
 

And that’s all that this Provincial Auditor wanted to do. He 
wanted to recommend his successor. That has been past 
practice. And somehow the Minister of Justice makes that 
appear to be wrong, to be improper in his remarks on Friday 
and in his remarks today. That has been the past practice; the 
Provincial Auditor has recommended his successor, and his 
successor has come from within the 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1310 
 

auditor’s department. And he says: 
 

I propose that Mr. Wendel be appointed Provincial Auditor 
by Order-in-Council effective the date of my retirement in 
the following form: 
 

He did not say, I demand that Mr. Wendel be appointed. He 
said, I propose, I propose, and that’s quite within reason, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other point that the auditor made in this so-called package 
that the Minister of Justice cast aspersions on was that he said: 
 

If my recommendation is acceptable to the Executive, I 
will discuss my retirement with the Chairman of the Public 
Accounts Committee to ensure compliance with subsection 
3(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act. If he is agreeable, I 
will advise you and retire the later of the date I see the 
Order-in-Council or July 31, 1989. 
 

And then he goes on and he says: 
 

The Provincial Auditor Act requires that I receive the same 
salary and privileges of office as deputy ministers. Deputy 
ministers are entitled to a lump sum payment when they 
leave office. 
 
Therefore, (he says) I require a special warrant for 
$112,000 to fund a lump sum payment and holiday pay 
when I retire. 
 

And then he goes on and he says: 
 

My resignation notice will be placed in escrow 
immediately with my lawyer as part of this process. 
 
The conditions of the escrow will be as follows: 
 
— the letter from the Minister of Finance is issued; 

 — the letter from the Minister of Finance is issued; 
Remember, this auditor has had great difficulty with Crown 
corporations, mixed corporations, Crown-controlled 
corporations, and government departments. He wants the 
Minister of Finance to send out a letter to all of those agencies, 
private auditors as well as the Provincial Auditor, suggesting 
that they should comply with the provisions of The Provincial 
Auditor Act, suggesting that they comply with the law. Is that 
so much to ask? I don’t think so. 
 
Then he says he wants: 
 
— the enactment of the legislative amendment; 

 — the enactment of the legislative amendment; 
And this has to do with his ability to do his job. He doesn’t 
want any further cuts coming through treasury branch. He 
wants the Board of Internal Economy, which is the board made 
up of all members of this Legislative Assembly, to set his 
budget. 
 
In view of past practice of this government, I understand why a 
Provincial Auditor would want such a provision, 

because this government has been cutting back on a variety of 
watch-dog agencies. 
 
And then he says: 
 

— the Order-in-Council for the appointment of Mr. Wendel 
issued; and 
 
— the special warrant is received. 

 — the          
Which has to do with the $112,000 lump sum payment and 
holiday pay. 
 
And then he says: 
 

If these things are done or a written undertaking is received 
with regard to the legislative amendment and the special 
warrant, I will consider this part of the accountability 
process repaired. I will report accordingly and I will retire. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t see what’s so wrong with 
what the Provincial Auditor has set out in this so-called 
package. And yet, and yet the Minister of Justice has cast 
aspersions on the character of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Minister of Justice, I think, has really reflected, his 
comments have reflected upon the integrity of the auditor. And 
as a result of that attack on the integrity of the Provincial 
Auditor, we have emotions before this Legislative Assembly; 
we have two prima facie cases of privilege in two consecutive 
days, which is unparalleled, unheard of in the history of our 
province; and we have a special report by the Provincial 
Auditor that has been submitted to us this day. 
 
Now why does the Provincial Auditor submit a report to us this 
day? The reason is because the Provincial Auditor, when he is 
attacked by any member of this Legislative Assembly, doesn’t 
have the ability to come before us and speak to us to answer the 
charges. He doesn’t have that ability. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition was calling upon the Premier of 
our province to have agreement on both sides of the House that 
the Provincial Auditor would come before the bar of the 
Legislative Assembly, to come before the bar of the Legislative 
Assembly and answer the charges of the Minister of Justice that 
his behaviour had been improper. 
 
And what did they do? The Premier didn’t even get up in this 
Legislative Assembly and answer the questions — the Premier 
of our province. Instead, the Minister of Justice continued to 
answer the questions. The Premier of our province has a role, 
and has had a role in this whole exercise. The Premier of the 
Province was in here earlier tonight when the Minister of 
Justice stood up and gave a not too proper academy 
performance in terms of justifying his actions. 
 
He says he has the right to question the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. He says he has the right to say that the Provincial 
Auditor’s behaviour is improper. And I say to the Minister of 
Justice, supported by the Premier of our 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1311 
 

province, that he doesn’t have the individual right. That right 
belongs to all of us collectively — all of us collectively. 
 
And if we don’t have that right, then I say that the Minister of 
Justice, supported by the Premier, today, in my view, has 
violated some of the practices as set out in Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, 20th Edition, page 162, which states: 
 

Both Houses will treat as breaches of their privileges, not 
only acts directly tending to obstruct their officers in the 
execution of their duty, but also any conduct which may 
tend to deter them from doing their duty in the future. 
 

And I would say, as a result of the comments from the Minister 
of Justice, the member from Kindersley, supported by the 
Premier of our province who came to this House tonight to sit 
in this House while the Minister of Justice gave his account of 
what happened . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The hon. member knows the rules and 
she is not to refer to the presence or absence of members. Any 
member has a right to be in here without being referred to. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. The point I was 
trying to make is that the Minister of Justice gave an accounting 
of his behaviour to this legislature. He gave an accounting of 
his remarks with regard to Provincial Auditor. The Premier of 
our province obviously supported those remarks. And I am 
saying, as a result of that justification, as a result of his refusal 
to withdraw his remarks, as a result of the undying support of 
the members opposite, that I say, Mr. Speaker, in my view, this 
conduct may tend to deter them from doing their duty in the 
future. 
 
We really have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where, as a result of 
this minister’s refusal to apologize, as a result of his comments 
and his justification tonight, his attempt to justify his remarks, 
that in the future it is possible that any future officer, present 
and future, will have difficulty in executing their duties — 
difficulty in executing their duties. Because what we’re saying, 
what the government is saying is that individual members can 
attack the integrity, the integrity of individual officers of this 
Legislative Assembly. And I say to all members in this 
legislature that that is clearly wrong — is clearly wrong. 
 
Now the question is: what do we do? What do we do? 
Democracy is too important to let individual political 
considerations take over. Democracy is too important. An 
officer of this Legislative Assembly has been attacked, his 
integrity has been attacked by a minister of the Crown, a 
member of the Executive Council . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Premier laughs; the Premier’s 
laughing. 
 
(2100) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — And I understand the Premier is laughing; 
that’s unfortunate. But an officer of our Legislative Assembly 
has been attacked, there’s no 

question about that. The members opposite obviously are 
condoning that behaviour because they have moved an 
amendment that takes away from the thrust of our original 
motion. And the thrust of our original motion was: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticisms of the Provincial 
Auditor, that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
executive council. 
 

And this motion was amended to read: 
 
. . .That this would be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Privileges and Elections (of which there are only 10 
members). 
 

Not all members of the Legislative Assembly will get to deal 
with the questions that have arisen as a result of this prima facie 
case of privilege. Only 10 members of the Legislative 
Assembly will have the opportunity to engage in lengthy 
debate. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is extremely unfair, 
extremely unfair, because an officer of this Legislative 
Assembly is not just the employee of 10 people, 10 members of 
the legislature. An officer of the Legislative Assembly is an 
employee, is an officer for all 64 members — all 64 members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to say this, that an officer of 
this Legislative Assembly, the Ombudsman, the Provincial 
Auditor, the Legislative Law Clerk, the Clerk, have the right 
and the expectation that they will be free of any unacceptable 
assaults from any individual member of this Legislative 
Assembly. They have the right to expect that their integrity will 
be held in trust by all of us — all of us together. 
 
If the Minister of Justice had some individual concerns, he 
could have dealt with those individual concerns through his 
public accounts members. If the Minister of Justice had some 
individual concerns, he could have expressed those individual 
concerns in some other forum, some other way. But instead, the 
Minister of Justice chose to attack, chose to attack the integrity 
of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And why did this Minister of Justice decide to attack this 
individual? This Minister of Justice decided to attack the 
individual integrity of Mr. Lutz because they couldn’t stand the 
message contained in the auditor’s report. That’s why. Shoot 
the messenger, shoot the messenger. 
 
What does he say? I want to put this back on the record. He 
says: 
 

He now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per 
cent of public spending; 
 

That’s all. He doesn’t see it for 100 per cent; only 50 per cent of 
the taxpayers’ money is audited by the Provincial Auditor. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1312 
 

There have been people saying for some time that this 
government, in many respects, is just blowing money, is 
mismanaging the people’s money. They’ve doubled the 
revenues of this province, they’ve doubled the expenditures of 
this province, but our services continue to get worse and worse 
and worse and worse and worse. 
 
And so the question is: where is the money going? Where is the 
money going? The Provincial Auditor talks about the fact that 
he is not able to see 50 per cent of the public’s money and how 
this provincial government spends the public’s money. They 
have been elected on behalf of the public. They represent all of 
us. They have an obligation to all of us to spend our money 
correctly, and yet the Provincial Auditor can’t see 50 per cent of 
how this government spends its money. 
 
This report, in many respects, indicates to the people of 
Saskatchewan that this government lacks integrity; that this 
government is out of control; that it’s lost all senses. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. You must relate your 
comments strictly to the motion. The motion is dealing with the 
criticisms of the minister for his words, and it isn’t the 
wide-ranging debate on the report now. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
trying to indicate why this minister chose to assault the integrity 
of an officer of this Legislative Assembly. And this minister 
chose to assault Mr. Lutz; he chose to assault his integrity 
because of the contents of the Report of the Provincial Auditor, 
where the Provincial Auditor indicates to us on page 4 that he 
can no longer do his job. He can no longer fulfil his function, 
his . . . “role to watch over the public purse for my client, the 
Legislative Assembly.” The client isn’t the Executive Council; 
the client isn’t the provincial government, the PC government; 
the client is the Legislative Assembly and we are elected, all of 
us, on behalf of all of the people of our province. 
 
And so this minister decided, I can’t hear the news contained in 
this report so I’ve got to shoot the messenger. And any time we 
get any kind of indication from a officer of this Legislative 
Assembly that there’s something afoul some place, these people 
decide to attack the integrity of those people — destroy them. 
 
Now what kind of people would engage in that kind of 
exercise? Obviously, the kind of people that engage in those 
kinds of exercises are afraid for the people of our province to 
hear the truth. They’re afraid to hear the truth. Well the truth is 
contained in the Provincial Auditor’s report, and anybody 
who’s listening tonight can write to the opposition caucus office 
at Room 265 at the Legislative Building and we will make sure 
that they get a report on how this government is and isn’t 
spending our money. We can guarantee that much because 
every citizen in the province of Saskatchewan has the right to 
know — has the right to know if they choose to — how this 
government is spending the peoples’ money. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I think it’s important that the 
integrity of the Provincial Auditor continue to exist. I think 
that’s an important principle. Obviously the Minister of Justice 
chose to attack the integrity of the 

Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, because of the contents of this 
report. At no time in this debate has the Minister of Justice 
substantiated any of his allegations that the Provincial Auditor, 
Mr. Lutz, acted improperly — at no time has he done that. 
 
As a member of the Standing Committee on Privileges and 
Elections, I look forward to representing the people of the 
province on this important matter that will, in all likelihood, be 
referred to that committee. I regret very much, Mr. Speaker, that 
all 64 members of the legislature can’t, as a result of the motion 
that’s been put forward by the member from Quill Lakes, 
indicate our reaffirmation of the importance of the office of the 
Provincial Auditor. It’s to bad that we can’t all do that. But 
hopefully, 10 members on the Standing Committee on 
Privileges and Elections will have some integrity, and we will 
bring in a report that brings back to this Legislative Assembly 
our respect, our respect for all officers of this House — all 
officers, including the Provincial Auditor, and that any future 
provincial auditor and the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, can 
continue to fulfil their role as the public watch-dog over the 
way this provincial government spends the public’s money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s my pleasure to enter into this debate this 
evening. And, Mr. Speaker, indeed we have a somewhat of a 
complex issue here to deal with tonight. We have had a number 
of motions and amendments and subamendments and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve spent a good considerable amount of time thus 
far listening to most, most of the NDP lawyers on the other side 
of the House. And, Mr. Speaker, those lawyers, those NDP 
lawyers seem to be able to very efficiently make an issue such 
as this extremely complex. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to get this 
issue, as important as it is to this legislature, back into 
perspective, Mr. Speaker. And to do that, Mr. Speaker, I do 
have to go through some of the history and some of the very 
significant events that have transpired as at 5 o’clock this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at 5 o’clock this afternoon, or shortly before, the 
Provincial Auditor provided to this legislature, to all members, 
a very important report. And I thank the Provincial Auditor for 
providing us with that information. And, Mr. Speaker, if you 
would have reviewed this report very carefully and, Mr. 
Speaker, if you would have listened very closely to the Minister 
of Justice’s comments tonight, I am very certain, Mr. Speaker, 
that beyond a shadow of a doubt you would be convinced that 
this very report substantiates absolutely every statement of fact 
that has been made by the Minister of Justice. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, this very report stands to prove beyond a shadow of a 
doubt that no breach of privilege exists whatsoever. 
 
I go back, Mr. Speaker, to give you the history of where we 
have come from to arrive at this point in this illustrious debate 
in this legislature. Mr. Speaker, last Friday, I believe it was, or 
last Thursday, the Minister of Justice made a number of 
statements. With those statements, Mr. Speaker, definitely 
questions arose, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, they were serious 
questions that all members of 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1313 
 

this Assembly and the members of the public in Saskatchewan 
should be interested in. Because, Mr. Speaker, it’s not every 
day that you make statements like that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, following those statements, a motion was 
moved by the members of the NDP Party saying that this was a 
breach of privilege. Well, Mr. Speaker, today — and I’ll get 
into it in just a few moments — I will show to you why there 
should be no breach of privilege. 
 
Subsequent to this motion, Mr. Speaker, a motion was moved 
by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley that said, well, if this 
is a breach of privilege, let’s send it off to the committee, the 
Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections, and rightfully 
so. And I think that committee would be very appropriate to 
determine if a breach of privilege was made. 
 
Subsequent to that, Mr. Speaker, members of the NDP Party, 
moved by the member for Saskatoon Fairview, have said, well, 
this new information should as well go to the standing 
committee on breaches and privileges. 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, I submit to you — and I’m going to come to 
the essence of my case, Mr. Speaker — I submit to you that, 
number one, it has now been proved that no breach of privilege 
took place. So, Mr. Speaker, in light of that new information, I 
don’t believe that our own motion, our own motion introduced 
by my colleague, the minister from Indian Head-Wolseley, 
which said we’ll take all the information to the standing 
committee, is a motion that we would vote for, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m going to recommend at the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker, that all members, after reviewing this new evidence, 
shall vote on whether or not this information should go to the 
standing committee. I don’t believe it should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Speaker, when you review all of the evidence, is 
there a breach of privilege when a man stands up and states 
matters of fact? I will review with you, Mr. Speaker, just what 
the member from Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, stated last 
Friday that brought up the question of privilege. 
 
The member for Kindersley alleged that, number one, the 
Provincial Auditor made the statement that he be allowed to go 
to the Board of Internal Economy to get his budget. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this very document, this very document submitted to 
us by the provincial officer says, yes indeed I talked about the 
fact that everything should go . . . or that my estimates should 
go to the Board of Internal Economy. Right here, page no. 3, 
item 2. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley as well alleged last 
week that the Provincial Auditor referred in his report to a 
successor. Well, Mr. Speaker, indeed, right here in this special 
report the Provincial Auditor indeed does make the case that he 
would like input into who the successor should be. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, what the member for Kindersley said, and what the 
Provincial Auditor says, match up. 
 
(2115) 

And, Mr. Speaker, furthermore, I ask you the question, would it 
seem fair or reasonable or proper to you that an employee of the 
people of Saskatchewan should choose his successor, or, Mr. 
Speaker, should it be members of the Legislative Assembly? 
 
I don’t think there’s a question, Mr. Speaker, that members of 
the Legislative Assembly were elected to do a job. And one of 
the jobs that we were elected to do would be to appoint and to 
hire. And, Mr. Speaker, in this case of all cases, I think it stands 
out very much as being common sense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how could there be a breach of privilege when 
the member for Kindersley and the Provincial Auditor are in 
agreement that the subject matter in the report was choosing the 
successor to the Provincial Auditor? 
 
Mr. Speaker, furthermore, the member for Kindersley alleged 
that the question of retirement of the Provincial Auditor was 
one of the subject matters. Here again, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor’s new report that he has given to us here 
today, item no. 4, page 3, talks about the question of retirement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that that Minister of Justice this 
evening in the legislature made a very, very good case, that all 
of these issues — retirement package, whether or not the 
Provincial Auditor goes before treasury board or goes before 
the Board of Internal Economy, the question of joint audits, 
those types of things, Mr. Speaker, are not and should not be 
part and parcel of an auditor’s report. Mr. Speaker, that cannot 
be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Kindersley made the case that in 
his judgement, that that package of items was improper, 
improperly used as a tool in an negotiating process. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not a lawyer. Mr. Speaker, I’m not a member of a 
professional organization. But, Mr. Speaker, I do know a little 
bit about common sense, and Mr. Speaker, I do know a little bit 
about business and professional ethics. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the case that the member made, the case that 
the member for Kindersley made, that gee whiz, this Provincial 
Auditor is acting improperly. He made the case that the 
Provincial Auditor perhaps did not use good judgement. And 
Mr. Speaker, I would throw this whole case out to the public of 
Saskatchewan and I would ask the public of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan I believe would agree with 
me. I believe that every professional organization that you 
could put your finger . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member has been 
interrupted several times and I haven’t brought it to the 
attention of the members. But I am bringing it to the attention of 
the member now, that allow the member to continue with his 
remarks without the stream of interruption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the public of 
Saskatchewan could judge. I believe as well, Mr. Speaker, that 
virtually every professional organization that you might want to 
pick at random, if  
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1314 
 

they were to examine these types of issues, or this specific 
issue, Mr. Speaker, and the issue is a whole package of items — 
retirement package, choosing of a successor, whether or not this 
particular individual should report to Internal Economy or 
elsewhere — the issue is whether that package should be a part 
and parcel of a package respecting the exact report, the 
professional report of this auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you ask any professional organization, you ask 
any man on the street, any person on the street whether or not it 
is fair to tie those two, whether or not it is proper to tie the two 
of them, and, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that it is. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Justice made a very 
good case for himself here tonight. And in light of the Minister 
of Justice’s comments tonight, and especially in of light of this 
very report that we got late this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
believe, I don’t believe that the motion of privilege against the 
member for Kindersley has any merit whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would defend the member for Kindersley. I 
would say that members opposite, in light of this new 
information, in light of the information, Mr. Speaker, that backs 
up every single statement made by the member for Kindersley, I 
believe that there is no question at this point in time; that there 
is no case of privilege whatsoever against the member for 
Kindersley. 
 
I would urge all members, I would urge all members in a 
non-partisan fashion to really stop and think what this document 
says and to really reflect upon what the Minister of Justice said 
the other day. And you can make your own judgements whether 
or not the Provincial Auditor was using good judgement or not. 
I’d say most people would say he wasn’t. But, Mr. Speaker, 
there is no question on the issue of privilege here tonight. 
 
So I would say to all members, Mr. Speaker, to defeat the 
motion, or the amendment to the motion, the subamendment to 
the motion, which is referring all of this information to the 
standing committee. 
 
I would ask all members, in fact, to vote against the motion 
referring the whole issue to the standing committee on 
privileges. And, Mr. Speaker, we will put this issue where it 
rightfully belongs, and that is before public accounts. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a motion at another point in 
time that the whole issue be referred to the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts. But at this time, Mr. Speaker, I am urging 
all members, all members to vote against, against this question 
of privilege. And, Mr. Speaker, we will decide that in this 
legislature, and ultimately, Mr. Speaker, the public of 
Saskatchewan, in using their good judgement and wisdom, I 
believe as well will agree that there is no case of privilege. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member be seated, 

please. Order. I believe the member for Cumberland has the 
floor, and let’s give him the opportunity to make his remarks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the limitations on 
speeches, I might make a point, you know, at the outset, 
because the subamendment talks about all evidence relating to 
this issue in regards to the fact of the auditor, and the report 
there mentioning statements of the audit. It is my 
understanding, therefore, I could utilize particular aspects of the 
audit itself in making some key statements about the credibility 
of the auditor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess my introductory comment, Mr. Speaker, is this: the 
whole question of privilege is tied to the very important point 
about having information to the people. The auditor, as a 
functionary of the Legislative Assembly, is a person whose 
function is to provide information about the expenditures of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and more particularly in his area 
as the public auditor. 
 
I would state, Mr. Speaker, that the direct attack on the auditor 
is a deliberate attempt to utilize an old . . . it’s an old trick, as 
one member says, of how you try and muzzle an opposition by 
attacking the messenger, by attacking the credibility of a 
functionary, in this instance, of our parliamentary democracy. I 
think it is very important to recognize this debate in that 
context, that it is not only an attempt to silence and muzzle the 
auditor, but it is also an attempt to keep that information that the 
auditor has been requesting for a long time, to keep that 
information away from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the ways that you try and muzzle democracy is to 
try and keep that information away from the people of 
Saskatchewan. So by muzzling the auditor, by attacking his 
credibility, you attack the basis and the roads of providing that 
information which is the essence of any democracy, any 
parliamentary democracy in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I make my introductory comments, this breach of 
privilege has to be first of all examined in the light of where the 
attack is coming from on the first stage of the argument, and 
how that argument, you know, was started out by the Minister 
of Justice. 
 
I would say from a general context, Mr. Speaker, many 
previous speakers have already pointed this out: the specific 
argumentation utilized has to be looked at in the context of what 
was mentioned in the letter to you dated May 23, 1989. It says 
on page 4, in the spring of 1987 the minister made such 
comments about the Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk. 
 
At that point, Mr. Speaker, in that letter there was disparaging 
remarks made by the Minister of Justice on the Law Clerk, and 
the letter that was sent to you stated the following point. At that 
time you made a ruling which constituted a prima facie case of 
privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you said this on June 24, 1987 at page 697 of 
Hansard. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1315 
 

It is vital, if parliament is to get fair and impartial service 
from its officers, that these officers must be defended from 
intimidation while conducting their duties. Critical 
comments attacking the competence of and credibility of 
an individual can be construed as a form of obstruction. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these were your words on June 24, 1987. 
 
I notice in context that, right off the bat — some other members 
have mentioned it — that this was the first time in the history of 
Saskatchewan that you’ve had two cases of privilege, two 
breaches of privilege back to back in the history of 
Saskatchewan; that never had this happened to anybody’s 
knowledge of the ones that spoke so far; that indeed, it was an 
unusual event that cases of privilege would be brought back to 
back. 
 
But as speaker after speaker mentioned, this wasn’t the very 
first time that the said Minister of Justice had done this before; 
that indeed he had not only attacked the legal counsel and was 
forced to apologize at that point, but he also has done that in a 
couple of cases just this past couple of days. And other 
members have pointed out to the fact this minister also did the 
same to the Ombudsman, David Tickell, when he dared criticize 
the government. 
 
(2130) 
 
When you look at it in the overall historical context, 
governments throughout the world try and silence people by 
intimidation, by making strong criticism, or by using selective 
devices of omission, or by committing them to severe attack 
right throughout the world. Many people figure this only 
happens in Chile, or this only happens in the Third World 
where the dictatorships are occurring; that intimidation tactics 
are the ones that can only be used by these dictatorships. 
 
But I think it’s very important to recognize that intimidation is a 
matter of degree, that there are different forms of intimidation. 
We know that many people have voiced their opposition to this 
government in the past, but they’ve received letters, you know, 
back from this government in that regard. And I think that the 
central message that we are hearing from the people is that they 
don’t want to be silenced by intimidation; they don’t want to be 
silenced by fear of being attacked. 
 
I would say that from my viewpoint, Mr. Speaker, when I look 
at the question of the auditor and I looked at how the auditor 
has presented his case, I checked around the older members in 
our caucus to find out in what way the auditor performed his 
tasks before and to the present. And the information I got, Mr. 
Speaker, in regards to the credibility of the auditor was very 
simple and straightforward. They said he’s always been very 
critical, whether it was an NDP government or whether it is a 
PC government; that his job is to protect the public purse; and 
that whatever information that he has presented in the past has 
been brought out of the facts that he utilized in regards to 
coming to conclusions on his judgement. 
 
I must say that as I got this information, I started looking at the 
more recent past couple of years. I’ve only been 

around in the past couple of audits. And as I looked at the audit 
from last year, again, there was the same general type of critical 
approach that the auditor did use. 
 
In other words, the auditor was not afraid to bring points that 
were contentious to the existing government, and which was the 
same that I got when I talked to the older members. They said 
he did the same thing when we were the government. 
 
So that indeed we are attacking a person whose credibility has 
been long-standing in this legislature. And the auditor in turn is 
being attacked by a person with very questionable motives at 
this point in time in history. 
 
And I might add when I look at the Special Report by the 
Provincial Auditor which was tabled just at 5 o’clock today, I 
looked at it on point 1.01, and the Special Report by the 
Provincial Auditor, it says that: 
 

On March 10, 1989, my lawyer, Mr. Gordon Neill, was 
speaking to Mr. Larry Kyle who was representing the 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan (CIC) 
regarding the interpretation of The Crown Corporations 
Act, 1978, relevant to the payment of $2.7 million reported 
in paragraph 5.05 of my 1988 annual report. 
 

And it’s interesting that in the context of the auditor report, in 
regard to the auditor’s report, the context there is a substantive 
content, and that there’s $2.7 million reported, and so on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the point here is that the auditor has been very 
critical about the government. And his point on 1.01 of the 
special report, which he tabled just before supper, shows that to 
be the essential reason why I think the government has gone on 
an outrageous attack on the public auditor. I will start out by 
reading selected aspects of the . . . of his summary statements 
on the Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative 
Assembly for the year ended March 31, 1988. And I will state 
this right at the . . . In his overall title he says, summary of 
current issues of importance. And in relation to the Provincial 
Auditor, this is what he had to say. Right off the bat he says, on 
page 4: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

It shows very clearly that in this case the government, 
especially the executive, appears not to have co-operated with 
him in his watch-dog role over the public purse. I think that’s 
the very clear statement of his initial position right off the bat. 
And in regards to the importance of information, Mr. Speaker, 
and much of the information he presents in his special report — 
which are also specifically connected not only to the letter but 
also to the audit — he says this on page 4. He says: 
 

In my view, the Legislative Assembly requires more 
information about crown corporations, crown-controlled 
corporations and mixed corporations. 

  



 
May 23, 1989 

1316 
 

The public accounts are not complete, correct or timely. 
 
There were a number of cases were the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

I think it’s very clear, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor is being 
attacked because he has made very clear-cut statements about 
how public accounting was being taking place in this province. 
 
He says that he had problems getting information from Crown 
corporations and Crown-controlled corporations where they 
didn’t have full control, and mixed corporations where there is 
both private and public control on the corporations. And I think 
at this stage, when the government is promoting privatization, 
Mr. Speaker, where we need to know information of the public 
accounts in regards to the Crown corporations, it’s very 
important at this stage when we’re dealing with privatization 
. . . and I notice that in the amendment, Mr. Speaker, that it was 
the Minister of Public Participation that made the amendment, 
the first amendment to have this brought out at the committee 
level. 
 
So the point there, Mr. Speaker, is this, that the auditor is 
making strong statements about the need to know exactly where 
our public corporations and our mixed corporations exist today. 
 
For our purposes over here we want to know what the 
government is doing in privatization, and so on. We need to 
know our record, where we are coming from so we know where 
we are going. But that’s what the Government of Saskatchewan 
is hiding to this date. 
 
I know that when I was . . . It’s very important, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’re trying to get this into committee. 
 
When we went into committee, the first thing I learned about 
committee was this: the committee doesn’t allow you the same 
level of public knowledge. For example, right now there is a 
certain amount of the public who will watch the television. 
When we go in committee there is no television at all on the 
debates in committee. It all takes place in a room here in the 
legislature, and there’s no TV cameras that report ongoing 
procedures in the way that the public can make judgements 
about how the proceedings go themselves. So it’s more or less a 
more hidden form of governing; it’s a more secret form of 
governing. Although from time to time there are reports coming 
out from the committees, it’s not as readily available to the 
public as you would on the televised debates, as we do have 
right now. 
 
Now on this side of the House we would rather more 
thoroughly deal with this on a public debate rather than just 
leaving it to committee, which the amendment suggests. So our 
proposal, also on the amendment, Mr. Speaker, in connection to 
that, is that we want information that was tabled, of course, in 
that special report, and connected with that special report and 
all connecting information from that — not that which is 
selectively brought into scope by the initial amendment. 

So what we are talking about overall, Mr. Speaker, as we are 
dealing with this, is public information that the public has the 
right to know. To me it’s an indirect form of trying to silence 
the public. It’s trying to get the people . . . the government is 
trying to make the people not know about what’s going on in 
our overall public account. 
 
As I looked at the information on the auditor, I also saw the . . . 
it was not only in terms of the tabling of documents and so on 
that he was worried about, and I will relate page 9 on the 
current issues of importance again. And this is what he says at 
2.20, he says: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because: 
 
—he now sees the financial transactions for about 50 per 
cent of the public spending; 

 —he now              
In other words, there is another 50 per cent that he would like to 
see but he does not have access to, and to me that’s going into 
the same boat when we try to debate in the committees. I used 
to try and get information on the Crown corporations through 
the committees, and when it was in the privatization process 
they said, well we can’t give you the information because it’s a 
private business, because it will be dealing with the secrets of 
business transactions and we can’t give you that information. 
 
And so that, you know, in regards to the same idea of 
privatization, they said we couldn’t disclose this information 
because it would be unfair competition, or something of that 
sort. So that’s the type of argumentation that was utilized. And 
we knew we weren’t talking about issues relating to unfair 
competition; all we wanted was straightforward financial 
information that was on record, that existed already. That 
wasn’t unfair competition; that had the right to be reported, but 
they didn’t want to give us that information because they said it 
would be unfair competition. So that type of argumentation is 
always utilized. 
 
I think it’s very important for the people of the province to 
know that half the information, half the money that is publicly 
spent is not accounted for through the public auditor. And what 
he had been requesting for a long time is to have the basis and 
the resources to be able to do so, but this government has not 
been forthcoming. Instead they will provide millions to the big 
corporations to do this and that. 
 
He also said that the Provincial Auditor can no longer 
effectively serve the Assembly because 
 

I am . . . denied access to information. 
 

And that’s a very important point. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I am listening to the member, and I’m 
sure somewhere along the line all this information can be 
somehow tied into the motion. However there are two motions 
before the House, and one deals more specifically with the 
report; this motion and the amendments do not. 
 
Therefore I would like to ask the hon. member to keep 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1317 
 

that in mind in his remarks. It is not a wide-ranging discussion 
on the report. I’ve allowed one or two or three referrals to it, but 
the issue before the House is not the report as such. 
 
(2145) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
auditor went on . . . You know, with your comment, I will just 
make a concluding point. He said he had problems in getting 
the Crown report and also in regards to public participation-type 
promises. But he also said this very clearly on 2.31. He said: 

 
. . . I have been interfered with in the execution of my 
duties. 
 

And my point here, Mr. Speaker, and I see the connection, there 
is not only interference in regard to the public accounting in the 
province on public auditing. I think what we are coming to see 
is interference by the government on the functions of the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan; that indeed, the direct 
attack on the auditor is an indirect way of trying to muzzle 
whatever important information that he does have. 
 
As I looked at the case done by the Minister of Justice, I would 
generally state, Mr. Speaker, he utilizes two methods in regards 
to his personal attack on the auditor. 
 
One is what I would call the act of commission, and that is one 
where you make more or less disparaging insinuations about the 
auditor. And I’d like to put it on record, you know, for that 
when where I figure that was said. On page 1247 of Hansard, 
dated March 19, 1989, the Minister of Justice had this to say. 
He said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if a Provincial Auditor says, I will change my 
report if you do this, if you do this, if I have a proper 
retirement package and if I can determine who my 
successor is going to be, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that is 
improper. 
 

What he is suggesting here, Mr. Speaker, is that the auditor is 
improper. He’s improper for making suggestions about 
retirement packages and successors. 
 
And to me, I connect this to my second point. One of the basic 
rules, of course, on debate or on information sharing is that you 
not only make disparaging remarks about who you are 
attacking, what you do is that you omit key sections. You don’t 
tell the whole truth. You select out different packages from 
complete statements made, and then you utilize that in your 
argumentation. 
 
I found that the minister was utilizing a lot of that type of 
argumentation in regards to making comments about the 
auditor. He was using very selective, incomplete sentences to 
make his argumentation. In other words, he was taking things 
out of context. And that device was used then to vociferously 
state his case. 
 
And I was listening to what he had to say again, and he made 
the same points on the 19th, and I heard him make the same 
points again tonight. And although we had outlined those things 
for him before in comments by the 

Leader of the Opposition, he should have known that indeed he 
was taking things out of the full context of the message that was 
provided for by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And so I will give my examples. Mr. Speaker, in point number 
three dealing with retirement, in regards to the question . . . and 
I’m reading the letter of April 20th, 1989, to a Mr. Larry Kyle, 
by the lawyer for the Provincial Auditor. And in regards to 
retirement, of course, the minister stated that: 
 

He would . . . expect to receive on retirement the same 
allowances and economic adjustments that are provided 
Deputy Ministers . . . 
 

What the Minister of Justice neglected to include in there was 
“in accordance with The Provincial Auditor Act.” He 
completely neglected to mention the fact, Mr. Speaker, that you 
would be doing this “in accordance with The Provincial Auditor 
Act.” In other words, that he would be following the law. He 
would be following the law, contrary to his charges on the 
government where he said that they don’t comply with the law 
in many cases on auditing, and that . . . That was the very first, 
one of the big main arguments that is utilized by the Minster of 
Justice. 
 
So when I looked at that, I thought to myself, well here is a 
person who’s trying to follow Saskatchewan law, Saskatchewan 
rules and principles, and those that have been established here 
by parliamentary bureaucracy for many years. He makes that 
important connection. 
 
But what does the Minister of Justice, the person who is 
supposed to be in charge of the law, do? He takes that out of 
context and leaves that out — he completely leaves it out in 
Hansard. There is absolutely no mention in his statement that it 
said in accordance with The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
I find that absolutely discouraging and disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker, for a Minister of Justice, for a minister in charge of the 
law, could deliberately try to give the impression that the 
auditor was not following the law. And I find that very, very, 
very disappointing. 
 
But also in regards to the fact about . . . the minister kept talking 
about whether or not this Provincial Auditor would be able to 
somehow appoint his successor. And again in that letter that he 
sent, he says that he also recommended that his successor be 
appointed internally. And that’s where, of course, the Minister 
of Justice stops. What he neglected to say, Mr. Speaker, is this, 
again: 

 
. . . in accordance with the convention that has been 
established in this Province, Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, 
P.E.I., Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia. 
 

In other words, what he did here is that he said the successor 
should be appointed in accordance with Saskatchewan 
convention. Again, it is very, very disappointed again, Mr. 
Speaker. Here is the sin of omission again where you neglect to 
tell the full story. You only tell a little bit of it, and you select it 
out for your own argumentation to try and save your own neck. 
  



 
May 23, 1989 

1318 
 

And what he neglected to do here was that this is already our 
provincial practice, our provincial convention. And that’s 
clearly stated in that letter of April 20. And that was sent 
already last week. But here I’m hearing the minister use the 
same argumentation again even this evening. And here he can 
call himself the Minister of Justice. 
 
I certainly hope, as we go through this, that he clearly 
re-examines his own statements and practices, and learns to 
abide by the parliamentary tradition of respecting our 
functionaries such as yourself, Mr. Speaker, and also people 
such as the legal counsel, and also people such as the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
The other thing I looked at was the whole question of the Board 
of Internal Economy. The thing I can state there, Mr. Speaker, 
is going directly to the proposal by the auditor and what the 
auditor is saying. The minister seems to insinuate many strange, 
sinister things about what the auditor is proposing, but it’s not. I 
would contend, Mr. Speaker, of course it’s not sinister. 
 
I looked at the Appendix IV of his report, and I looked at 
statements to see whether or not there was anything sinister 
about this. And I started looking at it, and I said to myself, well 
this doesn’t look too sinister. It says, the proposal on Appendix 
IV says that: 
 

The Provincial Auditor shall present to the Board of Internal 
Economy the estimates of the sums of money that are 
required to be provided by the Legislature for the purposes of 
this Act. 
 

Nothing sinister about that. 
 

That Board shall review the estimates and make any 
alterations that it considers proper, and shall thereafter 
concur in the estimates. 
 

Nothing sinister about that. 
 

The Speaker shall cause the estimates to be laid before the 
Legislative Assembly and the Assembly may refer the 
estimates to a Standing Committee of the Legislative 
Assembly pursuant to the rules of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

I don’t see anything sinister about that, Mr. Speaker, unless the 
Minister of Justice seems to insinuate that the Speaker . . . 
There may be something sinister there. Because all I see here in 
this V A 1(3) is a proposal by the Provincial Auditor talking 
about your position here, Mr. Speaker. And also when I look at 
the next thing, at point (4), it says: 
 

where the estimates are not referred to a Standing Committee 
of the Legislative Assembly, the estimates are to be 
considered in the Committee of Finance and defended by a 
member of the Executive Council who is a member of the 
Board of Internal Economy and designated by the Speaker. 
 

So what we see, Mr. Speaker, are processes and proposed 
solutions by the Provincial Auditor that have no semblance of 
the sinister way that the minister seemed to 

present before. And my feeling is that he made other charges 
along the way. And one of the other main ones that I saw is the 
whole question of making a deal. There seems to be an 
impression here that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. It being 10 o’clock, the House is 
adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 


