


















































June 20, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 June 20, 1989 
 
 

2061 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
want to introduce to Mr. Chairman, and other members of the 
Assembly and staff of the Department of Education and 
continuing education, a group of seven students from the 
Wilson House over on Empress Street, in the Elphinstone 
constituency. 
 
There is seven students here tonight, some of them in the 
Speaker’s gallery and one on the floor of the Assembly. They 
are accompanied here tonight by Ken Peet and Jennifer Read 
Sitter. They will be watching for half an hour here in the 
Assembly. I am sure they’ll find it interesting and I look 
forward to meeting with them afterwards. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Education 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too 
would like to welcome our guests on the floor of the Legislature 
tonight. 
 
Item 1 
 
And with me from the Department of Education, to my 
immediate right we have Mike Benson, who’s executive 
director of finance and administration; behind him, Liz 
Crosthwaite, assistant deputy minister; and to her left, Marine 
Perran, assistant deputy minister. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I note that you have some other 
officials with you, and I would appreciate it if you could 
introduce those officials as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, if I start to my left in 
the back row, we have Dianne Anderson from university 
affairs; next to her we have John Biss, who is director of 
institute affairs; next to John we have Ray McKay, who’s 
executive director of our northern division; next to him Lorne 
Glauser, associate deputy minister; Marilyn Jenkins from the 
provincial library; Betty Green, executive director of human 
resources; Deb Achen, executive director of skill training; Vic 
Tetreault, executive director of the official minority languages 
office; and now moving into the seat right next to me is deputy 
minister, Lawrie McFarlane. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. Mr. Minister, the last information that 
I received from your department outlined the following as the 
officials and I just want to run through this list and see whether 
or not we’re still accurate. 
 
Deputy minister, Lawrie McFarlane; special adviser to the 
deputy minister, Ray Finlay; deputy minister’s secretary, 
Denise Boczulak, I guess; the curriculum  

associate deputy minister, Marine Perran; curriculum and 
instruction division, Fred Renihan; special education branch, 
Bob Livingston; humanities, Sandra Klenz; community 
education branch, Saul Arbess; social science and resource 
centre services branch, Ivan Yackel, I believe the name is; 
mathematics and science, Barry Mitschke; Saskatchewan school 
improvement program, co-ordinators, Garth Findahl and Linda 
Pusch; evaluation and student services branch director, Susan 
Winter; official minority language office, Vic Tetreault — and 
obviously that’s the same; French curriculum development 
branch, Stan Frey; federal-provincial programs branch, Valerie 
Deane; French minority education branch, André Moquin; 
distance education council, Doris Bamford is the secretary; 
finance and operations, Mike Benson — that seems to be the 
same; administration and resources distribution, Don Trew; 
communication branch, Katy Adams; educational resources 
distribution, the manager for the book bureau and education 
media is Leanne Miles; financial planning, Linda Jackson; 
school facilities planning, Irvin Brunas; and school grants, Jerry 
Sing-Chin. Those are for the K-12, as I understand it. Can you 
confirm that all of these people are still with your department 
and still in those positions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Would it be satisfactory to the hon. 
member if we get a departmental flow sheet updated and sent 
over to you? I think, given the list that you’ve read, for the most 
part all those people are still there. So there’s been a couple of 
changes in some of the positions that they hold. For example, 
Ray Finlay is now in charge of our multicultural heritage 
languages policy side — multicultural consultant. If that would 
be satisfactory to the hon. member I could undertake to provide 
that to you. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — I’m particularly interested in knowing 
whether Fred Renihan is still the executive director of 
curriculum and instruction division, whether Bob Livingston is 
still the director of the special education branch. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I’d be interested in knowing 
what your philosophy of education is. If you would spend a few 
minutes outlining your particular views on education, I think 
that would be helpful in terms of framing the kind of discussion 
that we’re going to have tonight. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — That’s a pretty wide ranging and open 
ended question. Maybe I’ll start this way. I believe that 
education is the key to individual social and economic 
well-being in the future. It’s the key to our province’s 
well-being in the future. It’s a key to our nation’s well-being in 
the future. I subscribe very much to the view that in the 
post-industrial economy, the information age, the 
knowledge-based economy, the new economy — call it what 
you will — that education is the key commodity, if you like, in 
that new era. 
 
The implications of . . . And defining the implications of this 
changing world, no matter what label you put on it, are 
sometimes difficult. I think people in Weyburn,  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2062 
 
 

Saskatchewan and elsewhere probably don’t come up to you, 
nor do they come up to me, on coffee row in Weyburn and say, 
well, Mr. Minister, what are the implications . . . Mr. Minister 
of Education, what are the implications for my child in this 
post-industrial, technological, knowledge-based, information 
_based economy? 
 
They don’t talk like that, but quite frankly, what they do know 
is that they know the world is changing and changing more 
rapidly than ever, and the key to their child’s welfare in the 
future will be directly related to education. 
 
And as well they, I think, instinctively understand that that’s 
going to be a lifelong process, which may well be a new 
signpost, if you like, of this new economy. I think that’s a view 
they subscribe to as well. 
 
And thirdly and finally, if I sort of take your question and try 
and frame it relatively broadly as the question is posed, that 
education will be the tool that will serve our young people well 
as they grow up in this global village of the future. No longer 
will they find their success or their job in the work place in a 
50- or 60-mile radius of where they were born, but indeed they 
might find themselves taking in their place wherever in the 
world. Or as Marshall McLuhan, I think, once said, circa about 
1970, “The job of the future will consist largely of learning a 
living in this global village.” 
 
Those three points generally sort of provide me with the 
framework on how I approach this job. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So, Mr. Minister, if I can just try and 
paraphrase what you had to say, I understand that your 
philosophy of education is basically industrially driven; that 
you have a utilitarian view of education; that you don’t have an 
equality of opportunity or an equity of opportunity view of 
education; that it’s more in tune with the premiss that if you 
develop certain skills, if you reach certain levels of education, 
then you will, in fact, benefit economically and socially. Is that 
it in a nutshell? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I think the hon. member has put a 
lot of words in my mouth. First of all, what I said is that I don’t 
hold the industrial view. Or put it this way: some of what has 
served us well in the industrial economy may not serve as well 
in what some would call the post-industrial economy. So I 
suppose you and I might disagree there. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well I gather that . . . Is this the philosophy 
that drives our curriculum development process in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister? Is this the philosophy that drives 
the Department of Education or Saskatchewan Education? Is 
this the kind of philosophy that allows people to develop 
curriculum, to be involved in developing our future education 
and school system in Saskatchewan? Is this what’s driving the 
department at present, your particular view of the school 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In so far as what’s driving the 
educational reforms that we’ve been embarking on, at least 
probably this last half decade, is a joint and shared vision that 
came out of the Directions process. It defined  

the core curriculum. We are now into the implementation 
stages. 
 
It’s not one person’s view or vision that’s driving the changes. 
It’s that co-operative and shared view. By co-operative and 
shared I mean shared with the teachers, shared with parents, 
shared with the trustees, shared, I suspect, with a large 
cross-section of society, albeit we tend to look to the three or 
four major partners in education as representatives when it 
comes to framing it, and I speak specifically of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association, teachers’ federation 
and the league of educational administrators. 
 
That blueprint, I think, is the result of a lot of work and a lot of 
consultation by all of those involved — ultimately came up 
with a blueprint with some 16 or 17 recommendations. Some of 
those have been addressed relatively fully, others are being 
implemented, and still others are waiting to be implemented. 
But that’s what’s driving educational policy making in this 
province. 
 
(1915) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — One of the things that I’ve heard a lot since I 
became the education critic, Mr. Minister, is a fear on the part 
of many of those partners that you just previously spoke of, that 
the core curriculum is in danger of being overcome by 
conservative bureaucrats, and a view of education that’s not in 
keeping with the original Directions report, and the original 
view of what core curriculum would mean. 
 
Now I think that it’s fair to say that there was a consensus that 
was developed in this province around core curriculum and 
Directions and that consensus is now in danger of being 
obscured by a traditional view or a traditionalist view of 
education. And I’m wondering if you can tell me where core 
curriculum is at present. How many new courses have been 
developed? Where are we at in terms of the 10-year blueprint 
that has been outlined in terms of curriculum development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well we have defined the required 
areas of study, or what you and I might have called compulsory 
subjects when we went to school, and assigned their appropriate 
numbers of minutes of instruction for the various grades, if you 
like, obviously making provision for local policy making. 
 
As well, the second dimension of the implementation of this 
core curriculum is the common essential learnings, which I find 
is a term fairly widely understood by those who work with it 
every day but probably less well understood by certainly those 
70 per cent who do not have children in school. But it includes 
critical and creative thinking and independent thinking, 
communication skills, numeracy, literacy, those kinds of things. 
And that’s the two dimensions to the core curriculum. 
 
Various subjects are in various positions relative to 
implementation and development and curriculum writing and 
piling and those kinds of things. And if we don’t have a chart 
here with you, we can probably make one available to you that 
lays out the time frame for the  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2063 
 
 

various areas. 
 
As it relates to the common essential learnings, our first taste of 
the implementation of this new core curriculum for educators 
and for teachers this past year was the in-service around the 
common essential learnings. And I think that was well received. 
I think there was a lot of uncertainty and insecurity out there 
amongst teachers. They’d heard a lot about this core curriculum 
and for the most part obviously they had been very supportive 
of what had been designed and what the blueprint would be. 
 
But at the same time, any time you’re implementing change, 
there’s always that hesitation that, is this really going to be 
something momentous in their teaching lives, if you like, and 
that they won’t be able to handle. And I think once they saw 
that, they realized that this made sense, it gave them some new 
ideas to some . . . looking at some old problems, I guess, or 
some ways of teaching some old skills in new ways. And I think 
it’s been well received for the most part. 
 
For example, in ’89-90 what you could look to see in terms of 
the development of some various areas: language arts, K to 5 
will be piloted; there’ll be development in 6, 7, and 8. In social 
studies we’ll be having pilots in 6, 9, and 10; there’ll be 
development go forward in grades 4, 5, and 11. In science, 
kindergarten to grade 5 and grade 10 will be piloted; and there 
will be development in the secondary sciences of chemistry, 
biology, and physics. Arts education will be piloted K through 
5, as well as grade 9. And we’ll see some development, 
curriculum development, in grades 6, 7, and 8. 
 
Health, we’ll complete the middle years curriculum; implement 
AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) education in 
middle years and secondary program; development of health 
curriculum at secondary level; and so on and so forth, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, one of the things that 
I’ve learned is that in order to inform educators and inform 
parents and the public about the new core curriculum, that 
Saskatchewan Education has established a communications 
office and appointed a communications co-ordinator. I’d be 
interested in knowing the name of that person, and what the role 
and function of that person is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think the list that you had originally 
read had Katy Adams as head of the communications, and she’s 
on leave at the University of Regina, I believe it is. Richard 
Bonokoski is the head of our communications area. And it’s not 
a new position. It’s one that’s been there since I’ve been 
involved, if you like. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I know that you had a direct 
mail-out to all of the parents in Saskatchewan. Can you tell us 
what that letter cost? This is a letter that was sent advising 
parents of what the new core curriculum and what CELs 
(common essential learnings) was all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — We sent out something in the  

order of 94,000 letters to parents. We tried to target parents with 
school-aged children, across the province, with a response card. 
And so the question then is, why did we send the letters out? 
And the reason was, is that this past fall was the first stage in 
the implementation of this new core curriculum. That’s a pretty 
major event in the educational history of this province. And just 
as any time you’re implementing some change there’s 
uncertainty — and we’ve talked about the uncertainty at the 
teachers’ level — we wanted to make sure that parents 
understood what we were doing, and what this new curriculum 
was all about, and hence the fairly exhaustive several-paged 
letter. 
 
Included in the letter was a response card for people to send 
back responses to us with their views on what they saw this 
core curriculum, and as well for them to indicate if they would 
like to receive some more information in some certain areas. 
For example, they could write and ask for booklets to be sent 
out with titles like: How can I help my child at home, and What 
my child will learn in school. The approximate cost for this was 
in the order of $100,000. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — So the 94,000 letters to parents cost 
$100,000. Now, Mr. Minister, the other thing that you referred 
to earlier was these four booklets: What my child will learn in 
school, French Language Instruction in Saskatchewan, How I 
can be more involved in decisions about education, and How I 
can help with my child’s education at home. I gather that these 
booklets were sent to parents that sent in the reply card. 
 
Can you tell me how much these booklets cost, and can you tell 
me the reaction that you got from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation on the content of one booklet in particular which is 
called What my child will learn in school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The booklets, the entire bunch of 
them, cost us — I think there was four altogether — $53,000. 
 
I would have to say that for the most part the reaction has been 
very positive, but I would be less than honest if I didn’t say as 
well that some, probably from the teachers’ federation, were 
concerned about the language in them. They would probably 
have preferred the more professional, technical language, and I 
referred to some of that earlier. And I find myself doing it, and 
certainly amongst professionals it makes sense to use the 
technical language. 
 
But I find sometimes when you’re communicating with the 
larger public, including parents, that we have to make sure . . . 
There’s no sense communicating with them if we don’t put it in 
an understandable fashion, and I refer to things like 
eight-cylinder phrases, if you like, like common essential 
learnings and aesthetic education and some of those kinds of 
things. So we tried to make the language as clear and precise as 
possible, albeit I know that we probably took some liberties in 
doing so. 
 
I will . . . Having said all of that, however, I can attest to the 
popularities of the books. Certainly what my child will learn 
and How I can help my child at home were  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2064 
 
 

extremely popular in terms of parents writing and asking for 
them. And although some teacher federation officials may have 
had some concerns about the language, I can as well report that 
many, many teachers across the province were very, very 
pleased with them. 
 
We had several requests from schools and from individual 
teachers, the likes of which the requests went something like 
this, Mr. Chairman: I’m having my parent-teacher interviews 
next week; could I get 150 of them or could I get 250 of them? 
Or schools would write up and say, can we get 2,000 more 
copies because we’re doing a mail-out to all of our parents? 
We’d like to include that to all of them. 
 
So I . . . Yes, some concerns. I don’t think I view them as, you 
know, terribly serious. I mean I understand the concerns. And 
having said all that, the books I think were for the most part 
very popular and very well received. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, once again, that’s not my 
perception, particularly amongst people in the teaching 
profession and particularly amongst parents who aren’t 
necessarily white, urban, middle-class people. And one of the 
criticisms that was levied against these particular booklets by 
the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation was that if you were a 
white, middle-class parent living in urban Saskatchewan, the 
books may have made eminent sense; but if you weren’t, it 
excluded a great many parents in this province. 
 
Another criticism was that while you have been . . . Earlier 
tonight you said that the core curriculum and CELs is based on 
Directions 1984. If you look at the language used in Directions, 
and if you look at the language that was used in the handbook 
for teachers, it’s quite different from the language that’s used in 
these four particular booklets. And I think, Mr. Minister, what 
you have been engaged in is a public relations exercise; that 
there are some parents in Saskatchewan that are concerned that 
their children are not learning the three R’s — or the basics — 
and that you are falling into a traditional view of education. 
 
(1930) 
 
In this booklet you talk about compulsory subjects — this is the 
booklet, What My Child Will Learn in School — when really 
what it’s called amongst the collaborators in education is the 
required areas of study. In the booklet, you talk about English, 
when really what’s really being talked about by the 
collaborators is language arts. In this booklet, what you call 
general skills and values is called CELs or the common 
essential learnings. 
 
And there are a number of other areas — the adaptive features 
in this booklet, which everybody else calls the adaptive 
components. Now, Mr. Minister, can you explain, and while I 
understand what you were saying in terms of using language 
that people can relate to, can you explain to me why it is that 
you have created this big kerfuffle in the teaching profession 
and amongst the collaborators in education, by using some very 
traditional language, when in fact what the idea behind 
Directions and core and CELs was to move beyond the basics 
and to move into critical thinking? 

Mr. Minister, I think you are playing on some fears that some 
parents have that their children aren’t getting the basics, when I 
think most educators would acknowledge that the basics have 
always been there, they will always be there, they will be there 
in the future, and what educators want to do is move beyond 
reading, writing, and arithmetic. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, I think the hon. member may be 
over-reacting on this issue a little bit. As I said, there were some 
concerns, but I also mentioned that we had many, many 
requests from schools and teachers and boards, because they 
liked what they saw, and in fact it was consistent with 
everyone’s shared vision and put forward in as simple and as 
precise a language as you could, albeit that you know that you 
can’t put everything in a five-page document. We estimate that 
we had requests from schools for over 20,000 booklets. Now if 
they weren’t liked and well liked and thought useful, I doubt 
that those schools would have requested them. 
 
And further to that, Mr. Chairman, I see the Estevan Teachers’ 
Association felt strongly enough about what was in one of the 
booklets, that they had it reprinted in their local weekly 
newspaper, The Estevan Mercury. It was headlined: “Help with 
your child’s education at home”. 
 

The following article is condensed from “How I can help 
with my child’s education at home,” available from 
Saskatchewan Education . . . (They have the telephone 
number down.) 
 
Submitted by the Estevan Teachers’ Association 
“Preparing today’s youth for tomorrow’s challenges.” 
 

So, yes some concerns, but I think the record speaks for itself in 
terms of the popularity of the booklets, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, earlier you said that there was 
a partnership in education, that there is a collaboration process. 
But, Mr. Minister, when these booklets were published, was or 
were any of the curriculum advisory committees involved in 
this — curriculum advisory committees that you appointed 
yourself? Was there any consultation with those partners in 
education? 
 
And I guess the real question is, Mr. Minister: where are the 
decisions regarding core curriculum being made? Are they 
being made in the minister’s political office upstairs? Are they 
being made in the communications office? Or are they being 
made by what has historically and traditionally been in our 
province the collaborators or the partners in education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can share a bit of history with the 
hon. member relative to the final product there, these booklets. 
 
It was a difficult and complex task, trying to balance the 
concerns and be as precise as possible, etc., etc. And I can 
report to you that through the course of developing those  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2065 
 
 

booklets, some of which probably went through 12 or 15 or 
maybe even more drafts, that as we got further along, these 
drafts were shared with the trustees and with the LEADS 
(League of Educational Administrators, Directors, and 
Superintendents) group and with the teachers federation, 
looking for their feedback. 
 
Secondly, we put together a reaction panel composed of 
teachers, principals, and directors to give us their reaction, if 
you like, and their feedback. So yes, there was consultation and 
collaboration and co-operation. Yes, it’s probably also true that 
not everybody agreed, but then that’s probably not abnormal 
when you get that many players involved. 
 
Your second question, about really which related to one of your 
earlier questions tonight, like what’s driving educational policy 
in this province . . . And as you rightly point out, one of the 
things that’s probably made educational policy making in this 
country as special is that tremendous co-operative effort 
between the four partners in education. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, to wrap up on this part of 
our discussion on estimates, all I can say is that one of the 
collaborators in education, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, was not very happy. I understand that there were 
curriculum advisory committees that weren’t very happy. So in 
essence, Mr. Minister, while you were trying . . . in your 
attempt to indicate to me that there was a collaborative process, 
you did annoy several people who are members of that 
partnership. 
 
The next item that I want to talk about, and it has to do as well 
with core curriculum and development, I would be interested in 
knowing what process is used by your department when it 
comes to a decision to write and print a textbook in this 
province. And in particular, Mr. Minister, I’m interested in 
knowing the process that your department used when it came to 
this particular textbook, which is the grade 7 text for social 
studies, Canada and Its Pacific Neighbours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll try and do the best I can, but when 
it comes to writing and printing and publishing textbooks in 
education, I have to admit that it’s not an area that I 
comprehend totally or as fully as I would like. The book that 
you refer to was . . . The process would roughly go something 
like this: we have our curriculum advisory committees establish 
some broad policy framework, in this case for social studies; an 
outline would be drafted, worked on by writers under contract, 
in this case to Weigl publishers; drafts back to the committee, I 
would suspect probably a number of times over the course of 
production; and then when everybody has signed off, printing 
takes place. And I readily grant you that that’s probably a fair 
simplification to a pretty complex process. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well I understand that this particular 
textbook and its development began some time in 1985 — I 
think late fall, November 1985. And I understand that there was 
a project team established to determine and to decide which 
publisher would be used to develop and write a grade 7 
textbook for social studies. And I understand that there was a 
deadline given, some time in  

January 1986, for the publishers to mount their project 
proposals. And this is not a cheap exercise on the part of 
publishers. Publishers can spend 15 to 20 to 25 to $30,000 in 
mounting a proposal for a textbook such as Canada and Its 
Pacific Neighbours. 
 
Now as I understand it, the contract was for five years for about 
10,000 volumes. And there was a project team that was put in 
place. And I understand that the project team did not select this 
particular publisher as their first choice — this was the Weigl 
publishing company — as their first choice, but in fact they 
preferred the Prentice-Hall proposal. 
 
Now I am wondering, Mr. Minister, if you can tell me which 
publisher was recommended by the project team, which is a 
team of people who are set up to determine what project will be 
acceptable in terms of writing Saskatchewan textbooks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding of 
the situation here is that there may well have been a Toronto 
firm well in the running, but the decision was made by our 
department to go with Weigl publishers for two reasons at the 
end of the day: one, in that we could get a quality job done, and 
you don’t have to take my word for that. I think prior to her 
doing this book for us, she’d done a number for Alberta 
Education, and I think they have a pretty good quality control 
mechanism, and she had established for herself a very good 
education and was highly regarded in educational publishing 
circles. 
 
And the second reason was if we could get the quality . . . And 
the second reason, one that was a pretty important one to us, is 
we want to see Saskatchewan publishing — in this case, 
educational publishing industry — thrive. We’re going to be 
doing a lot of this as our core curriculum implementation 
unfolds, and we think it will be good for Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan young people and Saskatchewan educators, for 
the Saskatchewan educational system, if you like, to have that 
other piece in the chain right here and thriving, and by that I 
mean the educational publishing industry. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to answer the 
question for you because you didn’t answer it. Which publisher 
was recommended by the project team? The publisher 
recommended by the project team was Prentice-Hall. That’s the 
answer to the question. Weigl placed third, and a distant third 
actually, Mr. Minister. 
 
(1945) 
 
Now I grant you that Prentice-Hall is not a Saskatchewan firm, 
but the project team was unanimous. This is the process that 
your department set up, that there would be a project team that 
would determine which publisher would get the contract to 
develop and write and publish the grade 7 textbook. And the 
project team was unanimous. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I would be interested in knowing where 
Prentice-Hall . . . I guess I’ve answered the question for you, so 
I won’t ask that question. 
.  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2066 
 
 

I’d be interested in knowing what sort of process does your 
department use when developing textbooks. Do you have 
project teams and do they make a proposal to the department; 
does your department listen to their proposal? Or what is the 
process that allows someone in the . . . some place to overrule a 
project team’s advice on a matter. They do the evaluation, they 
look at the chapters, they look at the proposal, they evaluate it, 
they make a recommendation or make a decision, they talk to 
the publishers. And I’m wondering where it is in the process 
that some place someone can make the decision that the project 
team’s unanimous decision is going to be overruled in favour of 
something that, in their view, was not appropriate and ranked a 
poor third. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think, Mr. Chairman, the hon. 
member and I will have to agree to disagree on this one. If she 
wants to go to bat for some Toronto publishing house, that’s 
entirely up to her, but I and this department and this 
government are going to go to bat for a Saskatchewan 
publishing firm because they can do the job. And I ask you, Mr. 
Chairman, who has a better sense when it comes to social 
studies, the geography and the history of this province — I ask 
you, who is likely to present it better, some firm out of Toronto 
or some firm out of Saskatchewan? I rest my case, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, you haven’t rested your 
case very well at all, because one of the things that’s important 
is that information that young people are receiving in school is 
in fact factual; that the information is factual, that the school 
text does not have any particular bias — a sexist bias or a racist 
bias or a cultural bias. It’s important that textbooks not be full 
of mistakes, and, Mr. Minister, there are mistakes in this 
textbook. And one of the mistakes in this textbook is found on 
page 278, and it’s a picture of Grant Devine and George 
McLeod sitting at some sort of . . .  
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. That’s not a quote. I would ask 
members not to refer to other members of the House by name. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well my apologies, Mr. Chairperson. But we 
have a picture of the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Health 
minister sitting at a conference. The Minister of Health has his 
finger pointed at the Premier, it looks like, or maybe someone 
else, and it says, “The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement has 
some supporters and also some opponents. Where do you 
stand?” 
 
Now I ask you, Mr. Minister of Education, how would you 
interpret this particular picture of the Premier and the Health 
minister sitting at some conference? It’s probably a conference 
on health care, some provincial conference of all Health 
ministers and perhaps the Premier. 
 
How could anyone interpret that particular picture as the 
Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement has some supporters and 
also has some opponents? We don’t know who the supporters 
are. If you’re a young student in grade 7 and you don’t know 
who the opponents are, how is that a helpful picture for young 
people in grade 7? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
maybe is trying to suggest that because the department  

ultimately, or officials of the department ultimately chose the 
publisher, that somehow they choose the pictures that goes in 
there too. And as I outlined a process earlier, certainly I do not 
have a hand in the choosing of the pictures or in the captions. 
 
I don’t know what more I can say about them except to say that 
obviously those in charge of the writing and the curriculum 
advisory and the committees that were involved are the ones 
that have to be comfortable with the final draft. 
 
Having said all of that, if you’re asking me if that textbook or 
probably any other text or, for that matter, book that’s 
published, virtually anywhere in the world, comes out a perfect 
document despite everybody’s best proof-reading, etc., etc., I 
doubt it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We’re . . . Everybody’s human. They make a best attempt to 
make sure there are minimal errors, if you like, if that indeed is 
an error. I wouldn’t even offer that up. But certainly we’re not 
in the . . . It’s not my job to choose pictures and captions, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, the project team placed 
this textbook third. 
 
And I just want to go through some other errors in the textbook, 
and I’m referring to page 250; it’s figure 13.11. And it says 
here: 
 

These Spanish street signs are in a community in Mexico. 
Spanish was not the original language of the people of this 
area. Today both indigenous people and immigrants speak 
Spanish because it was the language of the colonizers of 
Mexico. 
 

Well that’s very interesting. The only problem is, you can’t see 
any street signs in this picture, Mr. Minister. There’s no street 
signs at all. And so the question becomes, why is this picture 
here? What is the purpose of this picture? 
 
And that was one of the concerns of the project development 
team, Mr. Minister, was that this project proposal was third and 
not first. They wanted a textbook that would meet the 
educational requirements of the people in grade 7. 
 
The only thing that we can see or surmise from this particular 
picture is that there is a bank sign. The bank sign is in English, 
French, and Spanish, and what the picture really tells you is that 
you can get your money changed if you’re in Mexico City at 
this particular bank, but it certainly doesn’t give you any 
direction in terms of street signs. 
 
And there are all kinds of other problems with this particular 
textbook, Mr. Minister. In fact, there are so many problems that 
there is a very large document, 19 pages, that have been 
submitted to the Department of Education on April 7, 1989 
from the publisher, outlining a list of changes. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, it would appear that as a result of the 
criticisms that this textbook has garnered, not only from  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2067 
 
 

the academic community but also from members of the Indian 
and Metis community, and in fact an advisory committee to the 
department has advised the department — this is an Indian and 
Metis advisory committee in terms of curriculum — that they 
have a great deal of problems with this particular textbook, the 
publisher has indicated that there are some changes that will 
have to be made. 
 
Now it appears to me that this book, I believe, costs $24. The 
difference between the Prentice-Hall book and this particular 
textbook was 80 cents a text. And so my question is: when all 
of these changes are made, who’s going to pay for that? Is the 
publisher paying for these corrections? Is the Department of 
Education paying for these corrections? Who’s paying, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we have 
to correct some of what the hon. member has put on the record. 
The project team didn’t turn down that book. That book had not 
been published. What they didn’t choose, was Weigl publishing 
as their first choice as the publisher. So the hon. member, I 
think, there is clearly in error, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And secondly, I guess I quite frankly find it incredible that an 
NDP member from this province, who continually questioned 
us in this legislature almost on a daily basis about our Buy 
Saskatchewan policy, would quibble about 80 cents — an 80 
cent investment to have an educational publishing house in this 
province. Is that not a small price to pay, Mr. Chairman, 80 
cents; 80 cents? But no, this member wants to sell our souls to 
Toronto. 
 
I’ll tell you, I’m tired of having everything come out of 
Toronto. What does Toronto know about Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan people and our culture? Not very much a lot of 
days, Mr. Chairman. And I am proud if we can assist to have a 
Saskatchewan publishing company, because there is going to be 
several hundreds of thousands of dollars of work emerge under 
this curriculum initiative. 
 
And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to see 
other provinces buying these books right off the shelf. And I 
would further suggest that the publisher in conjunction with the 
writers — David Evans I think, and is it Adrien Seaborne — I 
suspect they’ve put their heads to any potential or probable 
errors, along with the committee, that can be rectified. And as I 
understand it there will be a second edition that will be 
forthcoming, which is not an unusual procedure either in 
publishing, and that they’re going to make . . . Those will be 
replaced with school boards for some nominal fee, which I 
think is quite reasonable. So we stand four-square behind 
developing a Saskatchewan educational publishing industry, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the question. 
Who’s paying for these changes, Mr. Minister? The changes 
that are going to have to be made to this text as a result of the 
errors and as a result of the feedback — who’s paying for it? 
Now I think I heard you say that school boards will be replacing 
these textbooks for a nominal fee — is that what you said? — in 
order that the young people of Saskatchewan can have access to 
accurate information. 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as the second edition comes 
along, there will be provision made for school boards to get the 
new edition, which many of them would likely do with any text, 
including this one. And in so far as the additional costs, I don’t 
expect they’re horrendous. We have our officials, if you like, 
we pay them day in and day out to do this kind of thing in terms 
of working with the curriculum advisory committees and 
progress team. So I suppose the taxpayers are, as they always 
do, pay for a substantial part of that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, there were apparently 10,000 
copies that were supposed to be run. Can you tell me how many 
copies have been run? How many copies are out in grade 7 
class-rooms in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll have to take notice 
of that and undertake to provide it to the hon. member. It’s not 
something that we have here with us tonight. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I hope you can take 
notice . . . Can you get that information back to us by tomorrow, 
because I gather we’ll be in Education estimates tomorrow? 
 
Okay, Mr. Minister, while you’re taking notice of that 
information, I would be interested in knowing, as a result of the 
thousands of textbooks, I gather or presume, that are out in the 
class-room called Canada and Its Pacific Neighbours, young 
people in Saskatchewan have access to information in some 
cases that is not factually correct. I’m wondering what your 
department is going to do to ensure that all of the corrections 
and revisions that will need to be made to these textbooks 
actually will occur so that the young people can have this 
textbook replaced with another textbook in order that they have 
access to factual information for, as you say, to take them into 
the 21st century. The last that we want to do in this province is 
to support a textbook that’s not factual when, in fact, our young 
people are going to have to have the skills and expertise and 
knowledge to get them, as you say, into the 21st century. And 
they can’t do that when the textbooks that we’re publishing 
have misfactual or non-factual information contained within. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, given that the 
hon. member has raised questions regarding the accuracy and 
the factualness of this textbook, I wouldn’t want the public of 
Saskatchewan to suggest that this book is somehow not a high 
quality text, because it is, as I said earlier, not perfect in terms 
of having every I dotted and T crossed properly, but a very 
good textbook, and I wouldn’t want to leave any other 
impression. In fact, I would want to go on record, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, as saying that this book probably has more 
Saskatchewan content in it than any previously published book 
used in our schools of this nature. And I think the public and the 
parents would be interested in knowing that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2000) 
 
Now we’ve all seen, I suppose, books that had typographical 
errors or whatever in them, sometimes  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2068 
 
 

with an extra page stuck in them, erratum; a sticker sometimes 
on them. In this case, second edition is a process in place to 
make the corrections for the second edition, and school boards 
will be advised, and there’ll be a smooth process for making 
sure that they have the best and most recent edition, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to go back to 
the project team. Now if I understand it, the project team judged 
the Prentice-Hall proposal to be the superior proposal, because 
there were several advantages to that proposal. They judged the 
proposal by Weigl to have some positive advantages, in 
particular, I think that they liked the writing style of the people 
that had put together the proposal. They liked the visuals that 
were contained within the proposal. They thought that it would 
appeal to teachers and students. So in that sense there were 
some positive aspects to that proposal. 
 
But on the other hand, they said that the proposal had some 
problems. The editing was sloppy, as I understand the situation. 
There were some minor editing errors, and more minor editing 
errors than in the other two proposals. There were glaring errors 
in content, Mr. Minister, and that’s what I’m talking about 
tonight, some of the errors in content, some of the errors with 
the visuals. 
 
It was judged that the pictures and maps were poor. It says that 
liberties had been taken with the curriculum guide, Mr. 
Minister. And some of those members thought that the sample 
chapters were too chatty and visually oriented at the cost of 
in-depth content. Now that comes from the project team, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Now I think that all of us will agree in this province that it’s 
important to support Saskatchewan industry, Saskatchewan 
small business — that’s important. But I also think we would 
all agree that it’s important that when we’re educating young 
people, that our textbooks contained factual information, that 
our textbooks contain information that is free of sexist and 
racist bias. That’s important. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that your own project 
team had some serious reservations about this book — in fact, 
they ranked it third, and a poor third — I’m still not clear on 
why your department, or why you, made the decision that you 
would go with this particular book in view of the project team’s 
serious concerns about that book, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I think we have to distinguish again. I 
mean, what we chose was a Saskatchewan publisher over a 
Toronto publisher. We didn’t choose the content; we chose the 
publisher. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Content’s important. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — And content is important and this 
book has got more Saskatchewan content than any previously 
published and used textbook. That point is important to make as 
well. 
 
And you can go to bat for a Toronto firm for 80 cents a book, 
but I’ll flip that around. Let’s suppose we had taken the Toronto 
firms, whichever they are, and I don’t know  

except that there was a Toronto firm. Let’s suppose we had 
taken their offer for $23.20. I’ll bet you, Mr. Chairman, as sure 
as I’m standing here, the hon. member would have been 
standing in her place and saying, why didn’t you buy 
Saskatchewan; why didn’t you buy a firm that’s got a proven 
track record in western Canada; why didn’t you support a firm 
that’s put several textbooks into Alberta Education and into 
Alberta class-rooms? It’s obviously good enough for Alberta 
Education; why weren’t you supporting them for a mere 80 
cents, Mr. Minister? 
 
Well you can defend a Toronto firm. I will defend a quality 
Saskatchewan publisher who will continue to work with 
curriculum advisory committees and the writers to make sure 
we can get as perfect a book as possible, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, I understand that Con 
Romuld, and I may have the name pronounced incorrectly, was 
the chair of the project team. And in fact, Mr. Romuld felt 
compelled to write a letter, Mr. Minister, on May 12, 1986, and 
he wrote to all of the publishers because the publishers had 
believed from the beginning, because there had been rumours, 
that this really wasn’t a fair competition; that in fact the fix was 
already in; that someone some place had already made the 
decision that Weigl publishing would get the project. And as I 
said earlier, it’s not cheap to mount a proposal — 15, 20, 25, 
$30,000 to mount a proposal for a text of this magnitude. 
 
Now Mr. Romuld, in his letter to the publisher, said, and I 
quote: 
 

Senior management did not act immediately upon our 
recommendations but viewed it within a larger context and 
in due course made a selection based on criteria somewhat 
more comprehensive and exacting than that used by the 
project team. 
 

I’d be interested in knowing what this criteria was that was used 
by the project team, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ve already outlined why we chose 
Weigl. Quality — we felt the quality would be there. The 
perspective that we probably had that we don’t even expect the 
curriculum committee to have, or an advisory committee to 
have, or people who just are involved with the technical side to 
have, is the fact that we could see over this next 10, 15 years a 
major investment by this government. And we thought that we 
should use that kind of dollars, those dollars, to establish and 
help, perhaps see created a thriving educational publishing 
industry. And obviously the track record was there — a number 
of books published for Alberta Education — and that’s why we 
went the route we went. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I understand that Mr. 
Horsman advised the publishers that there were only two 
criteria: one was educational merit and one was competitive 
pricing. And the difference between the two bids, Prentice-Hall 
and Weigl, was 80 cents. Prentice-Hall, I understand had a 
$24.80 book; Weigl publishing had a $24 textbook, and that 
apparently was the reason. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2069 
 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you were going to invoke the 
Saskatchewan First policy, why didn’t you say that at the 
beginning? Why play the charade? Why have these publishers 
go through this process of mounting a proposal which costs a 
lot of money, and then invoke the Saskatchewan First policy? 
Why weren’t you just honest at the beginning? 
 
Why have a project team that evaluates and determines what is 
the appropriate textbook or proposal for a textbook? Why have 
them go through the motions when they thought that it was a 
fair competition, when, in fact, you had already decided long 
before that it was going to be Saskatchewan First? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can’t believe that I would be or our 
government would be indicted for a Saskatchewan First policy. 
It seems to me the hon. member ought to be making sure that 
that is what we do. Now if the difference had been $10 a book, 
fine. I would accept the argument that maybe I’d sacrificed 
tremendous numbers of taxpayers’ dollars to see an educational 
publishing company, an industry established in this province. 
But an 80 cent investment, Mr. Deputy Chairman, to help see a 
company get a good foothold? I can’t believe what I’m hearing, 
Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
The Buy Saskatchewan policy has been well articulated, 
whether it’s in Health or Education or elsewhere over the years. 
I don’t think that’s a new phenomenon particularly. And if you 
want to continue to go to bat for a Toronto firm, you go ahead. 
But I’ll stick by our Buy Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan First, 
and by the establishment of whatever little role we can play in 
helping a Saskatchewan publisher get on a firm foundation. 
We’ll do our part if we can, given that the quality is there. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m going to bat for 
educational merit and as the Minister of Education you should 
be going to bat for educational merit as well. You shouldn’t be 
going to bat for something that is not necessarily factually 
correct, and as the Minister of Education you should know that. 
 
Now I understand the Saskatchewan First policy and I think it’s 
important that government institutions, Crown corporations and 
agencies support Saskatchewan business. But most 
Saskatchewan business people I know want to be able to 
compete on merit based on the quality of the workmanship that 
they can provide. That’s what Saskatchewan people want to be 
known for. They don’t want to be given advantages just because 
they’re from Saskatchewan if their work doesn’t measure up. 
They want to be able to compete with anybody in the world, 
Mr. Minister, and I’ve heard you say that on numerous 
occasions, along with your Premier and Deputy Premier. 
 
And the point that I’m trying to make, Mr. Minister, was that 
this was not necessarily a fair process and had you decided that 
you were going to invoke the Saskatchewan First policy then 
you should have advised them in the beginning. Don’t play 
games with people; don’t have people waste their time 
mounting projects or proposals when you’ve already decided 
long before. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m not convinced that this is an 80-cent  

differential and I’ll be interested in knowing tomorrow how 
much this is going to cost to fix these textbooks. How much is it 
going to cost, Mr. Minister? As I understand it, publishers don’t 
make their money on the first edition. They make their money 
on the second edition, Mr. Minister. And I’ll be interested in 
knowing, is it really an 80-cent differential or are taxpayers, 
school boards, going to have to pay for this particular little 
problem that I’ve identified here tonight? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s suppose that 
it’s more than the 80 cents, and I don’t know that it matters, 
except that if it had been 200 per cent difference, or something. 
It was the hon. member who raised the dollar difference, not I. 
I, quite frankly, think that if it’s 10,000 books and it’s 80 cents, 
then $8,000 is a cheap investment. And as I said, you can 
defend a Toronto publishing house all you like. I believe that 
there is a good track record here. Sure there’s a couple of errors 
on page 212, and whatever else, that can be addressed. And I 
think Saskatchewan school children will be well served by 
having the use of this text. As I understand, it’s been pretty well 
received by the educational community across the country when 
it’s been displayed at conferences and conventions. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, there are not a few little 
errors. There are 19 pages of errors that have been identified. 
And if you would like me to go through them, I am quite 
prepared to do that. I am quite prepared to go through all of the 
errors that have been identified by numerous people, including 
the Indian and Metis curriculum review committee, including 
educators at the University of Saskatchewan, including a 
number of people who have identified, for the Department of 
Education, problems with this textbook. 
 
And I’ll be interested in knowing tomorrow, Mr. Minister, 
who’s going to pay for the revisions that are going to be made. 
Will it be the publisher or will it be the Department of 
Education and local school boards? And I’ll be interested in 
knowing how much it’s going to cost to make these revisions, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And the next thing I’d like to talk about, Mr. Minister, is a 
study that was done by Dr. Randhawa from the University of 
Saskatchewan. It was a study that was done in May of 1988, 
and it was a study that outlined for the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association the incidence of dropping out and 
transfers from grade 8 to 12 in Saskatchewan schools in 1986 
and 1987. Now this in fact is a revealing study, Mr. Minister, 
because what this study shows us is that we have had an 
increase in the drop-out rate in our province since 1980-81, and 
in fact the incidence of dropping out in Saskatchewan has 
increased by some 50 per cent, Mr. Minister. Now I would be 
interested in having your views on this, and I just want to report 
some of the contents of this report. 
 
(2015) 
 
What it tells us, Mr. Minister, is that 44.59 per cent of 
Saskatchewan students from grade 8 to 12 will not complete 
their grade 12, that they will leave school early. It tells us, Mr. 
Minister, that in urban Saskatchewan the rate is close to 50 per 
cent — 48.68 per cent of grade 8 to 
   



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2070 
 
 

12 students will not complete their grade 12. It tells us that 
females, females in urban Saskatchewan, 46.6 per cent of 
females or young women will not complete their grade 12. And 
it tells us that in rural Saskatchewan they seem to be doing 
much better. Only about 31 per cent of the young people in 
rural Saskatchewan will not complete their grade 12. 
 
I’d be interested in knowing, Mr. Minister, what are you doing 
as the chief administrator of education in this province to come 
to grips with this horrendous drop-out rate that has developed in 
our province over the last several years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, first of all, 
relative to the study that was commissioned by the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), I think there is 
some question as to the accuracy of that study. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Chairman, I think we all recognize 
that drop-outs are a serious issue facing parents and educators 
and indeed the educational system across the province. Our 
government views it as a serious issue, and that’s why we spoke 
to that whole question of drop-outs and how we can retain 
young people in our schools through grade 12 in the throne 
speech and again in the budget speech. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Chairman, there is some additional moneys 
over and above what’s been available through operating grants 
and through the educational development fund to help school 
boards and teachers and parents deal with this issue. So a) the 
study has some questions, but having said that, the issue is a 
real one. We’ve made some headway over the last decade or 
more. More work needs to be done, and we put some dollars in 
place to help school boards and educators and parents grapple 
with this thorny issue, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, very little headway has 
been made according to this study. No headway whatsoever — 
in fact, we’ve gone backwards. Now in 1980-81, Mr. Minister, 
using the same sort of a research methodology, Mr. Minister, 
the studies showed that 31.33 per cent of young people would 
leave school before grade 12. This study that was just 
completed in the ’86-87 academic year showed that there would 
be 44.59 per cent of students would not complete their grade 12. 
We haven’t gone down, Mr. Minister, we haven’t made 
progress. Things have gotten a lot worse. 
 
Now you can say, and you can try to discredit Dr. Randhawa’s 
study, Mr. Minister, but many, many people have not 
discredited this study. They’re taking this study very seriously. 
And so while we’ve had . . . we’ve made some great progress in 
our province in terms of education, there are many, many 
students, obviously, that our school system is failing. Our 
school system is failing those students. 
 
Now I am wondering, Mr. Minister, what you’re going to do 
about it. I noticed that there were some comments made in the 
throne speech. I noticed that there were some comments made 
in the budget books when the Minister of Finance delivered his 
thoughts on educational spending in this province. But I’m 
interested in knowing,  

what are you going to do to come to grips with this horrendous 
social problem — a problem that is affecting, according to the 
’86-87 academic school year, 44.59 per cent of all students 
between the age of grade 8 to 12 will not complete high school. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, before the hon. 
member goes on and gives people, the public, the impression 
that this study is accepted by ourselves, or for that matter the 
trustees, as the gospel, clearly you would be in error — clearly 
you would be in error. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s redo the study. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member suggests from her 
seat that we should redo the study. That’s maybe something that 
the SSTA is looking at. Number two, the hon. member is in 
error as well when she says no headway has been made. She is 
clearly in error there, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Over the last 20 or 
30 years we have seen retention rates go from where one out of 
two young people who entered school at grade 1 would not 
complete grade 12, to now where we are roughly in the area of 
three out of four who enter kindergarten or grade 1 will finish 
high school. 
 
Having said all that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that’s not good 
enough. And certainly in some segments and in some 
geographic areas of our province, the numbers come nowhere 
near those averages. But the SSTA themselves has difficulty 
with the numbers in the study. They have suggested that. And 
so I think the hon. member does a disservice to this legislature 
and its members, as well as the public, to suggest that that study 
is gospel, when she knows full well that the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association have said otherwise. 
 
And I think she does a disservice to this legislature to 
promulgate that view, and I would ask the hon. member to state 
that clearly on the record, that she knows full well when she 
uses that study, she’s using a study that the SSTA has already 
said is flawed. 
 
Having said all of that, Mr. Chairman, we too want to address 
the issue, because 75 per cent is not good enough. It’s not good 
enough for our other partners in education, the trustees, the 
teachers, the parents, the directors, indeed, the rest of society. 
And that’s why school boards have spent, probably over the last 
few years, several millions of dollars in 2 and 300 different 
kinds of projects revolving around curriculum and parent 
involvement and drug and alcohol abuse — a myriad of 
programs, Mr. Chairman, to try and keep these young people in 
school, alternative education programs, some of which I’ve see 
with my own eyes. 
 
That’s why we have some new money targeted in this year’s 
budget. That’s why we commissioned a northern education task 
force report, which has money to deal with those 
recommendations. And as we consult with the partners, which 
she would as well expect, the trustees and the teachers’ 
federation, more announcements will be forthcoming, Mr. 
Chairman. More announcements, like the $128,000 
commitment at the Ile-a-la-Crosse school board to do a joint 
program with Gabriel Dumont institute to have 20-year-olds 
who have left the school  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2071 
 
 

come back. I think some 40 young people are coming back into 
the system up there. That’s why we have drug and alcohol 
initiatives going on in conjunction with other departments — 
Justice, Social Services, Health — because we, too, want to do 
more in this area, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And before I take my place, I have some additional information 
about this book that the hon. member has so scurrilously 
attacked in favour of publishing coming out of Toronto. This 
book was chosen by Frank Feather, who is apparently a futurist, 
as an excellent example of education’s way in the future. And 
this man was speaking at the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation social studies conference; invited by the social 
studies teachers themselves to give his view on this book, and 
that was his view; an excellent example, and praised the 
textbook because of its relevance, Mr. Deputy Chairman. 
 
The state of Washington is considering using this book for its 
Canadian studies. And that additional information, I think, 
backs up what I’ve said earlier, Mr. Chairman, about the merit 
of this book. And if the hon. member wants to continue to go to 
bat for a Toronto publishing company that’s part of Gulf & 
Western, one of those awful, rotten, American multinational 
companies, Mr. Chairman, let her do so. I’m sure that Gulf & 
Western will be happy to know that they’ve got a socialist on 
their side. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, I would like to just raise a few questions 
in regards to the book. I was just listening to the minister talk 
about the book in relation to its effect on Saskatchewan history 
and Saskatchewan education. So I thought I’d have a quick look 
at the book and find out whether or not, for example, 
indigenous people of Saskatchewan were represented in the 
textbook. So I had a quick overview, Mr. Minister, in regards to 
the textbooks and to find out whether or not Saskatchewan 
Indians or Metis were represented in this book, because I 
overheard the minister mentioning that this was also including a 
lot of Saskatchewan history. 
 
But just to give you a point of example in regards to the lack of, 
I guess, a proper overview of the book by yourself, I’ve noticed 
that on different pages, for example, on page 49 they talk about 
homes. And the indigenous people mentioned there are the Taos 
Pueblo and also the Inuit in regards to the homes. 
 
And then I looked at page 51 and there it mentions the B.C. 
Indians in regards to the Haida. And they talk about economic 
development, the whole economy, the smallpox, communal 
life-style, and logging. 
 
Then they on page 67, it mentions the Maori of New Zealand. 
On page 68 the Haida and the development of land and the 
minerals and uranium development there. And also, respect for 
land on page 103 refers again to the United States Indians and 
also Central American Indians. And on page 154, there’s also 
the Iroquois and the constitution. On page 170, there’s talk 
about the constitution and also the Assembly of First Nations, 
but no mention of let’s say, Prairie Treaty Nations Alliance. 
Then page 194, there’s talk about Manitoba Metis but not the 
Saskatchewan Metis. On page 229, the James Bay Cree about 
their Yamaha dealership; and on page 287,  

talking about land and again the B.C. example. 
 
I guess the point I’m making, Mr. Minister, is this: on 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, on 10 examples that I looked at in relation to 
indigenous people, that there was no mention of Saskatchewan 
examples. 
 
And I am wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you would not 
re-examine the content in that area and make sure that we are 
using Saskatchewan examples. I am not saying that we should 
use all Saskatchewan examples in those cases, but at least to 
have Saskatchewan examples, a greater number of 
Saskatchewan examples than what is included in this text at the 
present time. But I was wondering whether or not in the 
revisions this is a strong consideration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can’t say specifically what 
revisions the experts, if you like, in the field who are 
responsible for writing and developing will be making 
ultimately. I can say though to the best of my knowledge, I 
don’t think that there’s ever been a textbook published who 
dealt with Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan culture, including 
indigenous people, to the degree that this textbook has. 
 
But having said all of that, I will make sure that the curriculum 
advisory committees or the appropriate people in the process 
receive a copy of your comments as recorded in Hansard 
tonight so that they can take those into consideration relative to 
any revisions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, one of the things I just want to 
make clear in terms of this textbook is that the proposed 
changes to Canada and its Pacific Neighbours submitted to the 
Department of Education on April 7, 1989 from the publisher 
contained 19 pages of revisions. 
 
There had to be changes to page 6 and 7, page 11, page 12, page 
13, page 14, page 16, page 17, page 18, page 19, page 20, page 
21, page 22, page 23, page 24, page 28, page 29, page 30, page 
31, 33, page 34, page 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, page 47 . . . 
pardon me, 48 to 49, page 51, and it goes on and on and on. 
 
It goes on until we’re completed the end, Mr. Minister, up to 
page 288, and in fact there have to be some changes to the 
glossary. There are massive changes, Mr. Minister, that are 
being proposed to this textbook. These are not a few little 
mistakes as you would suggest. 
 
(2030) 
 
There are pages and pages of the textbook that have to be 
corrected, Mr. Minister. And so while, you know, you will try 
and indicate to the public that somehow members of this 
opposition caucus are opposed to the Saskatchewan publishing 
industry, we are not. 
 
What we are in favour of is educational content that is accurate, 
and we’re in favour of a competition, a bidding competition that 
is fair. And we’re in favour, Mr. Minister, of a process whereby 
textbooks will be reviewed by some forum, some sort of 
committee, for accuracy once they’ve gotten beyond the 
proposal stage and into the  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2072 
 
 

development and actual writing stage, Mr. Minister. 
 
And obviously something happens in the process. Something 
happened in the process that now leads us to the point where we 
have a textbook that is very beautiful and there are many, many 
pages and information contained in the textbook that are 
accurate, but there are many, many, many pages, hundreds of 
pages, Mr. Minister — I shouldn’t say hundreds of pages but in 
excess of 100 pages — that will need revisions. And that’s a 
costly process, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so what we’re raising concerns about, Mr. Minister, is the 
process that your department used and you as the Minister of 
Education used in deciding upon this particular textbook for 
grade 7 students who are studying social studies in our 
province. 
 
Now I just want to go back to the drop-out report, Mr. Minister. 
Now you say that the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association has some concerns about the study, and that’s 
accurate. I acknowledge that, that the numbers are so high that 
they find some difficulty in believing the numbers. But, Mr. 
Minister, we have not yet seen in this province any attempt on 
the part of the Department of Education to redo the study. 
 
And as I said earlier, the person who was involved in the 
research on early school leavers used the same methodology 
that was used in the 1980-81 Cipywnyk study, Mr. Minister. 
They used the same methodology. And what this report shows, 
and I acknowledge that these statistics are soft, Mr. Minister, 
but they certainly show some trends. 
 
And the trends in this province indicate that in rural 
Saskatchewan there has been very little increase in the drop-out 
rate since 1980-81; there’s only been about a 3.7 per cent 
increase. But in urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister, the drop-out 
rate has increased by 54.5 per cent. We have gone from a 
cumulative drop-out rate in 1980-81 of 31.5 per cent to 1986-87 
of a drop-out rate of 48.68 per cent. 
 
If you use urban and rural statistics, Mr. Minister, there has 
been an increase in the drop-out rate of over 42 per cent, and 
that shows a trend, Mr. Minister. The researcher used the same 
methodology as the previous researcher. In fact, the researcher 
was involved in the previous study. 
 
Now what’s particularly alarming for me, Mr. Minister, is the 
increase in the female, the young female drop-out rate in 
Saskatchewan. What we see in urban Saskatchewan is a 56.1 
per cent female drop-out rate. 
 
In 1980-81 the drop-out rate was about 29.61 per cent. In 
1986-87 it’s gone to 46.6 per cent, or a 56.1 per cent drop-out 
rate. If you use the urban and rural drop-out figures for young 
females in Saskatchewan, the drop-out rate has increased by 
over 58.8 per cent, Mr. Minister, and we now have a situation in 
Saskatchewan where 42 per cent of females are dropping out of 
school early. 
 
Now you say that you have seen some wonderful programs, Mr. 
Minister, and I acknowledge that there are some wonderful 
programs in Saskatchewan that  

encourage young people to stay in school. But obviously we 
need a lot more. And I noted in your throne speech and in the 
budget book that there was going to be some funding to put into 
place some programs that would try to come to grips with this 
particular problem. 
 
And we can’t just blame it on drugs and alcohol. We can’t just 
blame in on teen-age pregnancy. There are a number of factors 
that cause young people to leave school. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister — and I say this very 
seriously to you — I think that we have a horrendous problem 
on our hands with our drop-out rate. It’s not 25 per cent, it’s not 
30 per cent; it’s higher than that, Mr. Minister. And I’m 
wondering what are you going to do to begin the process, as the 
chief educator or the person responsible for education in our 
province, to begin the process of encouraging young people to 
stay in school, because obviously our school system at present 
is failing some young people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, we’re both, 
I think, agreed that we have drop-out rates that are higher than 
we would like. But once again, the hon. member herself has 
admitted that the study . . . And the SSTA acknowledged that 
the study may well be flawed, so I don’t know why she persists 
in using what may well be some flawed numbers. But that’s her 
choosing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
That’s why, because we do recognize more must be done, that’s 
why we said there will be more done in the throne speech, that’s 
why we’ve set some new money, if you like, in the Education 
budget to deal with that. And how we’re going to deal with it, 
and what new programs we’ll put in place, will be done 
co-operatively and collaboratively with the partners in 
education — directors, teachers, parents, as represented by the 
trustees, the teachers’ federation, and the LEADS group, Mr. 
Speaker. The kinds of things I would envisage us doing more of 
are more in the area of counselling, more in the area of drug and 
alcohol and substance abuse, more in involving parents in more 
substantive ways. 
 
But having said all of that, Mr. Deputy Chairman, if the hon. 
member thinks that there’s some simple magic answer that 
school boards or parents or teachers could employ, they would 
have done it long ago. What we’re talking about here is a 
renewed effort on behalf of us all, on behalf of these children 
who drop out of the system. We’re talking about more of the 
200 . . . more of the 120 guidance and career counselling 
projects that are in place already, expending some $2.5 million. 
We’re talking more like the 300 student retention projects that 
we fund with $7 million now. We’re talking more, in some 
instances, computer and computer technology. We’re talking 
more special education. We’re talking of even better alternative 
education. We’re talking about new curricula. I wouldn’t even 
pretend to think that I have all the answers but that’s why we 
have this collaborative process in Saskatchewan Education. It 
has worked well for us in the past. We will use it to tackle, with 
renewed vigour, this problem as well, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to get back to 
some comments that you said in terms of the  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2073 
 
 

SSTA. While I acknowledge that the SSTA has some concerns 
about the statistics that have shown up in this report, the SSTA 
has made no moves whatsoever to redo the study. And I’m 
wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would make a commitment 
here tonight that your department, or someone is prepared to 
redo the study in order that we can have, what is in your view, 
an accurate reflection of what’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in 1980-81 this study was seen to be accurate — that there 
were about 32 per cent of our young people that weren’t staying 
in school. In my view there are many, many academics that 
agree with Dr. Randhawa, that his study is still a proper 
reflection of what’s happening in our Saskatchewan school 
system. There are people in the SSTA who just can’t believe the 
numbers. They’ve increased so dramatically, they just find them 
hard to believe. 
 
But I think what’s important, to put this issue to rest, is to redo 
the study. And then I think it’s important that you, as the 
Minister of Education, put in process a committee of some kind 
to come to grips with what I believe is a horrendous drop-out 
rate that has developed in our province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I should tell you that this trend that we’ve 
seen in our province is not only happening here, but it’s 
happening in other parts of the country as well, as well as in 
areas of the United States. This is not something peculiar to 
Saskatchewan. There are other parts of the world that are 
experiencing the same kind of change in the rate. For years we 
have seen the drop-out rate steadily decreasing, and in the ’80s 
it’s been increasing, Mr. Minister, so it’s not something new. 
 
I’m just wondering whether or not you will redo the study, and 
whether or not you would be prepared to put a committee in 
place that could advise yourself on what we need to do to come 
to grips with this particular problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well the answer to your last question 
first — yes. 
 
And now to your first question, whether we redo the study or 
not. In my mind, quite frankly, in terms of what we’re going to 
do over the next 12 months, it doesn’t matter to me whether the 
drop-out rate is 25 per cent or 35 per cent or 75 per cent or, for 
that matter, 15 per cent, because all of those numbers are too 
high. 
 
So we’re going to address the question no matter what. Because 
we can argue all night about whether the study is flawed or 
whether it’s 22 or 92 or 62. What we do know is there is an 
issue there and we’re going to deal with it. 
 
Having said that, we too think, to see if our measures work, it 
would be useful to have a reliable tracking system. And because 
we do believe that, we are going to put one in place. It will be 
called the student tracking system. It’s all part of our response 
to the curriculum and assessment committee report that came 
out three or four months ago. It recognized the need for a 
reliable data base, a better data base, and so we’re going to be 
putting that in place over this next year. I guess the answer to 
both of your questions is, yes and yes. But even in the interim  

we’re not going to sit on our hands; we’re going to work with 
the partnerships in education in a renewed effort in this area. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, do you also think it might be 
useful to undertake a process where we would do an in-depth 
study into what is happening to certain young people in terms of 
the reasons why they’re leaving school? Because I don’t think 
we have a clear picture of why young people are leaving school. 
We have some assumptions, but we really don’t have a clear 
picture as to why. And I’m wondering if that would be possible 
to have some sort of study that would look at the reasons why 
young people leave school early, and what we can do to prevent 
them from doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, I agree. In some areas we 
probably need to flesh out in some greater detail the basis for 
some of the drop-outs. I think to some degree we’ve got a pretty 
good start with the interim report from the northern education 
task force in terms of fleshing out a fair amount of detail there. 
But I wouldn’t want to suggest for a moment that the job is 
complete. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
would like to take you away from the elementary schooling and 
go to post-secondary education. And for the next hour or so I 
would like to talk to you about funding for education, vis-a-vis 
the provincial government as opposed to other provinces; the 
funding that you have done to post-secondary education, 
vis-a-vis 1982-83; and what some of the problems are that you 
were talking about with my colleague just a little earlier this 
evening. 
 
And your definition of education, I don’t think I could disagree 
too much with it, except that it’s all talk and it sounds well, but 
. . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — It sounds good. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — No, it sounds well and it can sound good. In this 
particular instance it sounds bad, Mr. Minister. 
 
What I want to show you, Mr. Minister, that you have been all 
words; you have been all words but no action. We told you this 
in 1987 when you unilaterally and very callously dismissed a 
lot of people at our institutes — very callously and unilaterally. 
And our campuses simply have not recovered from that. 
 
(2045) 
 
There’s a lot of anger at our campuses. There’s a lot of mistrust, 
and as you well remember, when you and I and Mr. Crowe of 
the Liberals appeared at the Kelsey campus, you were not well 
received there at all, and you, I know, expected that you would 
not be well received. But one of the fears, one of the fears that 
both the staff and the students had, Mr. Minister, was that you 
would not realize . . . or be honest with them, that you would 
not be honest with them in admitting that it was callously done, 
how you changed the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) structure, and secondly, that 
you would not be man enough to admit that there had been a lot 
of cut-backs, cut-backs in staff,  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2074 
 
 

cut-backs in quality of the education offered, and cut-backs in 
program. I mean, these weren’t my words; those were words of 
students and staff who were there. 
 
Now we could take that same analysis and go on to universities, 
and they will tell you the same thing. And I will provide you 
with evidence to show that you have . . . your funding to 
post-secondary education has not kept up with inflation. In fact, 
it’s far behind inflation. I mean, the statistics and the facts bear 
that out. 
 
I am talking, Mr. Minister, about operating grants. And if you 
look at the operating grants that you have provided since 
1982-83, they are way below the cost of inflation. And in fact, 
Mr. Minister, according to Statistics Canada, you stand either 
ninth or 10th in funding of post-secondary education — either 
ninth or 10th. I mean, I can show you those again . . . And 
those, I mean, I can show you those again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ninth or 10th in what? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — In funding for post-secondary education in 
operating grants. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you know for sure? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Oh there goes the minister from Urban Affairs 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I know, chirping again from 
his seat as he usually does. If it isn’t the member from Regina 
South, then it’s the member from Wascana, although he’s very 
occupied right now and I’m pleased to see that. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you tell us today . . . Would you tell us 
today, Mr. Minister . . . I want to refer to the revamping of 
SIAST. First of all, would you tell me the board members on 
SIAST, who appoints the board members to SIAST, and would 
you tell me who the members on the SIAST board are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the board of directors 
of the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology are Jack Matheson from Prince Albert; John Cross 
from Saskatoon; Elaine Brogden, who is the student alumni rep 
from Regina; Eva Lee, who is also the president; Elizabeth 
Crosthwaite, who is the assistant deputy minister; Dawn 
Radford from Regina; Joanne Phillips from Moose Jaw; 
Darlene Ryan from Saskatoon; Frances Underwood from Sandy 
Bay; Dave Small from Gull Lake; Ed Douglas from McTaggart; 
Merv Houghton, who is also the board chairman from 
Saskatoon; Dennis Fisher from Saskatoon; Les Hulicsko from 
Regina; Erhard Poggemiller from Kerrobert; Bonnie Daunt 
from Yorkton; and Ken Arner from Prince Albert, and I believe 
Mr. Arner is the faculty rep. 
 
And the board is appointed by order in council, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying is that the 
board is appointed by the cabinet. That’s correct, right? Okay. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you tell me who appoints the principals of 
the various campuses? How are they  

appointed, or how are the assignments made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Two responses here. First of all, we 
had a . . . There was a board committee, as I understand it, that 
led to the selection of the chief executive officer, the president. 
And then after that, once the president was on board, which 
occurred January 1, I think it was, of this year, then obviously 
the president became part of the management team, part of the 
board, and part of that committee that established who for 
whatever other positions along with a board committee. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I guess my question to you is: how are they 
selected? Do we advertise for principals at the various 
campuses, and then from that group do we select? Or how is the 
process . . . Could you tell me about the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, they were 
advertised. In fact, there was an open competition, I’m advised, 
right across Canada. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, could you . . . Would you make 
the list available to me of the people that at least made the short 
list on, let’s say, the Kelsey campus. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I can’t. And it’s not that I’m 
trying to withhold anything from you, but you would know as 
well that people apply to that position in confidence and that 
would be a breach of confidence, highly irregular, and unheard 
of, quite frankly, in human resource relations. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, would you tell me, did you have a 
look at the applicants that applied for Kelsey campus — you or 
any of your officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, I didn’t, and I don’t know what 
role all my officials played. Obviously I have the assistant 
deputy minister sitting on the board. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Would you ask her if she had an opportunity to 
peruse the applicants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, the assistant deputy minister did 
not sit on that committee. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, as the minister responsible for the 
SIAST, would you tell me, are there certain expectations that 
you would see for yourself as what a person . . . what 
qualifications a person would maybe have to have to run, let’s 
say, a campus like Wascana or Kelsey or Moose Jaw or P.A.? 
What qualifications would you be looking for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, I can’t give 
you a detailed list of what I might look for because that’s not 
my job. 
 
Secondly, I readily and openly acknowledge that I am not a 
good administrator. That’s why I’m a politician, and I won’t 
comment about whether I’m a good one or a bad one. But that’s 
quite frankly why we have officials, why we . . . to be chief 
executive officers and administrators, and to sit on these boards 
and provide that kind of expertise on our behalf. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2075 
 
 

And so I . . . I mean, I could guess at what some of the things 
that they might look for in chief executive officers and other 
senior executive positions. Obviously a proven track record and 
management skills, innovative, outward looking, those kinds of 
things would come to mind, but I quite frankly didn’t put my 
head to it because it wasn’t my job. 
 
I must say quite frankly, though, that I am very impressed that 
they were able to attract people like Eva Lee as CEO (chief 
executive officer) for SIAST, who I think brings a tremendous 
high-quality, if you like, reputation to that institution and gets it 
off on a good start. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t referring to the chief 
executive officer or Eva Lee. My question was very specific to 
you: as an individual, a principal, let’s say, of Kelsey Institute 
or Wascana or Prince Albert technical school or STI 
(Saskatchewan Technical Institute) in Moose Jaw, what 
qualifications would you be looking for? 
 
And I think, personally having spent some time in 
post-secondary education and in high school myself and having 
been an administrator for a number of years, I would think that 
one of the qualifications that I would be looking for would be 
someone that had had some experience, for example, in 
post-secondary education — someone who may have been the 
vice-principal of a campus either in Saskatchewan or Alberta or 
somewhere in Canada, particularly western Canada, someone 
who may be familiar with what is expected of a post-secondary 
institution like the ones I am referring to. 
 
I would assume that we would be looking for someone who 
may have a master or a doctorate degree in administration. You 
know, I would assume that we would be looking for that. You 
know, to run a big institution like Kelsey or Wascana, you 
know, it takes some skill and some ability. 
 
So I am surprised . . . I was very surprised to hear that we hired 
someone, you know, into that position who had very little or 
none of these qualifications. And if you say you were 
advertising right across Canada, that certainly does not speak 
well of the qualities of people in those particular areas. 
 
I was wondering, Mr. Minister, whether you were really serious 
about what you said. And I have to question what the criteria 
were for hiring and seeking — seeking and hiring; I suppose I 
should put it in that category, in that order — of people to run a 
large campus like the ones, the four that I have been referring 
too. And I will leave it at that, Mr. Minister. I think you know 
what I am referring too. 
 
I don’t want to get into any personalities, but I am very 
concerned. And it has been brought to my attention by students, 
has been brought to my attention by staff, because they were 
very disappointed that people are being hired who know very 
little about running an institute of the calibre that we have at 
Wascana or Kelsey, or Moose Jaw, or Prince Albert. And I do 
think that for the sake of our students and for the sake of the top 
quality  

education in Saskatchewan, that we must make certain that we 
hire the best. And I simply want to say to you that I have 
expressed a concern to the people who’ve asked me to express 
that concern, and I’ve done so. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to now go to another area. We’ll come 
back to some of these tomorrow, but I do want to turn now to 
private vocational schools. And I think you are well aware of 
the media news that has been made just recently, and I’m sure 
that you must have received a number of complaints from 
people, of the number of private vocational schools that are 
coming to the fore. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am not being critical here, I’m just seeking 
information. And I know that you, I think, are looking at 
appointing a committee to study the whole business of private 
vocational schools. But I do think that we have to be concerned, 
very concerned about the lack of admission requirements by 
many of the private vocational schools that are now in 
existence, the very, very high drop-out of students who pay 
extremely high admission fees — up to $5,000 admission fees. 
 
Thirdly, there is very little opportunity for employment, once 
these students have finished the courses, and in some areas as 
low as 5 per cent of the graduates only get jobs, and yet they’ve 
spent thousands of dollars in completing these courses. 
 
(2100) 
 
Fourthly, many of these private vocational schools do not have 
qualified staff. They pay the staff very little money. There is a 
regular revolving door as far as staff are concerned. They 
simply can’t keep the staff, and I want to make it sure now that 
you don’t misinterpret the schools that I am not referring to. I 
am not referring to Robertson school; I am not referring to 
Saskatoon Business College; I am not referring to Marvel 
hairdressing school. I exclude those because they have good 
reputations, and have over the years. I maybe should include 
some others, but those three I want to exclude. 
 
And I’d like you to comment now whether your department is 
aware of some of these problems, and secondly, if you are 
aware of them, what are you intending to do about it to resolve 
some of these situations that have occurred and at the cost of 
many of our students who now find themselves in huge debt but 
no opportunity for employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I think the hon. member has put 
the proper perspective on the whole question of private 
vocational schools because certainly . . . And I don’t want to be 
judgemental tonight either, in advance of investigations being 
completed. But also I think there have been times — and I’m 
not saying relative to the issue the hon. member raises 
specifically — but there have been times, I think, when all 
private vocational schools have been tarred with the same 
brush. And as the hon. member points out, that probably is 
unfair to a good many because they are just as interested in 
maintaining their continuing high-quality standards, because if 
they do not they will not have any clients. Many, as the hon. 
member has pointed out, institutions continue to do that; have 
done that for a very long time in this province. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2076 
 
 

However, there have been some issues raised relative to Bridge 
City College, as the hon. member has suggested. A variety of 
concerns, I think, as I understand it, have been raised, 
everything from student loans, staff members not being paid, 
admission of students without appropriate screening, those 
kinds of things, I think some of which the hon. member 
mentioned. Here tonight the question, rightly so, is, what are we 
doing about it. 
 
There’s actually a two-stage process here. First of all, as it 
relates to this specific school and these specific complaints, my 
departmental officials have been investigating rather 
aggressively to get to the bottom of these concerns. As it relates 
to student loans, for example, they will be doing an audit to 
make sure that student refunds are issued, if and when due and 
where due. Because there were some questions raised, there was 
a freeze on registrations — a freeze on student registrations 
were halted until the department is comfortable that some 
progress is being made. 
 
There’s been a number of meetings including a recent one with 
the staff. The usual process is to go through the investigation 
and ask the school to address the concerns, come up with a plan 
where appropriate. So yes, I can say the department is actively 
investigating this. I can’t give you the results of all of that to 
date. 
 
The other step in the process is one that was put in place as a 
result, in fact, and I think we had some discussion of it in last 
year’s estimates about some of the broader issues relating to 
private vocational schools. To that end, I’ve put a committee 
together to address the whole regulatory framework of private 
vocational schools in this province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — I appreciate those comments, but I do want to 
make this comment too, and that is, it is getting high time that 
we get some results, because they’ve not just been a few 
students, there are hundreds of students have been affected. And 
it’s not just Bridge City. There are a number of others who are 
advertising programs that are not being offered to students once 
the students get there. And there are students who, for example, 
are not told the real costs of the program, and they run out of 
money half-way through and no longer qualify and have to 
discontinue. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Minister, there are private vocational schools that 
in order to qualify for the student loan are stretching their 
program into the required number of weeks in order that 
students can qualify for the loans, but they don’t have the 
required hours. 
 
And here again, I will ask the minister . . . I’m not just talking 
about Bridge City. I am talking about a number of others. And I 
am wondering, Mr. Minister . . . I asked you the composition of 
your committee. Have you on that committee people from the 
private, reputable private vocational schools? Who is on that 
committee? When will the committee report? 
 
And when can we expect some action so that those private 
vocational schools, who do not meet those standards, will 
simply . . . We can put out a warning to  

students that, look, don’t apply to these schools. They don’t 
meet the standards. Or, Mr. Minister, maybe even better yet, 
when students apply for loans in application for some of these 
schools, why do we approve the student loan? Why do we 
approve student loans for Bridge City? Why do we approve 
those loans? 
 
I mean, if you knew . . . If your department knew that they were 
questionable, their programs were questionable, aren’t you 
admitting to the students, or aren’t you endorsing those schools 
by allowing, or by approving the student loans? And that would 
be one way of making sure that students don’t get into these 
schools, by not approving the student loan application. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, he asks why approve 
student loans. Well hindsight may well be 20-20, and as I said 
at the outset of my remarks, given there’s an investigation under 
way, I don’t know as I want to even . . . I don’t know as I want 
to be judgemental at this point. However, having said that, as I 
said in my early response, the officials are already going to do 
an audit relative to the student loans and where refunds are due. 
That shall be . . . That will be determined, or if they haven’t 
gone out, or whatever the case may be. 
 
The other question he asked was who was on the committee 
that’s looking at this whole question of the private vocational 
school Act and regulations, the members are: Gordon McKay, 
who is president of McKay Tech. Inc., Saskatoon; Mrs. Carol 
Morin, president of Academy of Esthetics, Moose Jaw; Mr. Jim 
Shortall, president of Life Management Centre, Regina; Mr. 
Bill Preddie, president of CompuCollege of Prince Albert, 
Saskatchewan; and Mr. Saul Jacobson, president of Prairie 
Broadcasting in Regina. 
 
We have a graduate on there as well who is Mrs. Jasmine 
Dubois, cosmetology graduate. And the employer 
representatives we have are Miss Lisa Hickie, manager of Lee 
Ann’s sports wear, Regina, and as well Mrs. Vicki Skolrood, 
corporate accounts executive from Marlin Travel in Regina, and 
the chairperson of the committee is Mr. Lorne Sparling from 
Saskatchewan Education. 
 
The other point that I wanted to raise again with the hon. 
member who said . . . who rightly questioned and rightly so, 
you know, what has been done. As I said, the officials are 
actively investigating, meetings have been held with the school 
operator where the concerns were outlined, a plan of action was 
requested, and student registrations were halted until the 
department was comfortable that progress was being made. 
 
So I think that’s reasonable action to date, Mr. Chairman, and if 
investigations warrant further action, then I think I’ll be advised 
by my officials. But over the longer haul I think that committee 
can perhaps be of some great use to us here in a preventative 
kind of mode if you like. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the other point I should make as well, unless the 
hon. member . . . I think he wouldn’t want to be on record 
relative to a statement that’s not fact when he talked about 
hundreds or thousands of. . . (inaudible interjection) . . .  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2077 
 
 

An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say thousands. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, hundreds at least. Just for your 
information, there are approximately 5,000 students enrolled in 
private vocational schools across the province. And this last 
year we’ve had less then a hundred formal complaints. I don’t 
want to suggest that for those hundred students or whomever 
they are, that that’s not a serious issue, because it is. I mean, 
obviously they wouldn’t complain if they didn’t think they had 
an issue. But I’m just trying to keep it in perspective for the 
very reason you raised at the outset of your remarks. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, I very purposely kept the numbers 
down. I don’t want to argue with you whether it’s 150 or 200 or 
300. If it’s a hundred, fine. 
 
What my point that I wanted to make with you was, that is not 
the first time we have raised this with you. My colleague raised 
it with you last year. My other colleague from Saskatoon 
University raised it with you the year before, that there were 
problems in the private vocational schools about the quality of 
the program that they were advertising and the quality of the 
education and the programs in those private vocational schools. 
 
I do want to say to you, Mr. Minister, some of those members 
that you have on your committee come from the colleges where 
we get the complaints, and some of the more reputable colleges 
that I mentioned before don’t seem to be represented on that 
committee. I find that somewhat hard to believe. 
 
But be that as it may, I do hope that we get some 
recommendations from that committee that will set the 
standards, and if the private vocational schools don’t meet those 
standards, that we simply either shut them down to protect our 
students, or at least we don’t approve the student loans. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister — now I know some of my 
colleagues want to get in on this, but I want to ask you: how 
many student loans were processed in this past year for private 
vocational schools? What was the total sum of money? What 
was the average sum of money? 
 
I think it is important that we know that. And do you have any 
statistics at all about the employment rate of the graduates, be it 
in . . . Well, if it’s not in this province, you wouldn’t know, I 
assume. But let’s say the rate here in Saskatchewan — would 
you have those figures with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll have to take notice 
of that question and give you our best undertaking to provide it. 
I am advised, and our officials will check this tomorrow, I am 
advised that we don’t keep student loans by institution — let’s 
say Kelsey, private, University of Regina, university, college — 
you know, we don’t keep them in that kind of order in the 
computer bank. Now it may well be that they can generate it, 
and if they can, we’ll provide numbers, total sum, and average 
sum. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, yes, that’s fair enough. I am 
somewhat surprised that you don’t have that. I would have 
thought that we would want to know how many students are 
applying for loans at SIAST and at university  

and the private schools. And the reason I’m asking that question 
is twofold. One, because of what’s happening. Secondly, I am 
asking it because some officials, some people are suggesting 
that because we have quotas, because we have quotas on our 
universities, and because we have quotas at some of our courses 
at SIAST, that we are forcing our students to seek alternative 
education, and the private schools have jumped in. 
 
(2115) 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that in the last few years, not only in 
this province but in some of the other provinces, students have 
not been able to find permanent employment. And as you 
indicated earlier in your definition of education that students 
will have much better opportunity to have upward mobility if 
they increase their education. They must have been listening to 
you, Mr. Minister, because they are now seeking the alternative 
education, albeit not very good education in many instances, 
and they are being taken advantage of by some of the private 
vocational schools. And one of the ways that we could prevent 
this from happening is if you made sufficient moneys available 
to SIAST, and made sufficient moneys to our universities so 
that they could take the quotas off, and many of these students 
who are well qualified to go to SIAST or well qualified to go to 
university wouldn’t have to take the alternative education that 
they now are looking for. 
 
So you could help them out in two ways: make sure your 
committee does its job; and number two, make sure you have 
additional funding for the other institutions which we know 
have a good reputation and offer good quality education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the hon. member 
raises the question: are young people being driven to private 
vocational schools for reasons other than just plain that’s where 
they want to take the course and that’s who offers whatever 
course. 
 
I suspect there may well be some. I wouldn’t want to deny that 
there isn’t one or 10 or whatever out there that may well have 
looked at the private school option had there not been quotas. I 
can’t say unequivocally one way or the other. 
 
But I also would lay out for the member’s information, and why 
I would probably question if there’s any massive kind of shift 
that way, you only have to look at the increase in university 
enrolment over the last — well really since our administration 
has been in place — where we’ve seen a 35 to 40 per cent 
increase in university enrolments. Were they all drifting off to 
the private vocational side, I think you wouldn’t have seen that 
kind of massive jump in university enrolments. 
 
And that’s led to packed universities, there’s no question about 
that, and I suppose the Minister of Education — maybe that’s a 
nice problem to have, is packed universities. I’m not happy that 
we have quotas; I don’t think the university’s happy, but I think 
it’s good to see that there’s 35 or 40 per cent more young 
people today than five or six or seven years ago having the 
opportunity at a post-secondary university education. 
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2078 
 
 

Now relative to the other question, observation I would make 
relative to this whole regulatory side of the private vocational 
schools is that what we are experiencing here in Saskatchewan 
is really to some greater or lesser degree a national 
phenomenon. Many other provinces, if not all, are facing some 
of the same kinds of questions, and I might even argue that 
we’re probably ahead of the pack in terms of dealing with the 
issue with our committee that’s well under way, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Minister, and you can thank the opposition 
for putting the pressure on you for the last three years to do 
something about it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — If you had taken our advice in the first year — 
in the first year — instead of us having to repeat it to you three 
or four times, the committee now would have reported and we 
would be well on our way in protecting the students. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I don’t think there’s any doubt at all, when 
the economy turns down and there are lack of jobs — this has 
happened right across Canada — in those provinces where there 
aren’t any jobs, students will seek further education in order for 
them to qualify for the jobs. But if there are good jobs available 
after high school and it’s easy for them to walk right into a job, 
they may delay their education or may not pursue a 
post-secondary education. I mean, those things happen. 
 
But the point that I wanted to make was the same point that Dr. 
Kristjanson made the other night again, and made at the 
convocation — and you were there when he made it — when he 
said that one of the things that disappointed him the most is that 
two years or three years from now, that there would be 800 to 
1,200 students who would not be graduating because of the 
quotas that had been established. They just won’t be able to . . . 
And they were qualified students, not students that anybody . . . 
I mean, the universities have proven that with a 65 average in 
high school. Most of those students do very well at the 
university. I think 70 per cent get through it with a university 
degree. 
 
We are denying those students that opportunity, and many of 
those students, many of those students, Mr. Minister, have had 
no other alternative. Some have gone to SIAST, but many of 
those courses are filled. Some of them have left the province, 
and I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that maybe next year 
or the year after, your problem will be solved, not because of 
anything that you have done positively, but they will be solved 
because of the outmigration — of the outmigration. 
 
If the trend continues this year, Mr. Minister, as it has so far in 
the first four months, we would have approximately 28 to 
30,000 people leave this province this year. That’s net — a net 
out-migration of 28 to 30,000 people. Of that, Mr. Minister, 
about 12,000, 40 per cent it’s estimated, about 12,000 are in the 
age group of 15 to 24. All right? If 60 per cent of those students 
enter post-secondary education, you’re looking at what — 
7,200 students. 

If those students have left the province, they’ll solve your 
problem. They’ll solve your problem in a few years, not 
because of opportunities here in this province but because of 
lack of opportunities in this province. They will be leaving and 
your problem will be solved. 
 
And I know, three or four years from now you will stand up in 
this House, or your counterpart will stand up in this House and 
say, we have eliminated quotas. We no longer have quotas at 
the university, and we no longer have quotas or waiting lists at 
our technical schools. And you’ll be right. And you’ll be right. 
But those students will be enrolled in other provinces, not here. 
And the brains of this province will be gone. Many of those do 
not return to this province. They will not return. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, that is not the way to solve our problems. To 
solve our problem is to confront the issue, do what Dr. 
Kristjanson has suggested, and that is to make additional 
moneys available so that they can do away with the quotas. Do 
away with the quotas. Make additional moneys available to 
SIAST so that they can do away with the waiting lists, so that 
students who wish to get into some of these courses can get in 
and don’t have to go to SAIT (Southern Alberta Institute of 
Technology) or NAIT (Northern Alberta Institute of 
Technology) or Mount Royal College in Calgary. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you are simply not facing the facts. When 
experts and some people are suggesting that what you are in 
fact doing is driving these students to seek alternative 
education, and many of them are seeking private schools. And 
then we don’t protect them by setting up regulations and 
standards that these private schools have to meet; in fact, we 
endorse them, we endorse them by allowing the student loan 
applications to succeed. 
 
And secondly, you are addressing your problem by allowing the 
young students, the ones that are well qualified to meet our 
education standards here, to seek their education somewhere 
else. That is how you’re solving the problem, and that’s 
unacceptable. And I think, Mr. Minister, you have to address 
those problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the first thing 
that I would say is: I don’t think I, or anybody in this province, 
quite frankly, of whatever political stripe, wants to see a 
qualified student denied admission because of quotas. I mean, 
that’s a given. That’s a given. 
 
But if you’re asking me, do I want to take the whole issue of 
university accessibility back to the dark days of the NDP?, the 
answer is unequivocally no, Mr. Chairman, because if we did 
that, what that would mean is there would be 7,000 less young 
people in university today. Do we want to go back to the days 
when there was 7,000 less young people? Do we want to go 
back to the days when there was no regional college set up 
delivering a standardized — or not necessarily standardized yet, 
but working well towards that course — regional college 
system that is delivering a first- and second-year arts and 
science programs across this province, more technical institute 
problems? Do we want to go back to a day where there was no 
6 per cent student loans, Mr. Chairman, available for our young 
people? Do we want to go back to  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2079 
 
 

the days when there was no technical institute campus in Prince 
Albert, Mr. Chairman? 
 
I would suggest the answer to all of those is no. The track 
record of this government is . . . I am very proud of what this 
government has done to try and have as many young people as 
possible go on to post-secondary education, Mr. Chairman. The 
increase at the universities alone has been in that range of 35 to 
40 per cent. 
 
Having said all that, we have quotas because the issue becomes 
one of would we like to 7,200 increase as opposed to 7,000, and 
for some people the answer is probably yes. But I want to relate 
to you, and to other members of the legislature, a little story, 
some facts, quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, about two meetings I 
held. 
 
When the University of Saskatchewan first announced that they 
would have quotas I met with two groups, one being the 
regional colleges, their chairmen, and their CEO’s, and then I 
had a meeting with the university. And the question I put to the 
regional colleges is: given that we could be faced with 2 or 300 
young people being turned away because of quotas, could you 
handle them? We have these regional colleges across the 
province with a new mandate to deliver more university 
programming, Mr. Speaker. And so my question to those people 
assembled in room 218 about a year and a half or two ago now 
was: we do have, apparently, some young people being turned 
away at the University of Saskatchewan because of quotas; 
could you provide them with some first-year arts and science 
programming, and could you handle those kinds of numbers? 
And do you know what their answer was, Mr. Chairman? The 
answer was yes. So about two days later then I arranged to meet 
with the university — I think the board chairman was there, 
maybe one or two other members of the board as well as senior 
administrative staff from the university, including the president, 
and Gwenna Moss, I think, had some particular responsibilities 
in this area. And here’s what she and what they told me, Mr. 
Chairman, about the whole quota question. And I think that we 
should put this in the record so we have this perspective. 
 
At that time, they had suggested . . . the numbers were, and this 
was September 13, Mr. Speaker, of a year and somewhat ago. 
And what they suggested then was that to that point in time 
there had been 344 turned down. Now on the application of 
every student, whether they’re accepted or denied admission, 
there’s a provision right on the application to make them aware 
of the regional college option. That’s point number one, Mr. 
Deputy Chairman. 
 
But in order to try and make sure that these 344, although they 
had been denied direct access into the University of 
Saskatchewan, to see if we couldn’t help them either at one of 
our other universities or through a regional college system, they 
were all written, and there was a special 1-800 phone number 
put in place, or a WATTS kind of line, Mr. Speaker. Three 
hundred and forty-four were turned away. They were written, 
and there was a special phone line put in place to see if we 
could deliver them, because the university and regional colleges 
were interested in doing what we could for them, as were we. 
So what the results to that date — and this was September  

13, about those 344 young people that were apparently denied 
admission? 
 
Well do you know how many phone calls we had, Mr. Deputy 
Chairman? Fourteen. Fourteen out of the 344 — 14. Six were 
referred or went on to the regional college at North Battleford; 
two went on or were referred to P.A.; two were taking some 
classes in Saskatoon in the evening class. I don’t have the 
details on the rest, but there is some speculation that many went 
on, perhaps to Regina or on to further education in technical 
institutes or wherever. 
 
The point I’m trying to make, Mr. Chairman, and I’m not going 
to deny that the university has quotas, but I think the hon. 
member has underestimated two things: number one, the impact 
of the regional college system, and also they underestimated the 
co-ordination or the digging out that students will do to in fact 
take care of the problem themselves, Mr. Chairman. 
 
(2130) 
 
And the final point I want to reiterate on again is, do we want to 
go back to those dark days of the NDP? No new agriculture 
buildings being built at the university; no 6 per cent student 
loans, Mr. Chairman; 7,000 less students in our universities . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Fewer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — . . . 7,000 fewer students in our 
universities, Mr. Chairman — I want to be grammatically 
correct here — no new technical institute campus at Prince 
Albert, Mr. Chairman; no regional colleges with this new and 
expanded mandate, Mr. Chairman; no student assistance 
particularly targeted to those high-needs groups — the disabled, 
single mothers, some of those groups, Mr. Speaker. Do we want 
to go back to those dark days, Mr. Chairman? I guess not. 
 
Would we like to see quotas eliminated? Sure. I think 
everybody would. The difficulty always becomes one in terms 
of determining who is that qualified student, and who should 
have that opportunity, and making that judgement call. And I 
think for the most part, universities have tried to address that 
question, and indeed, as we talk are looking at that whole 
question of accessibility. 
 
But our track record, Mr. Chairman, I would suggest stands 
second to virtually none. And I quite frankly think, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why on April 28 of this year I received a letter 
from the president of the students’ union at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and he said things like this, Mr. Speaker. It was 
addressed to myself: 
 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you on behalf 
of the University of Saskatchewan students for the 
commitment your department has shown to education, 
specifically at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 

He went on to say: 
 

 I’m happy to see the increase in the student assistance 
program. My council was especially impressed with the 
initiatives directed at 
   



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2080 
 
 

disadvantaged student groups, specifically single parents, 
(Mr. Chairman). 
 

That’s the kind of thoughtful response that these students are 
making given what we have done for them. Yes, we would 
always like to do more. And I could talk at length about the 
SCAN (Saskatchewan Communications Advanced Network), 
the distance education, some of those initiatives we’ll be 
hearing more about, because this government, Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t merely pay lip-service to education. When we say it’s a 
priority, we mean it and we show it by word, deed, and action, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to request that the 
minister table that letter, please. He read from a letter that he 
said he got from the president of the university council. I’d like 
him to table that letter. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thought you and I had an understanding 
yesterday — our answers would be short. 
 
I see however that that will not hold water any longer, so our 
time table is off, I can assure you of that. 
 
I will not address that this evening, but I will refer back to that 
tomorrow, for the simple reason that my colleagues wanted to 
get in on an earlier issue about 15 minutes ago before you 
started on another issue. But I can assure you that I will get on 
that topic tomorrow and the next day and the day after until you 
learn to answer the questions in this House. 
 
Mr. Minister, my colleague from Prince Albert would like to 
get back to another issue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Minister, earlier in this statement you 
indicated — you made a comment regarding an audit that was 
being done pertaining to student loans. And I think what you 
said is there was some student loans that were given to students 
who were going to private vocational schools, and where, due 
to some situation beyond the student’s control, that perhaps the 
student loan would be forgiven, I guess, by the department 
because of conditions. 
 
And I wanted to clarify that: is that what you said? Because if it 
is, I would applaud that that is a direction that you should go in, 
particularly if it’s a case that can be established that is not the 
fault of the student; where the loan wouldn’t ordinarily have 
been forgiven if ordinary conditions would have existed; where 
the student could have properly completed the course. Can you 
just verify that please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll provide you with this information 
and see if this answers your question. 
 
Relative to refunds, students who discontinue may qualify for 
tuition refunds from the school. We’ve requested and have 
recently received class lists and attendance of all programs 
offered, and an audit will be conducted of student refunds 
issued and due. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Now I’ve had students come to my office 
and explaining situations that they’ve found  

themselves into, where they feel that they’ve had the conditions 
of the loan misrepresented to them. And I think there are other 
colleagues of mine that have had the same kind of thing. 
 
Should I be directing these students now to apply to your 
department or to you? And explaining their situation where they 
feel that they’ve had a situation that’s been misrepresented to 
them by the representatives of vocational school, can I direct 
them to you, or should I direct them to the auditor, or to whom, 
so that they wouldn’t miss out on a chance for forgiveness of 
loan which they were given to understand, or at least they 
believe they were given to understand? Where should it go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — If there are some students who have 
some concerns, and who approach you and who are looking for 
direction relative to student loan questions and 
misrepresentation or whatever the case may be there, I’m 
advised that the right person to funnel this through would be 
Mr. Sparling, who is in charge of this area and in fact is doing 
the investigation. So Lorne Sparling at Sask Education here in 
Regina, and they could . . . I would probably recommend they 
drop him a note, quite frankly, to get it down in black and white 
for him. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Will you be giving Mr. Sparling a sort of an 
ombudsman authority in order to be able to make judgements in 
these situations? Because what happens is, if the regulations are 
as they are, and if he isn’t given any more power, the only think 
he can do is explain to the students that they are in a “buyer 
beware” situation. And that’s been the unfortunate part about 
the whole post-secondary vocational training, is that the 
students find themselves in a buyer beware situation, and being 
young students, they find out about it after. 
 
Will you be able to give him the power of referee or 
ombudsman so that he can actually make some kind of an 
authoritative decision and order a pay-out or a pay-back, or 
order a forgiveness of student loan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The first thing I would like to say is I 
haven’t personally given Mr. Sparling any direction, nor do I 
intend to. That doesn’t mean to say that I don’t care about the 
issue, because I do, and I’ve been kept briefed on it. But quite 
frankly, I think that could be construed as political interference 
with an investigation that he is conducting as a competent and 
qualified individual in the department. So I’m not going to give 
him any special direction. As I said earlier, he and perhaps 
others in the department are actively investigating the concerns 
to determine if, as you have suggested, there may well have 
been some misrepresentation or misleading or whatever the 
case may be; there’s a number of issues, as I suggested earlier. 
And if there’s some special recommendations that he makes, 
then I’ll await those, as will my other officials in the department 
if there’s some especial action that has to be taken as a result of 
this. 
 
As I said earlier to one of your colleagues, we haven’t exactly 
— or the officials haven’t exactly been sitting on their hands on 
this one. There’s been, as I understand it, more than one 
meeting with students and with faculty  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2081 
 
 

there. They froze admissions; they’ve raised concerns with the 
operator; they’ve asked for a plan in so far as how they’re going 
to address these. I obviously can’t give you a complete and full 
report tonight, but they . . . I too, like you, are concerned, and 
that’s why we have officials to investigate these kinds of 
complaints. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — I understand that the officials have been 
investigating that, and I think that’s just quite proper. What I’m 
asking for is that when they investigate it . . . Once they 
investigate a complaint, they may get a personal opinion as a 
result of that, and they no doubt would consult with other 
people. But in the end, they really can’t do anything about it 
because of the way the whole system is structured. The only 
thing they can do is advise the student, well sorry, but I guess 
that’s the way it is. You’re going to have to pay back the loan 
because that’s a contract. 
 
At some stage if they feel that the student has been wronged — 
and I mean it won’t be in all cases because I think it should 
work — there are probably cases where maybe the complaint 
isn’t justified, but they have got to have the authority to be able 
to do some kind of a roll-back. 
 
The difficulty here is that the students really don’t . . . In the 
end, unless they’re going to take the school to court, and that 
they haven’t got anybody to go to, what student can afford to 
take on a private vocational school or anybody else in a court of 
law. First of all, it’s very intimidating and they might not know 
the procedure, they might only be mad enough, but you need 
sort of a . . . somebody in the interim stage with some kind of 
an ombudsman authority. 
 
The second thing I wanted you to address, Mr. Minister, that I 
wanted to ask you about was whether in the interim, or whether 
you and the department were prepared to consider very strongly 
some type of an instructor certification program for the private 
vocational schools? 
 
Unfortunately what’s happened, through our experience, is that 
private vocational schools are unable to consistently get 
qualified people, certified. Sometimes they’ll get a real 
crackerjack. Somebody will establish a real good reputation for 
the school. That person will be hired on by SIAST, or 
somebody who pays a decent wage, and then they’ll have to 
hire a fill-in person. And then the next group comes in under a 
good reputation and the students come in and they end up 
completely disappointed. 
 
You need some kind of a program in the interim, I hope that . . . 
Ideally it would be good if the private vocational schools set up 
their own certification program and quality control program, but 
until they do, I think it is incumbent upon the department to set 
up some kind of a certification program for these instructors so 
that we are not getting cheap education. 
 
(2145) 
 
They’re paying for it, we’re paying for it through student loans, 
and students end up paying for it, and pay for it a heck of a lot 
. . . They pay for it a lot more then they would  

going to SIAST, and yet in some cases they get poor quality 
instruction. 
 
And I mean there’s no denying that, and I don’t think you want 
to deny that, but I’m looking at solutions here, and some system 
is needed to be put in place. And I think maybe a strong 
suggestion to the committee to look at it over the long term is 
one thing that can be done, and in the interim . . . We don’t 
want to rush the committee and yet I don’t want the committee 
to slow-walk this thing out of existence. The committee has got 
to take its time to come to the right and proper conclusions. But 
in the interim we need to make sure that the students are 
protected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, relative to course 
approval and faculty approval and what more or what can be 
done better there, as you correctly point out, that’s part of the 
mandate of the committee that’s been structured, and as I said 
earlier, we’re not going to have this — how does it go? — 
paralysis by analysis. I indicated earlier that we’re hopeful of 
having something from them by September. We have put in 
place, however, having said all of that, even in the interim, a 
private vocational schools instructor approval form that is to be 
completed as part of certifying instructors and as part of 
evaluating courses. 
 
But over and above that, I guess I don’t want to get — as I said 
at the outset of my remarks tonight . . . While there’s an 
investigation going on, I don’t want to get into prejudging nor 
to tracking down the road as to hypothetical “what if’s,” except 
to say that we’re not without some teeth. I mean, the Act may 
not be perfect, that’s why obviously we have some review 
going under way, but there is some teeth there, and there is 
provision for refunding tuition, those kinds of things. So we’ll 
let the investigation go forward and see where that takes us. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, as you know, 
there’s quite extensive growth in the Sutherland area of 
Saskatoon. But I am wondering if you can tell us what kind of 
plans your department has for new schools in the Erindale and 
Silver Springs area of Sutherland? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Just to make sure I have the right 
project. Is the hon. member referring to St. Paul Separate, the 
Erindale school — total cost $3 million, elementary school? 
That project has the 1991 approval in principle. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Could the minister comment on the public 
school system and the plans for the high school for the Erindale 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The other project that might be of 
interest to the hon. member is in 1989, a this-year approval for 
Saskatoon public, James Alexander School, a major addition 
and renovation. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — That school is not in the Erindale area to my 
knowledge. Can the minister confirm that that’s in the Silver 
Springs-Erindale area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — My best understanding of that project 
in that area is that the school board has identified that as part of 
a five-year capital projects wish list, but,  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2082 
 
 

you know, haven’t attached an emergency priority category to it 
or anything like that. And so it will get due consideration as we 
go through our three-year moving approval process. 
 
We’re aware of it, it’s part of their five-year package, but we 
don’t have any announcements relative to it at this point in 
time. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Originally you talked about there being a 
renovation, I believe, to the James Alexander School. We’ll 
leave it at that. I don’t think you know for sure what you’re 
talking about here tonight. I would simply commend to your 
attention the needs of the north-east sector of Saskatoon, which 
is the most rapidly growing part of the city, and commend for 
your consideration that you build the schools before they’re 
needed, so that as the area expands, parents and children can 
make use of the schools when they move in. They’re going to 
be built inevitably; why not build them when they need to be 
done? 
 
I’ll leave that subject, Mr. Minister, and I just would briefly like 
to know how many names were on the mailing list to receive 
the new calendar for SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can direct that request for 
information to the president’s office at SIAST if you wish, but I 
don’t have any knowledge, nor do any of my officials present 
have any knowledge, about who was on their mailing list or . . . 
any more than I would have any knowledge, quite frankly, 
about the universities’ mailing list. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Mr. Minister, can you tell us how much it 
cost to mail this tome to the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said earlier, I really don’t 
have any knowledge of that, and you can either direct the 
questions directly to SIAST yourself or I can forward them on 
your behalf if you so wish. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I’m asking you tonight if you could 
undertake to determine how many people received the SIAST 
calendar, the cost of production of this calendar and the related 
materials, such as the cover letter and the view book that 
accompanied the mailing, and the calendar guide that 
accompanied the mailing. And if you could further indicate 
what the response was to the SIAST calendar survey which 
followed on April 3rd, could the minister undertake to provide 
that information to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you very much; that’s very helpful. 
One final comment. Is the minister aware of the class survey 
done of SIAST classes by The Scanner at Kelsey Students’ 
Association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No. 
 
Mr. Koenker: — I think the minister needs to look at this 
survey. It surveys some 12 or 15 different classes at Kelsey, and 
I’m very concerned about the kinds of responses that came with 
respect to some of the technology courses there. 

The industrial electronics technology and technicians course 
description indicated that two out of the three students surveyed 
in that program felt that the instructors’ educational level had 
problems. And two out of three also indicated that they had 
problems with the course content of this course. 
 
In the CAD/CAM (Computer Aided Drafting/Computer Aided 
Mapping) course, five out of the five students surveyed had 
problems with the instructors’ level of education; three out of 
five had problems with the course coverage. 
 
With the animal health technicians course, four out of seven had 
problems with the instructors’ education, and four out of seven 
had problems with the course coverage. I think it ought to 
concern you that students are raising these kinds of concerns 
with the education they’ve received, and I think that they 
deserve more for their money than the kinds of results that this 
survey indicates. 
 
In the food service portion of the survey, five out of five 
students had problems with the course description, four out of 
five had problems with the money for equipment, five out of 
five had problems with the instructors’ education, five out of 
five had problems with the use of the books that they were 
using for the course, and five out of five had problems with the 
course coverage. I think that means that you, as a minister, 
ought to look at this concern and to see what underlies it, and 
I’ll simply leave it at that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, before we go to educational spending estimates 
tomorrow, I’m wondering if you can provide me with some 
background information as it pertains to the report of the task 
force on the education of the deaf. And I just need some 
clarification on a couple of questions. 
 
Mr. Minister, is it possible to provide me tomorrow morning the 
Educational Services to Children with a Hearing Impairment 
Report, or the Livingston report of 1985? Mr. Minister, is that 
possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I’ll take notice of that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, I understand that this report is 
now available to anybody in the public who asks for it, and I’m 
wondering if it’s possible for me to have the report sent over to 
my office early in the morning in order that I can peruse the 
report, in order to ask you questions regarding deaf education in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll take notice of what you’re asking. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Minister, taking notice won’t be 
helpful because I’d like to have the report for tomorrow. But 
one of the questions that I do have, and I’d like some 
clarification on, is I wonder if you can provide me with some 
information as to whether the Livingston report formed the 
background or the framework for the task force report that has 
just been completed in May of 1989, which is commonly 
referred to as the Houghton  
  



 
June 20, 1989 

 

2083 
 
 

report. Did the Livingston report form the background to the 
task force report on deaf education in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well I can’t say for sure because I 
haven’t talked to Mr. Livingston specifically about the question 
that you raise, but it seems to me that if he sat on the task force, 
that one of the reasons he probably sat on the task force was to 
bring the sort of wealth of experience he has in that area, 
including if, as you suggest, he himself has written reports and 
documents on this. I suspect that’s one of the reasons why we 
had him from the department’s standpoint sit on the task force. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Minister, you appointed the members to 
the task force. There were four members appointed by yourself. 
And are you then saying that the reason why Mr. Livingston 
was appointed to the task force was because of the Livingston 
report that was completed in 1985. Is that one of the reasons? 
 
I also wonder, Mr. Minister, if it’s possible to have Mr. 
Livingston with you tomorrow in order that we can discuss 
some of the task force recommendations in order that you can 
be properly briefed on the recommendations contained within 
the task force. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Livingston was on the task 
force because he is the . . . I’m not sure exactly what his official 
title is, but something like this: the director of special education. 
And he was on there because of his wealth of experience, the 
fact that he is head of that area, and thirdly, widely 
acknowledged, I think fair to say, across Canada for his 
expertise in this area. I’ve had that brought to my attention on 
numerous occasions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 p.m. 
 
 
 
 


