


















































May 26, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 26, 1989 
 

1393 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, a group of 26 grade 6 students who are seated 
in your gallery, sir. They’re accompanied by teachers Hugh 
Jenner and Gilbert Goodfellow, former colleagues of mine when 
I taught in the Spiritwood community. They’re from the Hartley 
Clark Elementary School. The chaperons are Audrey Magnus 
and Donna Tiringer, and bus driver Jim Dunlop. 
 
We bid you a warm welcome to the Assembly. I trust you’re 
having a very enjoyable visit in Regina, and the weather is 
co-operating with you. You had fun swimming last night; I heard 
a few stories about that, and a few of you broke curfew. 
 
I should point out the Minister of Education spent three of the 
best years of his life in grade 6, he enjoyed it so much. And the 
members of the opposition agree with that. 
 
We trust you’re going to enjoy the rest of your stay here. I’ll be 
meeting with you at 10:30 for refreshments, photographs, and 
general discussion. And we wish you a very safe trip home, and 
look forward to seeing you back home in Spiritwood. I’d ask all 
members to welcome the group here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce two 
different groups today. The first group I would like to introduce, 
Mr. Speaker, to you and all members of the legislature, is a group 
of 13 grade 8 and 9 students from White Bear School at White 
Bear, down by Carlyle in my corner of the world. 
 
With these students today, Mr. Speaker, are teachers Mike 
Coderre and Will Elliott, and the bus driver Bev McArthur. I’ll 
be meeting with these students a little later for pictures and 
refreshments, Mr. Speaker. And I would invite all members to 
join with me in offering a warm welcome to this group of 13 
students from White Bear Lake. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And the second group, Mr. Speaker, is a 
group of students from Alida School in Alida, 23 grade 8 and 9 
students. And they’re in Regina visiting the legislature and other 
points of interest this weekend, Mr. Speaker. And travelling with 
this group of students from Alida is a teacher, Mervin Walker, 
and the bus driver Bill Anthony. They’re in the west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would invite all members to join with me in 
offering a warm welcome to this group, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, some students who are visiting us 
from outside our borders, from Manitoba, Shoal Lake, Manitoba. 
They’re students from the Shoal Lake School. They are grade 6, 
numbering 17 people, and they’re in the west gallery. And 
they’re accompanied today by their teacher Miss Kingdon, and 
chaperons Mr. Stewart and Miss Michasiw. I hope I pronounced 
your name correctly. 
 
We welcome you here to the Assembly today. It’s always a 
pleasure to have people from outside our borders visiting our 
legislature. We hope you enjoy your visit. We hope you enjoy 
question period. I’ll be meeting with you at about 10:30 in room 
255 for refreshments and to answer any questions that you may 
have about the proceedings here today. So we wish you a 
welcome, and we hope that you have a very, very enjoyable 
summer on your holidays this coming summer. 
 
So I would ask all members to please welcome these students 
from Shoal Lake, Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
SaskEnergy Public Meetings and the Securities Commission 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a 
question to the Minister of Justice. I see in the Leader-Post that 
the chairman of the Securities Commission is considering laying 
charges, initiating charges against those responsible for the 
SaskEnergy advertising campaign that was in direct 
contravention of The Securities Act. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you tell us whether or not 
the chairman has been in contact with any of your officials, and 
can you assure this House that the Department of Justice, if and 
when an information is laid, will co-operate fully to ensure that 
the offending parties are dealt with in accordance of the law, 
regardless of who they are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I can advise the hon. member the 
following. The Securities Commission has an ongoing 
investigation, is conducting an ongoing investigation, and when 
they complete that ongoing investigation they then would consult 
with the Department of Justice as to charges. And if charges 
would be laid, the Department of Justice would prosecute those 
charges. 
 
Now should that come to pass, then the Department of Justice 
will proceed with prosecutions. As I indicated yesterday, and as 
I indicated on many occasions, that I as Attorney General — and 
any attorney general — should not interfere in that process. There 
are two streams in any attorney general’s department. One is a 
prosecutorial stream that the attorney general never becomes 
involved in, as to laying charges. And of course there’s the   



 
May 26, 1989 

1394 
 

administrative and political stream which you are involved in. 
But if there are . . . if Securities Commission recommend charges 
and consult with the Department of Justice, then the Department 
of Justice will properly proceed with charges. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I refer you to a particular section of The Securities Act, 
and I want to quote, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 

Where a company or a person, other than an individual, is 
guilty of an offence pursuant to subsection (3), every: 
 

(b) other person who authorized, permitted or 
acquiesced in the offence; 

 
is also guilty of an offence and liable to a summary 
conviction to a fine of not more than $1,000,000 or to 
imprisonment for a term of not more than two years, or to 
both . . . fine and imprisonment. 
 

Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that you no doubt participated in 
the cabinet decision in respect to launching this illegal campaign 
in respect to SaskEnergy. Therefore, I ask, Mr. Minister, in light 
of those facts, in light of those facts, would you then possibly 
consider setting up an independent prosecutor to be appointed by 
the chief justice of the Court of Appeal to give not only the 
appearance but to give also independence to the alleged charges. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, the 
Securities Commission is conducting an ongoing investigation 
on this, and they are conducting that investigation. When that 
investigation is completed, they will take whatever appropriate 
action they see that they should take, Mr. Speaker. And if there 
is charges to be laid, charges will be laid. I’ve indicated to the 
House that I would not interfere with that, as I have not interfered 
in the past with regards to that, Mr. Speaker. And it would seem 
to me, let the course of justice take its course as it properly should 
— as it properly should, Mr. Speaker — and proceed 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, I have here a schedule to OC (order in council) 4/25/89, 
and it indicates that these regulations may be cited to the 
securities amendment regulations, 1989. 
 
I want to refer you particularly, Mr. Minister, to section 10 and 
section 14(1). And I point out, what you have done there is to 
circumvent the existing security legislation to say that any 
person, just on your letter of authorization, can become a security 
dealer of any of the public participation enterprises. That’s what 
you’ve said. 
 
I want to ask you: how do changing those regulations where you, 
by a mere letter, can authorize anyone to be a salesman of 
securities, how does that square with the Premier’s avowed 
purpose of changing the regulation was solely to get information 
out to the public? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 
raises the second equation here, and that is in the regulations has 
the government exempted itself from the review of the Securities 
Commission? And I don’t think anybody is denying that the 
government, through the OC you refer to, is excluding itself from 
the purview of the Securities Commission. 
 
If you look at the legislation as introduced, it also exempted this 
particular process from the purview of the Securities 
Commission as has been done, as I indicated in this Chamber 
before, by previous governments, and it has in other jurisdictions 
by previous governments as well. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I 
have here a standard form for the application of those who are 
going to deal in securities, the form that ordinary underwriters 
have to sign and sales persons selling securities. I want to ask 
you: how is it in the public interest that now you can go out and 
appoint, in respect to public participation, anyone that you want 
just by a mere writing of a letter and authorization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that with 
regards to that anyone can be appointed, I think if you go back 
and look at previous bond issues by this government or previous 
other share issues by this government, you will see who has been 
authorized to sell those. Now one of the most significant changes 
is that when the bond issues were being done, rather than simply 
restricting those to the investment bankers to sell, there was a 
further extent, Mr. Speaker, to — let’s take the SaskTel bond 
issue for example — that banks and credit unions, in fact, also 
sold those instruments which they hadn’t in the past. 
 
In fact, if you look at the recent SaskTel thing, that the credit 
unions and the banks in fact were the largest sellers of SaskTel 
bonds, and that is the intent of the government, is to have a wider 
distribution than simply some stockbrokers that live in the two 
major cities as being the only people selling that document. That 
is what it is designed primarily, Mr. Speaker, to do. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too have 
a question to the same minister. Mr. Minister, a few days ago the 
chief of the Securities Commission advised the public to be wary 
of your government’s advertising because what you were saying 
in that advertising has not been proven. And earlier this week you 
said you hoped the advertising campaign would not continue; in 
fact you said, I never liked the advertising anyway. 
 
Yesterday, Mr. Minister, in the press, an unnamed government 
official says the advertising campaign is over and will not be 
renewed in the near future. Will you confirm today here, sir, that 
your government has halted this expensive ad campaign which is 
being paid for out of the taxpayers’ pockets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1395 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I think if the hon. member properly 
reflected what I said, is that I believed it was proper that the 
various peoples from the new energy company would have the 
right to go out and discuss in broad terms what they were 
proposing to do. 
 
With regard to the advertising, I indicated outside the House that 
I didn’t think the advertising was terribly effective and, as I 
understand, that advertising has been pulled. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — New question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Minister, I think everybody on this side of the House agrees 
with you that that advertising certainly has not been in any way, 
shape, or form effective. I wonder, Mr. Minister, would you tell 
us here today how much that ineffective, ineffectual advertising 
has cost the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the answer to 
that question. I would undertake to take notice of that question, 
Mr. Speaker, and bring the answer back to the House. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister. 
I presume he’s taking notice of that and will provide the House 
the answers to the question I’ve just asked. 
 
Mr. Minister, final question for you, sir. Now you’re cancelling 
your ad campaign; your public meetings are going nowhere. The 
question I want to ask, sir, is in regards to the order in council 
authorizing certain individuals to sell bonds, stocks, on behalf of 
the companies that you intend to privatize. Is the full intent of 
what you intend to accomplish with that order in council the sole 
purpose of providing patronage appointments to further add to 
the cost of what has turned out to be just another political fiasco 
for your government? Isn’t that the intent of what you intend to 
do, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the intent is that through the 
regulation it would allow people from SaskEnergy to go out to 
the public and explain what their proposal is going to be. It’s not 
to go out there and peddle shares to anyone, Mr. Speaker, and 
shares cannot be peddled until such time as legislation . . . Mr. 
Speaker, shares cannot be sold until the legislation is passed in 
this House. 
 
Following that, a prospectus is filed, Mr. Speaker. The 
prospectus is filed and then, Mr. Speaker, there is various agents 
that will go around and sell these shares. Now that’s exactly the 
same thing as we’ve done on previous public participation 
initiatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For the most part those have been, Mr. Speaker, the investment 
bankers and the financial institutions and financial planners, Mr. 
Speaker. And I wouldn’t think anyone would somehow suggest 
those are our political hacks out there doing that. If they are, 
they’re suggesting that every credit union in Saskatchewan is a 
Tory hack, 

and I don’t think they’re prepared to say that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sale of Dental Equipment 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Public Participation. The Department of Health, as pointed out in 
this auditor’s report, which is a kind of scathing attack on the 
government, says that the Department of Health sent dental 
equipment costing $2.2 million to the Sask Property 
Management Corporation to sell. And when the dental equipment 
was sold, the revenue should have been paid into the 
Consolidated Fund as these assets were not owned by SPMC. 
There’s also no apparent record of the revenue in the 
Consolidated Fund. 
 
I’m wondering if you could tell us today — since actually the 
Minister of Justice took notice of this question a week ago — if 
the Minister of Public Participation could tell us what has 
happened to the $2.2 million. Has it just disappeared, or what 
happened to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Certainly, Mr. Speaker, that as the auditor 
says . . . And I don’t know where he comes with the figure of 2.2 
million. I believe it’s a book value figure, but we have no 
substantive evidence of that figure. But being as it may be, 
certainly there has been some sale of some equipment. About 
$707,000 worth of equipment has been sold. Some . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. We’re 
attempting to hear the response, and I’m sure all hon. members 
are interested. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — About $707,000 have been sold. Some of 
the other equipment has been transferred to other parts of 
government. There is still some of it . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, if you care to laugh, that’s fine. If 
they want the answer, I’ll proceed. And the other aspects of it, 
the equipment are still in the warehouses with SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation). But 
certainly, as far as the funds, the funds have been . . . are with 
SPMC. The auditors that have been hired by SPMC to conduct 
their business have not, have not, shall I say, ever been 
questioned by the Provincial Auditor pertaining to the dental 
equipment — have not been. 
 
There has been a question asked by the Provincial Auditor about 
the total sales and salvage. Well let me tell you, the total sales 
and salvage of SPMC is much larger than just the dental 
equipment. You see yourself, Mr. Speaker, that there are sales of 
equipment almost weekly in the paper of government assets. So 
the auditor has asked about the total sales and salvage but has not 
asked our auditors or the officials in SPMC about the dental 
equipment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1396 
 

Mr. Anguish: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. The auditor is 
right. You don’t know what’s going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — As an officer of this Assembly, I’d have to take 
the auditor’s word that it was $2.2 million. Now you don’t know 
where the money is. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You don’t know where the equipment is. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You don’t know where the equipment is. The 
auditor said that you’re supposed to put that into the Consolidated 
Fund. You’re holding the money at Sask Property Management 
Corporation. It’s not your money. When are you going to put this 
money into the Consolidated Fund and tell us where the rest of 
the dental equipment is. It’s $2.2 million worth of equipment, and 
you’re beyond your authority, sir, in what you’re doing with that 
equipment and money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat the answers again 
because obviously he didn’t get them the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — It seems to me that the member’s more 
interested in laughing than getting the facts, but so be it. I just 
want to indicate to you again that the book value, as said by the 
auditor, is $2.2. million. And of that, $707,000 has been sold; the 
equipment has been sold, and that money is in SPMC, fully 
accounted for by our auditors. 
 
Secondly, the rest of the equipment has either been transferred to 
other departments where it can be used within government or else 
it is still in warehouses for further sale. So I don’t see anything 
that the member would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Well I really couldn’t hear the minister finish, 
and if he wishes to take a few seconds to complete his remarks, 
I’ll give him that permission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, for the third time I will 
indicate that $707,000 of the equipment has been sold. And that 
money is fully accounted by our auditors in SPMC, and the 
remainder of the equipment is either in warehouses or has been 
transferred to other government departments. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question. I was wondering, Mr. Minister, 
if maybe you’re filling holes in the highways with the drill 
equipment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mail Delivery for Consumer and Commercial Affairs  
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’d like to go to another item pointed out about 
your Crown corporation by the auditor, and it refers to the 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. And that 
department paid property management $254,000 for mail 
delivery. Now the department does not have a written agreement 
or arrangement for fees to be charged by property management 
corporation. There’s also the absence of records at the 
department to verify the accuracy of invoices rendered by Sask 
Property Management. 
 
And I’m wondering, is this the same kind of sloppy service we 
can expect in other department from the property management 
corporation, the big slush fund that you have for the government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — No, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the 
department of the property management is well run, as the 
auditors have indicated. It would make it a lot easier if the 
questions that the Provincial Auditor wished to report in his 
report were asked of our auditors — and that was not the case in 
many situations. 
 

Participation Credit 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I’m wondering about . . . a new question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the same minister. Also in the auditor’s report at 
29.19, the auditor says: 
 

The financial statements do not disclose the nature and 
significance of the Participation Credit of $42.7 million in 
the Statement of Income and Retained Earnings. 
 

Now the auditor goes on to say: 
 

In my opinion, this is essential information which is 
required to be disclosed by G.A.A.P. (general accepted 
accounting principles). 
 

And the reason the auditor doesn’t get a lot of information is 
because your property management corporation withholds it 
from him. And I was wondering if you could tell us today, Mr. 
Minister, what the $42.7 million participation credit is. What’s 
the participation credit and how can it be worth $42.7 million, 
sir? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the question 
certainly indicates the problem that exists in the minds . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I’m sure all 
members are having a problem with hearing the minister. It can 
be easily rectified if members simply co-operate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — What I was saying is that I think that the 
questions indicate the problem that exists is mainly between the 
Provincial Auditor’s report and the auditors employed by the 
property management Crown. And I   



 
May 26, 1989 

1397 
 

believe that kind of a question certainly should be discussed 
between both of those groups. A technical question of accounting 
principles is the kind of thing that should be discussed between 
the Provincial Auditor and the auditors employed by the property 
management corporation. 
 
As I said previously, as I said previously in my answer regarding 
the dental equipment, the question of the dental equipment per se 
was not asked to our accountants. If there are questions and 
problems there, then I believe that those two should sit down 
together, the accountants for the property management 
corporation and the Provincial Auditor, and come to a resolve. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Same question, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister 
tell us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. It’s the same question. The rules do not 
allow the same question to be asked twice. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Now just listen to 
this, Mr. Minister. What is the $42.7 million participation 
credits? What is it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, to be able to give the 
exact definition of that, I’ll take notice of the question and report 
back to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sales Trip to Greece by WESTBRIDGE Employees 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the 
acting minister responsible for SaskTel. Will you tell this House 
whether or not the firm WESTBRIDGE, of which your 
department owns a substantial amount, sent at least 15 people of 
its sales staff on an all expenses paid trip to Greece earlier this 
month? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of the 
question. 
 
Mr. Trew: — New question, I guess. While taking notice, Mr. 
Minister, could you tell the people of Saskatchewan why these 
15 people were sent to Greece earlier this month, all expenses 
paid? How can you justify that enormous expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I just . . . I point out that it is a private 
company, Mr. Speaker, but I will take notice of the question and 
undertake to bring the answer back to the legislature. 
 

Drilling in Great Sand Hills 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you. I have a question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Minister of the Environment. Mr. Minister, 
recently there were some 100 people who met at a public meeting 
at Fox Valley, who indicated that they believe that further drilling 
on the Great Sand Hills will destroy this unique and highly 
sensitive ecosystem. At that public 

meeting, Mr. Minister, the manager, project manager for Lone 
Pine Resources, Jay Lyons, indicated and admitted that the track 
record of the industry was far less than impressive with regard to 
protecting the environment and environmental protection, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
In light of this, I would like to ask you: what steps have you taken 
to meet the concerns of these citizens who represent not only the 
100 but many other citizens of Saskatchewan, about what’s 
happening on the sand hills in the south-west? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
finally get a question on this subject. It’s been in the news for a 
while, and I thought that the opposition wasn’t interested in 
environment any more. Let me give you some of the details of 
what our department is doing, dealing with the drilling in the sand 
hills. 
 
The meeting in Fox Valley was part of the environmental impact 
assessment process that the company is required to go through. 
That environmental impact assessment was asked for from that 
company in February of this year. They are still doing their 
environmental impact assessment, and they’re holding meetings 
with people in that process. 
 
About a month from now, I would expect that the environmental 
impact assessment will come to our department for review, and 
it will go through the normal review process and then the public 
hearing process following that. And before any permission is 
given for drilling, all of the questions of the public and of my 
department will have to be answered, and they will not go ahead 
and drill unless they can guarantee protecting the environment in 
that area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Report of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow (that) the Provincial Auditor 
to fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

That is the motion that we’re debating here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan regret,   



 
May 26, 1989 

1398 
 

the people of Saskatchewan regret that this government has 
abandoned its stated policies of 1982 which would protect the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
This government, this political party, the Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan, brought out a program in 1982 and printed it and 
sent it all about the province. It’s a five-point program designed 
for good management, good government management. 
 
It dealt with such things as efficient management of Crown 
corporations, service at cost — that has been abandoned. 
Consumers will be protected by a public utilities review 
commission — that has been abandoned. They will protect the 
taxpayers’ money by ensuring the independence of the Provincial 
Auditor — that has been abandoned. They will open the books 
on government business — that has been abandoned. They will 
establish freedom of information legislation — that has never 
been attempted by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think it’s fair to say that the people of Saskatchewan regret 
that this government has abandoned its high principles which 
were written on paper in 1982 and has reversed itself. And that’s 
why we find ourselves in the position today of discussing this 
question about the Provincial Auditor of Saskatchewan — this 
question about how the Government of Saskatchewan treats the 
Provincial Auditor, the guardian of the public purse. 
 
I believe it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that I make some reference 
to The Provincial Auditor Act. I wouldn’t normally expect to 
have to do this, but there’s obviously some people, a considerable 
number of them across the way, that don’t understand The 
Provincial Auditor Act. I don’t intend to take a lot of time today, 
Mr. Speaker, to read The Provincial Auditor Act into the record. 
It’s a document that’s available to all people. As a matter of fact, 
the Provincial Auditor put a copy of The Provincial Auditor Act 
in his report to this legislature, ending March 31, 1988. It’s right 
here in the auditor’s report. 
 
I just want to refer to selected parts of The Provincial Auditor 
Act, Mr. Speaker. I want to refer to the section that’s entitled 
“Duties and Powers”; the duties of the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan. It says . . . this is on page 4 of the auditor’s report 
in the Appendix I: 
 

The provincial auditor is the auditor of the accounts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan and shall . . . 
 

Get that word: 
 

. . . shall examine all accounts related to public money and 
any accounts not related to public money that he is required 
by an Act to examine, and shall determine whether, in his 
opinion: 
 
the accounts have been faithfully and properly kept; 
 

That’s the law. That’s the law of Saskatchewan. That’s why 
we’re discussing this auditor’s report, because this government 
has broken the law, Mr. Speaker. This government has broken 
the law. 
 

The second thing the Provincial Auditor shall determine is: 
 

public money has been fully accounted for and properly 
disposed of . . . 
 

We can tell from the questions in the question period today that 
the Minister of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation is unable to account for sums of a couple of million 
dollars. He’s unable to tell you what a $42 million item is in his 
own Crown corporation. So that means that this minister is not 
accounting for public moneys. They’re not fully accounted for 
and properly disposed of. They’ve broken the law quite, quite 
clearly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Act goes on: 
 

. . . and the rules and procedures applied are sufficient to 
ensure an effective check on the assessment, collection and 
proper allocation of public money; 
 

Well the Minister of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation was unable to answer the questions this morning. 
The minister, according to the auditor, has broken the law. This 
is the law. They’ve broken the law. 
 
The third point: 
 

public money expended has been applied to the purposes for 
which it was appropriated by the Legislature and the 
expenditures have adequate statutory authority; 
 

This government has contravened the statutory authority. 
They’ve contravened the law. They’ve broken the law. In plain 
English, they’ve broken the law. 
 

(d) essential records are maintained and the rules and 
procedures applied are sufficient to safeguard and control 
public money. 
 

It’s clear from the answers in the question period that those 
safeguards are not in place. It’s clear from the auditor’s 
statement, those safeguards are not in place. 
 
The Act goes on. And this is the law, Mr. Speaker. Later on it 
says: 
 

In the fulfillment of his responsibilities as the auditor of the 
accounts of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
provincial auditor may (get that word — may) rely on the 
report of the appointed auditor of a Crown agency or 
Crown-controlled corporation if he is satisfied that the 
appointed auditor has carried out his responsibilities 
pursuant to . . . (this Act) with respect to that Crown agency 
or Crown-controlled corporation. 
 

Quite clearly, the government has broken the law here again. 
Clause by clause, this government breaks the law, stands above 
the law. And as been illustrated today, if   



 
May 26, 1989 

1399 
 

they’re breaking the law, they’ll change the law. 
 
Another question in the question period today. If they’re breaking 
the law, just wait around until the next cabinet meeting and we’ll 
change the law. That’s what this government says. Cavalier 
treatment, cavalier treatment of the law. Shabby treatment of the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s what this government’s 
practising. 
 
When the Provincial Auditor determines, pursuant to subsection 
(1), that he is unable to reply on the report of an appointed auditor 
with respect to a Crown agency or a Crown-controlled 
corporation, the Provincial Auditor shall — shall — conduct 
additional audit work. The Provincial Auditor, according to the 
report, has been prevented by this government from conducting 
additional audit work. This government again has broken the law 
in this clause. What a sorry record for the people of 
Saskatchewan this government is maintaining. 
 
It goes on in subsection (3) on page 5 of the auditor’s report, 
Appendix I: 

 
Where the provincial auditor has performed additional 
(audit) work on the accounts of a Crown agency or a 
Crown-controlled corporation pursuant to subsection (2), he 
shall report . . . 
 

Well the Provincial Auditor has reported where he’s been able 
to, and has reported that he’s not been able to in a number of 
cases, again law-breaking. What shall the Provincial Auditor 
report? He shall report: 
 

(a) the reason that he is unable to rely on the report of the 
appointed auditor of the Crown agency or the 
Crown-controlled corporation; 
 
(b) the nature of the additional audit work he conducted; 
and 
 
(c) the results of the additional audit work. 

 
The Act goes on, the law goes on and states, Mr. Speaker: 
 

At the end of each fiscal year, the provincial auditor and 
every appointed auditor shall . . . 
 

There’s no options here, Mr. Speaker. The law says “they shall” 
— not only the Provincial Auditor, but the appointed auditors. 
 

. . . shall prepare a report on the results of all examinations 
that they have conducted of departments of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, Crown agencies and Crown-controlled 
corporations during that year giving details of any 
reservation of opinion made in an audit report, and shall 
identify any instances they consider to be of significance 
and of a nature that should be brought to the attention of the 
Legislative Assembly, including any cases in which they 
observe (the following): 
 

(1045) 
 
This is the law; this is The Provincial Auditor Act which 

we in this Chamber passed on, The Provincial Auditor Act. We 
made it the law. Now the government tends to ignore the law and 
break the law. 
 
The observations are as follows: 
 

(a) any officer or employee of a department of the 
Government of Saskatchewan or Crown agency has wilfully 
or negligently omitted to collect or receive any public 
money belonging to the Crown; 
 

Well there’s cases here in the book that illustrate that point. 
 

(b) any public money was not duly accounted for and paid 
into the appropriate fund; 
 

Well a minister, property management corporation, this morning 
stood right up in his place in this House in the question period 
and said that he hadn’t paid the money into the appropriate fund. 
He had appropriated it to himself, the property management 
corporation. Why is that minister appropriating funds that do not 
belong to him, to himself? 
 
I have dark suspicions of why that minister is doing that. I’m sure 
in due course we’ll be able to examine those suspicions — why 
that minister is doing that. 
 
And also to observe: 
 

(c) any appropriation was exceeded or was applied to a 
purpose or in a manner not authorized by the Legislature; 
 

Well clearly they’ve broken that law, too. 
 

(d) an expenditure was made for which there was no 
authority, or which was not properly vouchered or certified. 
 

There’s a list in the back of this audit report of about 46 of them, 
46. 
 

(e) there has been a deficiency or loss to the Crown through 
the fraud, default or mistake of any person; 
 
(f) a special warrant authorized the payment of public 
money; or 
 
(g) essential records were not maintained, or the rules and 
procedures applied were not sufficient: 
 

There are many examples in this auditor’s report where the rules 
were not sufficient to cover it. 
 

(i) to safeguard and control public money; 
 
(ii) to effectively check the assessment, collection and 
proper allocation of public money; or 
 
(iii) to ensure that expenditures are made only as 
authorized. 

 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1400 
 

The law goes on. The law goes on, Mr. Speaker, The Provincial 
Auditor Act, which we passed in this legislature, which we as the 
lawmakers are sworn to uphold in our oath, sworn to uphold. This 
is the law the government breaks. Under the section entitled, 
general, on page 9 of Appendix I of the auditor’s report it states: 
 

The provincial auditor or the appointed auditor, as the case 
may be, is entitled: 
 
(a) to free access, at all convenient times, to: 

 
(i) all electronic data processing equipment and programs 
and documentation related to the electronic data 
processing equipment; and 
 
(ii) all files, documents and other records relating to the 
accounts; 

 
And it goes on: 
 

. . . of the Government of Saskatchewan, Crown agency, 
Crown-controlled corporation (etc.) . . . and 
 
(b) to require and receive from employees of a department 
of the Government of Saskatchewan, Crown agency, or 
Crown-controlled (agencies) . . . or other person . . . any 
information, reports and explanations that he considers 
necessary for the proper performance of his duties. 
 

That’s the law. 
 
The law has been broken by this Executive Council, supported 
by their back-benchers. It’s been broken. We hope, we hope that 
their back-benchers over there see the folly, see the folly of 
breaking the law which we’re all sworn to uphold in this 
Chamber. The law that we made, this Executive Council breaks 
with impunity. 
 
I want to go on to a further part of my speech, Mr. Speaker. I’ve 
reported to you what the law is, as stated in The Provincial 
Auditor Act. I recommend it as reading to all members across the 
way, because obviously if some of them don’t understand it, 
here’s a chance to become conversant with the law, and those that 
do understand it obviously are skirting the law or breaking the 
law. I don’t know which are which over there, but something has 
to be done, and that’s the purpose of this resolution — to bring 
this subject to a head. 
 
How has this government, as they said in their literature in 1982, 
their solemn promise to the electorate, which no longer . . . the 
electorate no longer has to believe or will believe . . . They said, 
protect taxpayers’ money by ensuring independence for the 
Provincial Auditor. That’s the exact wording of their promises 
right off their campaign literature. How have they done that, Mr. 
Speaker? Or have they done it at all? 
 
I’ve done some review of the finances of the auditor’s 
department, the revenue that the auditor has to work with, and 
the size of the provincial budget. The auditor’s funds, which he 
has to operate on for the year, in 1982 

was 3.1 million; in 1988-89 — that’s last year — it was 2.8 
million. That’s a drop of $275,000 . . . pardon me, $279,000 in 
the funds that the auditor has to examine the records of 
Saskatchewan government, Crowns, and Crown-controlled 
agencies. 
 
During that time, just the provincial budget, not including the 
Crowns — just the provincial budget — has risen. In 1982 it was 
$2.8 billion; in 1988-89 it was $3.9 billion — an increase in the 
provincial budget of $1.1 billion over that period of time, 
whereas the auditor’s funds to control and as act as the watch-dog 
over those funds, and the expenditure and accounting of those 
funds, has been cut by $279,000. 
 
The staff of the auditor’s office, consequently, has been cut in 
that exact period of time from 72 employees to 52 employees, a 
cut of 20 people, whereas the budget they’re supposed to oversee, 
just in the government section, leaving aside the Crowns, has 
increased from 2.8 to $3.9 billion — an increase of $1.1 billion. 
 
This question before the legislature has put the government in a 
position that someone over there has to answer the questions, or 
attempt to answer the questions on behalf of the government. The 
Premier has indicated by his actions quite clearly, as I stated 
before when I spoke into this debate, that the member for 
Kindersley, the Minister of Justice — what an irony, what an 
irony that is — the Minister of Justice will perform as the judge, 
the jury, the prosecutor, and the executioner of the Provincial 
Auditor and the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
 
That’s what the Premier has indicated because the Premier’s not 
risen off his seat on this issue. The Minister of Justice has 
answered the questions, or attempted to answer the questions 
about this whole area of the abuse of the record keeping of the 
people of Saskatchewan as reported by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Clearly, the Premier has taken out a contract on the Provincial 
Auditor. He’s taken out a contract on the Provincial Auditor and 
his report. And the word is: get him, get him. That’s what the 
Premier of this province has done by his very actions in this 
Chamber, carried out by the Minister of Justice. What an irony. 
 
Why? the people ask. Why is the member for Kindersley doing 
this job? Well I suppose it’s, Mr. Speaker, because of his past 
experience making vicious attacks on servants of this legislature. 
In the past he has attacked the provincial Ombudsman, he’s 
attacked the Legislative Counsel, he’s attacked auditors in a 
general way, and specifically he’s attacked this auditor and his 
report here and now. 
 
He is the instrument of the Premier; the Minister of Justice is the 
instrument of the Premier. There can be no escaping the fact that 
the final responsibility lies with the Premier of this province for 
breaking the law. He condones it. He has the Minister of Justice 
act as his executioner, with a contract on the auditor and the 
auditor’s report. 
 
In a parliamentary sense, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is 
a chronic offender. He’s a chronic offender. He’s got the taste for 
attacking officials of this Chamber,   



 
May 26, 1989 

1401 
 

and who knows where it will end? I think the Premier, in a 
perverse sort of way, appreciates having a specialist on hand, and 
because of this the Minister of Justice is now a chronic offender. 
He will attack any civil . . . any public servant from this Chamber 
at any time it’s convenient for him to do so, and will aid his cause 
or the cause of his Premier. 
 
That is a sad thing to have to report. It’s a sad thing to report, and 
it sickens me to have to even suggest that. But the evidence is so 
clear that it cannot be ignored. 
 
A few days ago this same minister, the Minister of Justice, 
suggested that the provincial auditor’s report should be sent to 
the Public Accounts Committee, and he suggested that in the 
minutes of the House on page 1246 on May 19. The minister said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the proper forum by which to call witnesses is 
the Public Accounts Committee. The Public Accounts 
Committee, which is now, I might add, open to the media, 
which it wasn’t prior to 1982 . . . 
 

And I want to deal with that. I didn’t have an opportunity the 
other day, Mr. Speaker, but I’m going to deal with it now. 
 

. . . have the right to call witnesses to deal with this question. 
They can call the Provincial Auditor; they can call anyone 
else they wish, Mr. Speaker. And the members on this side 
of the House are perfectly . . . ready, willing to call anyone 
to that Public Accounts Committee to deal with this 
particular auditor’s report. 
 

Before I deal with the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
members indicated that he wishes to introduce students. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Battleford, is that your 
intention? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Yes, I’d like to ask leave of the House to 
introduce some students in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and 
through you to members of the House, a group of 21 grade 4 and 
5 students from Lawrence School in North Battleford, seated in 
your gallery. I see that they’re accompanied today by their 
teacher Mrs. McLaren, and a couple of chaperons, Pat Squire and 
June Thomson. 
 
I’d like to welcome these people to the Assembly here this 
afternoon, and I’ll be meeting with you out in front on the stairs. 
As soon as you leave, I’ll leave. And I’d like the House to join 
with me in welcoming them here today, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Report of the Provincial Auditor 
(Continued) 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to join with the 
member from The Battlefords in welcoming the students to this 
Chamber. And I know the member for Battleford couldn’t say it 
because it would be political in an introduction, but I feel that I 
can say it. 
 
If there’s one thing I could recommend to students all over the 
province, regardless of their age, required reading should be the 
auditor’s report — the auditor’s report — because they’ll see how 
this province is being run. 
 
The auditor is the watch-dog. He looks over billions of dollars of 
expenditures for the people of Saskatchewan, for the members of 
this Assembly, and he makes a report each year. And this is the 
auditor’s report for 1988, and it’s an indictment of this 
government and how they spent and recorded the expenditure of 
the money of the province and the taxpayers of this province. 
 
I said I wanted to deal with the Provincial Auditor’s . . . or pardon 
me, the Public Accounts Committee and the growth of the Public 
Accounts Committee and the auditor’s position in Saskatchewan. 
 
As an introduction, I read the comments of the member for 
Kindersley when he talked about this, and that this subject should 
be sent to that Public Accounts Committee. 
 
I have in my hand the minutes of the Select Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts and Printing, March 24, 1976. It has in it a 
summary of the growth and development of the Public Accounts 
Committee and the Provincial Auditor. And I must give due 
credit to the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, the Liberal 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, because then he was a 
Liberal. And he’s changed his spots and he’s a Conservative now. 
We don’t know whether that will last, but he’s made a change. 
 
It says here, the minister — or now the Minister of Finance, the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden who was a Liberal, is now a 
Conservative — said as the first chairman, first chairman of the 
new Public Accounts Committee. His statement was as follows: 
 

This is the first Public Accounts Committee since the 
dissolution of the last Legislature . . . 
 

(1100) 
 
Now he’s referring to the 1964 dissolution which caused an 
election to be held and a new government took over in the 
province of Saskatchewan in 1964. The Public Accounts was set 
up so that the opposition is the chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee. A member of the opposition is the chairperson of the 
Public Accounts Committee. The member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden goes on: 
 

  



 
May 26, 1989 

1402 
 

The first Public Accounts Committee met in 1888 (that’s 
quite a while ago) as part of the Territorial Legislative 
system. This Committee continued after the establishment 
of the Province in 1905. 
 

It states how the committee operated, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Committee was open to the public with Cabinet 
Ministers present to defend their departments. The 
Provincial Auditor then was a governmental official 
responsible mainly for the pre-audit function. The 
Committee reviewed the Public Accounts document page by 
page without a systematic review of accounting procedures 
and without the assistance of an independent Provincial 
Auditor’s report. 
 

This is the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden speaking. 
 

The committee was basically a political forum . . . 
 

And how right that was, because I remember in my early years in 
the House the Public Accounts Committee was basically a 
political forum, was even more so in the earlier years. And the 
member goes on to say: 
 

The Committee was basically a political forum where 
government policy, rather than government accounting 
procedures were reviewed. The Legislative Assembly was 
not particularly pleased with this system of review and as a 
result, established a Special Committee in 1963 . . . 
 

Now that was just a while before I arrived in this Chamber, but it 
was established under the CCF/New Democratic government in 
1963 to review the establishment of the Public Accounts 
Committee and the duties of the Provincial Auditor. 
 

This special committee was assisted by Mr. C. B. Koester, 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly (who later became Clerk 
of the House of Commons in Ottawa), senior civil servants, 
and Dr. Norman Ward of the University of Saskatchewan 
. . . The Special Committee examined British and Canadian 
Public Accounts Committees and noticed the presence of an 
independent Auditor who was responsible for post-audit 
(not pre-audit) . . . 
 

But now they’re talking about an independent auditor who is 
responsible for post-audit and the report to parliament, in this 
case to the legislature. 
 

Based on their review of the British and Canadian 
Committees, the Special Committees reported to the 
Saskatchewan Legislature in 1964 that: 
 
1. An independent Provincial Auditor be established who 
would be responsible directly to the Legislative Assembly 
and would ensure that a proper post-audit was conducted. 
 

This is when we had a CCF/New Democratic government in 
Saskatchewan. They set up the committee. Before the 

new system could be inaugurated, an election intervened, an 
election intervened and the government changed. 
 

2. That Public Accounts Committee hold all of its meetings 
in camera with a verbatim transcript to be Tabled . . . 
 

Now here’s where the in camera sittings of the Public Accounts 
Committee occur. And it was held: 
 

. . . in camera so that the Committee’s investigations could 
be frank and thorough without having to pursue the 
sensational issues for the benefit of the press. 
 
3. That the permanent heads and Deputy Ministers rather 
than Cabinet Ministers be witnesses before the Committee. 
The intent of the Committee was to examine not the policy 
of why the expenditures were made, but whether the 
expenditures were made properly with adequate legislative 
authority. 
 

So that was the reason, that was the reason that an independent 
auditor was established. That was the reason the committee met 
in camera. 
 
Prior to that time, we had an auditor was in the direct pay of the 
Executive Council and controlled by the Executive Council. The 
meetings were open to the public. And I might say with regard to 
that, the minister was in the committee rather than the deputy, 
rather than the bureaucratic head of the department or agency. 
 
And what would happen in those days was that the leader of the 
opposition, at that time was Mr. Thatcher, would go into the 
committee just before the newspaper’s deadline in the morning. 
He would make a grandstand on a particular issue in the 
committee. He would get himself a headline for the day, and he 
would leave the committee. So it was a convenient vehicle for 
the leader of the opposition of that time to go into the committee, 
grab himself a headline for the day. 
 
That’s why it was changed to in camera. That’s why the Public 
Accounts Committee was changed to in camera. If the members 
of the Assembly wish to have it out of camera and open to the 
public, that’s fine. It was decided in a committee separate and 
apart from this Chamber. And that’s the way it was decided then, 
and I go along with the decision of the majority. 
 
I have no objection to following the decision of the majority with 
regard to establishing rules with regard to auditor, the Public 
Accounts Committee, the rules of this Chamber. I have no 
problem with that whatsoever. 
 
So that was the growth and development of the Public Accounts 
Committee and the growth of the Provincial Auditor in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say, without 
accountability there is no democratic freedom. Without 
accountability in our system which we have freely chosen, there 
is no democratic freedom. 
 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1403 
 

It has been fully shown that this government is prepared to do the 
following: trample on the rights of another servant of this 
Chamber — the public has a right to have an answer to that. This 
government is prepared to ignore the public’s wishes about 
privatization of Sask Power Corporation — the public has a right 
to know about that. To eliminate agencies such as PURC, the 
public utilities review commission — the public has a right to 
know why the government does these things. And they have a 
right to not believe this government in the future when they give 
written pledges about supporting the democratic institutions of 
this province, because they’ve completely broken them, ignored 
them, or failed to implement them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the rain in Saskatchewan will not wash 
away the stain of abuse on the parliamentary system brought 
about by this government’s gross interference and contempt for 
the office of the Provincial Auditor and his report. All the rain in 
Saskatchewan will not wash that away. It’s there to stay; it’s a 
matter of historic record in this Assembly now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could do some quotations in conclusion of my 
remarks. I was reading one the other day when the clock 
interrupted me, and I’ll conclude reading that. “Lutz taking right 
road.”, and this is the Star-Phoenix, February 10, editorial page, 
1989: 
 

Good for Provincial Auditor Willard Lutz. Demands for 
retractions and apologies from government MLAs are not 
going to make him change his mind about the public’s right 
to know how the money it has invested in certain 
Crown-controlled companies is being managed. 
 
While Lutz earned respect from Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
the whining government back-benchers on the legislature’s 
Public Accounts Committee only harmed their credibility 
and demonstrated a lack of political astuteness by failing to 
latch onto this popular issue. 
 

This is the Star-Phoenix editorial page in February of this year. 
 
The Financial Post, or pardon me, The Globe and Mail from 
outside of Saskatchewan, has this to say in part — the initial 
paragraphs have been quoted a number of times — now I’ll only 
quote in the end part of the editorial from The Globe and Mail, 
May 22 of this year: 
 

It is commonplace that government auditors turn up 
irritating, embarrassing things in the course of their work. It 
is routine that they should remonstrate strongly, if 
necessary, with the government for slipshod handling of 
public money and failure to ensure that the taxpayer got 
value for it. 
 
It is rather less common for an auditor to censure a 
government for actually preventing him from getting at the 
books, thereby evading its obligation in law to be financially 
accountable. Mr. Lutz has found it necessary to take the 
government and its major Crown corporations to task for its 
evasive 

tactics. Protesting that he could not effectively carry out his 
duties, Mr. Lutz reported that there were a number of cases 
in which he could not get information he was entitled to 
receive. 
 
The shameful outcome has been that Mr. Lutz is obliged to 
enter his own estimates of the amount of public spending in 
the province, for want of any summary financial statements. 
He calculated that government departments and Crown 
corporations employed about 35,000 people in 1988 and 
spent about $6.9 billion. 
 

This is the kind of figures we’re dealing with — 35,000 people 
employed, $6.9 billion of budget. 
 

Among the major devices by which the government appears 
to have tried to throw the auditor off the scent has been its 
increasing use of private auditors to check Crown 
corporations. He reports that this has allowed him to see 
only 50 per cent of the expenditures from the public purse 
in 1988, compared with 90 per cent the previous year. He 
has run up against straight denials of access to information 
needed to check the private auditors’ work. The image that 
emerges is of a shabby, almost furtive government. 
 

That’s from The Globe and Mail, May 22 of this year. 
 
A further item from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix editorial page, 
and I’ll only read a couple of paragraphs on this one, Mr. 
Speaker, because it’s available to the public. It’s May 23, 1989. 
It reads as follows: 
 

Devine must act. It’s time for the Premier to step forward 
and tell government ministers and officials to co-operate 
with the Provincial Auditor, Willard Lutz. 
 

Going on to a third paragraph: 
 

In his 1988 report, Lutz said he can no longer effectively do 
his job because the government isn’t obeying its own laws. 
It is denying him access to information he has a right to see. 
 

And it concludes with the final paragraph: 
 

The premier will have to make some attempt to temper the 
arrogance of government ministers and Crown officials. 
Otherwise, the public may well ask, “What has the 
government to hide?” 
 

That’s a good question. I’m sure the public is asking that 
question. I want to say in final conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that I have had a copy of the auditor’s report in my constituency 
office in Saskatoon this week, and there will continue to be a 
copy of the auditor’s report for 1988 in my constituency office 
for my constituents to look at. I hope they avail themselves of 
that opportunity of checking that auditor’s report because for 
every taxpayer of Saskatchewan that should be required reading. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1404 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
make a brief intervention in this debate. I want to begin by saying 
that it’s not a debate that any serious member of this legislature 
wants to have take place in this House, but on the other hand, Mr. 
Speaker, any serious member of this legislature, seeing what has 
occurred with regard to the Provincial Auditor and with regard to 
what is in the Provincial Auditor’s report, and with the actions 
and the inactions of this government, I think, ought to feel 
obligated to speak in this debate on behalf of the constituents that 
he or she represents, and on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who 
continue to believe in a strong democratic process and in the 
adequate and effective functioning of this legislature to which 
they elect representatives. 
 
(1115) 
 
Now I want to speak on this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
I believe that our parliamentary system of government is good. 
It’s a good system of government but it’s a very fragile system 
which must be defended when it is attacked. Now, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, members before me, the evidence of the auditor’s report 
and press reports clearly show that in this province this system of 
parliamentary government is indeed under attack in a very 
serious way. The motion that we’re considering deals with this 
government’s interference with the ability of the Provincial 
Auditor to carry out his role. 
 
Now in the process of my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want 
to talk about that, but one of the key things I want to talk about 
later on in what I have to say is to show to the House, and put on 
the record, some evidence which will show that the Premier of 
this province was directly involved in withholding information 
from the Provincial Auditor. That is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very 
damning information which the public of Saskatchewan ought to 
know, and will know. 
 
I think the Premier knows that. In fact, I know he knows that, 
because he was involved. And that’s one of the reasons, as my 
colleague from Saskatoon just finished saying, why he set up the 
Minister of Justice to try to deflect the issue of the cover-up and 
the interference by doing a direct attack on the Provincial 
Auditor. And it’s not working. I don’t know what their next ploy 
is going to be, but surely by now they must be understanding that 
it is not working. 
 
Now what we have here in this interference with a very important 
official of this Legislative Assembly is not an isolated situation 
when it comes to the way that this government operates. And I 
want to give you some examples and relate them to the auditor’s 
report to indicate that it is not an isolated . . . it’s a very deliberate 
strategy of the government of the day to withhold information 
and not allow the opportunity or provide the opportunity for an 
adequate scrutiny of the things that the government does. 
 
We have had cases, Mr.Deputy Speaker, where the government 
has not provided answers in the legislature, never mind going 
through an officer of the legislature. This legislature, through that 
Chair that you occupy right 

now, has in the past ordered orders for return. In some cases it 
has taken two years for the government to provide answers for 
those orders for return even though this legislature itself ordered 
them to be coming forward. That’s another example which is just 
like the interference with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
We have cases where questions are asked of ministers and they 
refuse to answer them in this Legislative Assembly. They don’t 
address the question because they don’t want the answers 
provided, because they know that there has been wrongdoing on 
the part of members of the executive branch, the cabinet. They 
know that there has been wrongdoing on the part of the 
government as a whole, and so therefore they don’t want to 
provide the answers so that the people of Saskatchewan would 
know what the wrongdoing is. 
 
Another example which is like the interference we see in this 
motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the refusal by this government to 
table the 1986-87 annual Public Accounts for months and months 
and months beyond the period of time when it normally would 
have been tabled. In each of these cases there is not any doubt in 
my mind that we saw a very serious attempt by the government 
to withhold information, and the refusal to be accountable to this 
legislature, and therefore to the people of Saskatchewan who 
elected them. 
 
There are other major examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, such as the 
spending of vast amounts, tens of millions of dollars, in 1987 by 
special warrant without the introduction of a budget. 
 
Now that’s all part of the misappropriation of public money. All 
of that has led to the attempt by the government today, and in 
recent weeks and months, to interfere with the auditor, because 
they know that if the auditor had all of the information that he 
should have to fulfil his role, the auditor’s report would be even 
worse than what we see in this report that’s before us now. 
 
And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the most recent example of 
this government’s breaking its own law and interfering with the 
due process of the law is the example of advertising the 
SaskEnergy share thing without having a prospectus issued in 
advance, to the point where the Securities Commission had to 
intervene and had to tell the government that it was in 
contravention of its law, in the same way as the government is in 
contravention of its law when it refuses to provide information to 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now faced with that, any self-respecting and honourable 
government and ministers would say, well, gee, we’ve got to deal 
with the problem; this is wrong. But what do they do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? They don’t say that. They say, well we’re going to 
change the law to suit ourselves, and we’re going to pass an order 
in council to exempt the government from the requirements of 
the Securities Commission. 
 
Now if you were a business person, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
maybe you are — I know you’re a farmer — surely you would 
not expect the government to pass an order in council exempting 
you. Or if it was my case — it’s unfair   



 
May 26, 1989 

1405 
 

to use you as an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker — or any member 
of this House, the small-business person in Saskatchewan 
follows the law, lives by the law, operates under the law. He or 
she does not get exempted because somehow it’s inconvenient. 
 
But this Minister of Justice and this Premier decide that they can 
do that. And is it any wonder that we have had editorials from 
one end of this country to the other, not just in the province of 
Saskatchewan now, condemning the government for its actions, 
condemning the government for its interference with the 
Provincial Auditor. Editorials that say things like the one in the 
Star-Phoenix of two days ago which said: 
 

 For the government to cavalierly override the securities 
commission (and) write its own rules to suit its own share 
offering is ludicrous. 
 

That’s not any different than what the government has done with 
orders for return, which it refused to table for the longest period 
of time. That’s not any different than the government passing 
minutes — which I will talk about in a little while — at boards 
of a Crown corporation, saying that the officials of that Crown 
corporation ought not to provide information to the Provincial 
Auditor which he was requiring and which he had asked for. 
 
Blatant, deliberate, premeditated interference, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And so that’s why this motion is here. And that’s why 
this debate is taking place, a debate that’s taking some time and 
will take some more time, because it is an issue that no member 
of this House, either on the government side or on the opposition 
side, should take lightly. It is the very integrity of this institution 
that’s at stake here. It’s the very integrity of democratic 
parliamentary government that’s at stake here. 
 
And for the members of the government side, the back-benchers, 
to ignore that is absolutely irresponsible — absolutely 
irresponsible. I say to members who are not on the front benches 
in the Executive Council on the government side of the House, 
that they ought to do their job. And they ought to say to their 
cabinet ministers, enough is enough, that the cabinet has to be 
accountable, because it’s hurting each and every one of them in 
their constituencies. And never mind that, it’s hurting the way 
this government, through this legislature, can be accountable to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so we have this motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which states: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

That is a very serious motion, but it’s not here for no reason at 
all. 
 

So why are we here debating this serious motion of privilege? 
Why are we here debating this serious motion? We are here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because without the ability to address the issues 
of the people of Saskatchewan, this legislature cannot function 
effectively. Without appropriate information provided as 
required, and when required, this legislature cannot hold the 
government accountable for the expenditure of the taxpayers’ 
dollar. 
 
Government becomes simply government by Executive Council 
or government by cabinet, and parliamentary accountability is 
destroyed and the interests and the concerns of the citizens are 
ignored. The political interests then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
cabinet become the only consideration of the government, and I 
am sorry to say that’s the kind of situation we face in 
Saskatchewan today, where the political interests of the cabinet 
have become more important than the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To carry out its responsibility, this legislature has certain officers 
and committees who have been provided the powers to get 
information on government expenditures, on whether 
government is acting within the laws passed by this legislature, 
and whether ministers have used their positions for personal 
benefit or gain or for that of friends and relatives or others as 
individuals or corporations or organizations. 
 
When the functioning of these officers of committees is 
interfered with by officials of government acting on behalf of the 
Premier or the cabinet, or by cabinet ministers themselves, as has 
been the case in the most recent sense with the statements of the 
Minister of Justice, then I think we have a very serious problem, 
Mr. Speaker. The legislature itself then has been obstructed. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even more important, the 
people of Saskatchewan are the victims. Their interests are not 
served, their tax dollars are not accounted for, and their future is 
put at risk. 
 
The Report of the Provincial Auditor shows that this government 
has violated the taxpayer in a very serious way. It has obstructed 
the work of a key officer of this legislature. It has something that 
it is trying to hide. This government is faced with a damning 
indictment of its waste and mismanagement, and I even would 
go so far as to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, its corruption. 
 
Now faced with all of this, does the Premier call his cabinet 
ministers to a cabinet meeting for the purposes of addressing the 
situation that faces him as the chairman of the Executive Council, 
and does he demand an explanation? Does he direct that the 
problems be corrected? Does he show the leadership that is surely 
required in this situation? Does he do all those things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? No. No, he doesn’t. He calls his Minister of Justice and 
directs him to shoot the messenger. That is highly irresponsible. 
 
I think that the statement made by . . . in the editorial of the 
Star-Phoenix on May 23, 1989 is a very relevant statement, when 
it says that it’s time, and I quote, Mr.   



 
May 26, 1989 

1406 
 

Deputy Speaker: 
 

It’s time for Premier Grant Devine to step forward and tell 
government ministers and officials to co-operate with 
provincial auditor Willard Lutz. 
 

That’s what the editorial says. But I know why the Premier has 
not done that — because he is part of that interference. He has 
been involved directly in that interference. 
 
And in conclusion, the editorial goes to say that: 
 

The premier will have to make some attempt to temper the 
arrogance of government ministers and Crown officials. 
Otherwise, the public may well ask, “What has the 
government (got) to hide?” 
 

And I ask and my colleagues ask and people in Saskatchewan 
ask: what has the government to hide? The question has to be 
asked. 
 
(1130) 
 
So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not only an indictment 
of the government’s waste and mismanagement — it’s that, but 
it’s not only that — it is also an indictment of the lack of 
leadership of the present Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here’s a man who as Premier has time to do many other things. 
Oh, he can take a month and take a little junket to the Far East 
and say some things that have got the government into trouble. 
He’s got time to defend the federal budget even though it’s 
devastating for the province of Saskatchewan. He can’t find 
anything wrong with it. He says to the Prime Minister, you’re 
doing the right thing. Put it to the province of Saskatchewan, I 
don’t care, he says. 
 
He’s got time to defend the Prime Minister at every turn, even 
when the Prime Minister is wrong, but he doesn’t have time to 
call his cabinet ministers in and say that in light of the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, you’ve got to clean up your act. He’s only got 
time to tell his Minister of Justice: destroy the Provincial 
Auditor! 
 
There’s no time and there’s no desire to clean up his own 
government which has been for some time totally and completely 
out of control. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are not the kinds of things that 
any member should say in this legislature lightly. And I don’t say 
them lightly. I don’t think you’ve heard me say these kinds of 
things that often. So when we choose to say them, there is good 
reason. 
 
I am concerned about what I see happening out there among these 
front benches of this government. I wasn’t elected to allow this 
type of thing to happen without doing my part in trying to do 
something about it. That’s not what I was elected for. None of us 
were elected for that, neither the members of the government side 
nor the members of the opposition side. 
 
And so I say again to the members of the government that I 

sincerely hope that, at least in their caucus, they’re asking 
questions and they’re applying pressure and they’re demanding 
some answers. 
 
Now maybe it’s too much to expect of members of the back 
bench on the government side to stand up in this House and say 
out loud on the record, Mr. Premier, get your act together, or, do 
something about making sure that the auditor gets his report. 
Maybe that’s too much to ask of government members. I 
understand that. But in caucus at least they could apply the 
pressure on the Premier and the cabinet, on behalf of their 
constituencies, to get those ministers to be responsible and 
accountable. 
 
Well what are some of the facts here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
show that this is not an issue that should be taken lightly. Well 
the facts are that the government itself, on May 17, tabled in this 
legislature a document which is a searing indictment of its 
contempt for the legislative process of this province and for the 
people of Saskatchewan. It was, of course, the annual Report of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Now I guess it’s natural, maybe, I’m not totally convinced, but 
some people will suggest that it’s natural for the Provincial 
Auditor and the government of the day to be at odds from time 
to time. Maybe that’s part of the role of the public watch-dog. 
But I think of very few, if any, incidents — in fact I can’t 
remember any — where it has reached the proportion that we see 
in this Provincial Auditor’s report. Never before have I seen a 
situation where an officer of the Legislative Assembly has met 
with such solid wall of non-co-operation and evasion — never. 
I’m not sure that it has happened in most parts of Canada. 
 
I just refer you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to Mr. Lutz’s — that’s the 
auditor’s statement in section 2.20 of the report in which he says 
the following: 
 

The Provincial Auditor can no longer effectively serve the 
Assembly because he now sees the financial transactions for 
(only) about 50 per cent of the public spending; 
 

The government has decided that it needs to account for only 50 
per cent of the public spending, and the other 50 per cent it 
doesn’t have to account for. 
 
He also says he: 
 

. . . can no longer effectively serve the Assembly because 
when reliance on an appointed auditor is not justified, it is 
no longer possible to carry out the work not done by the 
appointed auditor; 
 

Then he went on further to say: 
 

I am being denied access to information. 
 

That’s unprecedented in the province of Saskatchewan, 
irregardless of which government has governed here before this 
particular government with this particular Premier. 
 
Now those items taken together can lead to only one   



 
May 26, 1989 

1407 
 

conclusion, and that is that this government has embarked on a 
concerted effort to hide from the auditor, and thus from the 
taxpayers of this province, its use of the taxpayers’ money. Now 
some would say, and I would confirm that, that this should not 
come as a surprise. Everything that the official opposition has 
raised, and will raise in the House, points toward a government 
which is wasteful, disorganized, and some would even suggest, 
corrupt. 
 
Mr. Lutz suggests that the government is in violation of the law 
by failing to provide adequate information to his office, and 
certainly all the evidence that we have shows that to be the case. 
And that’s why this motion is here, that’s why it is being debated, 
and that’s why it’s getting so much attention. The issue is that 
this government is in direct contravention of all of the 
conventions and traditions which have allowed our democratic 
system to survive through the years. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is an officer of the Legislative Assembly, 
and as such he reports to the Assembly, and members of the 
Executive Council are accountable to him, and not the other way 
around. And this has been the case because of the need for an 
independent evaluation of how the government spends its money. 
 
Taxpayers should have, must have, access to such an independent 
evaluation. And when members of Executive Council or 
high-placed civil servants take steps to impede that full and 
complete access, they are putting themselves above the law, and 
are more definitely putting themselves above the will of the 
people and the prerogatives of the elected representatives of the 
people. 
 
The people who run Crown investments corporation or the 
property management corporation or SaskTel have no mandate 
to deny this access to information. If they have been instructed to 
do so by their appropriate minister, then that minister is doing so 
without the authority of this legislature, which has the ultimate 
authority over how the provisions of The Provincial Auditor Act 
are carried out. 
 
These actions by the government to prevent the auditor from 
doing his job are not isolated. They’re part of a pattern of this 
government to circumvent and, yes, even abuse the democratic 
process in this province. 
 
We see that even with the legislative rules debate which is before 
this Assembly as well, this government’s attempting to 
unilaterally force through undemocratic legislation to muzzle the 
actions of the official opposition. 
 
And when government muzzles the opposition, it also muzzles 
the public. It denies the public the right to know how government 
is looking after the public’s business. 
 
I find it highly ironic that this government can have the gall to 
paint itself on the one hand as a defender of democracy, while at 
the same time telling the people of this province that how 
taxpayers’ dollars are spent are none of their business. 
 
This is an issue that must be taken seriously. It goes to the heart 
of what a government is and what a government 

should be. It defines the utter contempt that the current 
government shows for the people of this province and the utter 
arrogance with which it continues to operate. And that is why the 
legislature is debating this privilege motion today, and has been 
for several days. 
 
But one would have hoped that the Minister of Justice would be 
able to rise above partisan politics on this occasion and give this 
matter the full and impartial consideration that it deserves. What 
did he do instead? Instead he chose to cover up the government’s 
waste and mismanagement and incompetence by attempting to 
destroy the Provincial Auditor. The words of the Provincial 
Auditor’s report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ring very true, and I quote 
again from the auditor’s report when he says, “Freedom from 
public scrutiny provides the ability to work in secrecy.” 
 
This government has been working in secrecy. The Premier and 
this government betrays and misleads the public. They can’t be 
trusted with anything they say. And if government had nothing 
to hide, why would information be kept from the Provincial 
Auditor, I ask? Why? Why would they let themselves get into 
this great political difficulty if they had nothing to hide? The only 
conclusion one can draw is that there is a great deal that this 
government is hiding. 
 
If the Premier believes that government spending of taxpayers’ 
dollars can stand up to public scrutiny, why has he refused to act, 
and why has he designated his Minister of Justice to be the hit 
man to attack an officer of the legislature? is the question I would 
like answered. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said that this government refuses to allow 
this issue to come to a conclusion. Some time ago, earlier when 
this issue arose, the Premier stood in his place and he said he 
would like this issue referred to a committee of the legislature. 
Now we say it ought to be dealt with here. It’s a matter of 
privilege and it’s a question that should be dealt with the 
legislature here. The Premier said, well we’ll suspend all the 
other work in the Public Accounts Committee, and we’ll let this 
latest report of the Provincial Auditor be considered in the Public 
Accounts Committee now. 
 
Well obviously he’s either not talking to his members on the 
Public Accounts Committee or he has no control over them any 
more. Because yesterday in that Public Accounts Committee, do 
you think that the Conservative members allowed the 
consideration of this 1988 Provincial Auditor’s report? No. The 
Conservative members in committee chose to filibuster the 
committee. 
 

(The) Progressive Conservative members of the public 
accounts committee are preventing Provincial Auditor 
Willard Lutz’s highly critical (1987-88) report from being 
examined. 
 

It says in the Leader-Post of May 26, 1989, which is today — 
and the interesting thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to show how 
blatant it all is, they don’t even use their own questions. They 
have decided to use the questions that have been provided in 
writing to the Provincial Auditor and to the committee by 
members of the opposition on that committee, and they’ve stalled 
a whole day’s work. 
 
  



 
May 26, 1989 

1408 
 

And when a motion was put into the committee to go 
immediately to the auditor’s report, which is the one we’re 
talking about here, the Conservative members of the committee 
refused to let that motion be dealt with. In fact one of the 
members, the member from Rosthern, stated to the press that they 
are probably not going allow that to happen. They continue to 
hide from this issue. They continue to refuse to allow it to be 
discussed. 
 
Now I come then to why is the Premier so concerned about 
making sure that the auditor was discredited. Why? There had to 
be a reason. Very unusual thing for any premier to do. Well I say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Premier is concerned and so 
determined because he is directly implicated in the cover-up in 
the interference that’s taken place. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the Report of the Provincial 
Auditor, page 11. The public who may interested should look at 
this. It says in that report, and I’m going to quote it so that it’s 
clear what it says. On point 2.34, it says: 
 

As reported in my 1987 annual report, on September 17, 
1987, the Minutes of the Board of Directors of the Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan (C.I.C.) 
contained the following: 
 

Here’s the minute: 
 

The Board confirmed their direction to CMB (Crown 
Management Board) Management to not release any 
information to the Provincial Auditor pending further 
discussions among the Board Members. 
 

This was a minute passed by the board of this Crown 
Management Board, more commonly known as Crown 
investments corporation. The auditor went on to say that: 
 

In my opinion, this action by the Executive is an interference 
with an Officer of the Assembly. 
 

And he went on further to say: 
 

In addition, on April 12, 1988, my officials were refused 
access to the minutes of the Board of Directors of C.I.C. 
Therefore, I have not seen any minutes of C.I.C. issued since 
its November 12, 1987 Board meeting. 
 

(1145) 
 
Now that’s what the Provincial Auditor reports. 
 
And I want now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to refer you to the annual 
report of the Crown Management Board of Saskatchewan, which 
is the annual report which this report by the Provincial Auditor 
speaks of. 
 
Who is on this board of the Crown investment corporation, the 
Crown Management Board, when this minute is passed? Well 
here are the board members. The chairman, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. 
Wolfgang Wolff; a member of the board is Mr. Harold Lane, 
former MLA for the Conservative Party, Saskatoon. There are 
two other 

people, a Frank Proto of Edmonton and Garnet Wells of 
Edmonton. 
 
Now let’s put those aside and let’s see who else is on this Crown 
Management Board, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The vice-chairman of this Crown Management Board (I 
read from the report now so that I cannot be called out of 
order) vice-chairman Hon. Grant Devine, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan; the Hon. Eric Berntson, the minister 
responsible; the Hon. Bob Andrew, the Minister of Justice; 
(I’m reading from the report; the Speaker knows that) the 
Hon. Gary Lane, the Minister of Finance, and the Hon. 
Graham Taylor, the Minister of Privatization. 
 

Now that it a very interesting collection of people. These are the 
key players, Mr. Speaker, in the privatization initiatives of this 
government. This is the board that passed the minute at a board 
meeting on September 17, 1987, which confirmed their direction 
of the Crown Management Board not to provide the minutes to 
the Provincial Auditor. And the Premier is vice-chairman of that 
board, and the Premier is directly involved in interfering with the 
work of the Provincial Auditor. And that’s why he set up his 
Minister of Justice to try to destroy the Provincial Auditor 
because he personally has something to hide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what role does the Minister of Finance play in this? 
I’ll tell you what role he plays in this, because the Minister of 
Justice said in this House in question period that the three people 
involved in negotiating with the Provincial Auditor to try to 
squeeze him out were one Larry Kyle, lawyer for the Crown 
Management Board, of which the Deputy Premier is responsible. 
He’s a member of the board. Wolfgang Wolff, who’s the 
chairman of the board, and the chief of staff of the Minister of 
Finance. They were all involved in this exercise which was trying 
to get rid of the Provincial Auditor because he was being honest 
in doing his work. All of those people are members of the board 
of directors when the minute was passed refusing information to 
go to the Provincial Auditor, which he required to do his work. 
 
There can be, in light of that evidence, Mr. Speaker, no doubt at 
all that the implications of all this go beyond any one minister. 
They go directly to the office of the Premier, as the vice-chairman 
of this Crown Management Board which passed this motion. 
 
It’s no wonder that the Premier has been ducking the questions 
in this House, and that he’s instructed the Minister of Justice to 
do his dirty work for him because he’s afraid he’s going to get 
caught. 
 
Now there’s some hypocrisy in all this as well, Mr. Speaker, 
because the Minister of Justice was the man who for some time 
in previous years claimed about how important it was for the 
Provincial Auditor to be independent. 
 
I refer you, Mr. Speaker, to the minutes of Hansard, April 28, 
1980 in which the Minister of Justice said, and I quote. He was 
asking the question; in fact he was asking it of me back in 1980. 
He said: 
 

  



 
May 26, 1989 

1409 
 

 It relates to the whole question of the auditor having a 
perception of being an independent person, and his office 
being independent, which I think is very important. 
 

And then he was concerned about the authority of the Provincial 
Auditor, and he said that further: 
 

Does the provincial auditor in this province conduct audits 
on all departments of government and all Crown 
corporations? 
 

He was concerned then, whether the Provincial Auditor did an 
audit of Crown corporations. He’s not concerned any more 
because the government doesn’t let him do that any more. At that 
time he had a strong opinion about that, and he said the 
following: 
 

 . . . when the cabinet or the board of a Crown corporation 
can unilaterally say, well, now we don’t want the provincial 
auditor on this one. We are going to get another accounting 
firm to do that for us. Now surely that should be a decision 
of the provincial auditor, not a decision of the cabinet. 
 

If that was true in 1980, Mr. Speaker, why would the Minister of 
Justice not believe it to be true in 1989, and be part of removing 
from the Provincial Auditor the authority to do these kinds of 
things? 
 
He went even further to say: 
 

 . . . should it not be the provincial auditor’s decision as to 
whether he wants to farm something out. If he doesn’t have 
enough staff that he, in fact, arranges for the accounting firm 
or the auditing firm as opposed to the government? It seems 
to me that what you are saying is, that if we have problems 
in the given Crown corporation, the provincial auditor 
should zero in on it in his provincial auditor’s report. This is 
not necessarily the case with a firm of accountants being 
hired. You can circumvent the harsh words that might come 
down on you from the provincial auditor. 
 
 

Well having said all that, and making it very clear, he was part 
and parcel to removing the role of the Provincial Auditor from 
having anything to do with reporting on Crown corporations, 
even to the point of being part of a board of directors that passed 
a minute to prevent information being provided to the Provincial 
Auditor when he required it. And that’s the hypocrisy, Mr. 
Chairman, and that’s why, if the Premier had at least looked 
carefully at what he was doing, he picked the wrong person to be 
his hit man in this situation. 
 
Something seems to have changed. I’ll tell you what has changed 
as I conclude my remarks. What has changed is that this 
government has set out on a privatization agenda in which there 
have been special deals that have been made which the 
government doesn’t want disclosed, in which there have been 
under-the-table deals which the government does not want 
disclosed. If that was not the case, why would they be hiding this 
information? Things were being done which government did not 
want 

debated in the legislature. Secrecy was the order of the day, and 
the public was to be kept in the dark. 
 
I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that pay-offs have been taking place in 
some form or another, and the friends of PC Party were being 
rewarded. Irregularities were taking place everywhere, and that’s 
why we have this attempted cover-up. The government decided 
that the auditor better not get all of the information or it would be 
in deep trouble. And so the cover-up began. And the irony of it 
all is that the government got into political trouble anyway — 
very serious political trouble. 
 
And so as we debate this very serious motion, it’s a very 
revealing but sad commentary on the mismanagement and the 
wrong-headed priorities of this government. And to even 
consider what’s been happening in this session, it’s important to 
note who sets the order of business of this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. You don’t. The opposition doesn’t. The government 
does. Who calls the Bills for debate in here? The government 
does. Who calls the estimates for consideration in Committee of 
Finance? The government does. We are now — is it 42nd or 43rd 
day of the sitting of this House? and we’ve passed two Bills, two 
interim supply Bills. And other than Bill 1, The Public 
Participation Bill, the privatization Bill; Bill 20, the sell-off of 
the potash corporation; and the Bills dealing with the 
privatization of SaskPower, this government has not been calling 
any legislation for debate in this House. Second readings of other 
Bills, other than the privatization Bills, have not been called here 
since April 14. That tells you something about the priorities of 
this government in dealing with the interests of the people who 
elected us here to deal with them. 
 
In budget the government announced legislation to protect the 
ozone layer, I say to the Minister of the Environment; it 
announced legislation to deal with the debt crisis on farms; it 
announced legislation to provide badly needed relief for small 
business. On day 43, none of that legislation is yet introduced in 
this House. No notice has been given. Well maybe it has been in 
the last day or two and I have not seen it, but up until then it had 
not been. 
 
The government sets the agenda of this legislature, has called 
only two estimates, that of Urban Affairs and Rural 
Development. And the last time that estimates were considered 
in this House and called to this committee was April 13 of 1989, 
because the government has refused to call them forward. Today 
is May 26; that’s a long time. The question, Mr. Speaker, is, why? 
And I think that the auditor’s report provides the answer. 
 
The government, this government, does not care about the 
people’s business. It does not care about the interests of the 
public of Saskatchewan. It does not have any respect for the 
functioning of this legislature. It doesn’t believe that it has the 
obligation to respect and follow the laws of this province, just 
like you and I or any citizens of Saskatchewan who we represent 
here. This Premier is prepared to say that his government is above 
the law, and that is the view that he and his colleagues over there 
have adopted. And that’s why this motion of privilege is here, 
because any legislature in a democratic nation or province should 
not allow any government to put itself   



 
May 26, 1989 

1410 
 

above the law. 
 
No officer of this legislature can do the work that that officer is 
mandated to do if it is interfered with by the Executive Council. 
And that’s why I am here speaking on this motion, outlining the 
things that I have said, pointed out how the Premier has been 
directly and personally involved through being a member of the 
Crown investments corporation board, involved in preventing 
information from being provided to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Any member, either on the government side or on the opposition 
side, who does not believe that this is a question of privilege, is 
not doing his or her job and is not carrying out their responsibility 
and the oath that we took when we signed the register with our 
hand on the Bible and indicated how we were going to carry out 
our responsibilities here. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say to you that I do not take 
what I have said lightly; neither have any of my colleagues. And 
I only hope that members opposite, deep down in their 
conscience, will once and for all sit back, take a look at what’s 
happening with this government and in this session, and 
reconsider this wrong-headed strategy that they have employed, 
and try to put some pressure on their Premier to finally take 
charge and do something about it and do the kind of things that 
any Premier ought to be doing, and that is, govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
prefer to be standing in my place today, talking about some of 
the issues which are affecting the people of this province on a 
broader scale. What I’d like to be talking about, Mr. Speaker, 
rather than this motion, is the issues that the government has 
indicated that they want to talk about during the course of the 
time when the bells were ringing. 
 
They said to us, the Premier said to us, they said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the Deputy Premier said and the cabinet members 
and the MLAs said, let’s get back to work. Stop the bells ringing, 
come back to the Legislative Assembly, and let’s deal with the 
business of the province of Saskatchewan. Let’s talk about the 
farm issues; let’s deal with Bills that will improve our health care 
system, rather than gut the health care system; let’s deal with 
Bills which will enhance our education system; let’s deal with 
Bills that will relieve the tax pressure and tax burden on the 
people, the working people and the small-business community of 
this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been back for three weeks now in this 
Assembly and we have not addressed one of those issues. This 
government, on the other hand, has gone from one crisis, which 
they’ve caused, to another crisis, and it’s a crisis situation of their 
own making. 
 
We’re debating here this morning a special order, a motion that 
has emanated from what the Speaker himself has deemed as a 
breach of privilege in this Assembly, from a comment made by 
. . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. As I mentioned in 
my remarks, I left it up to the House to decide. I did not say it 
was. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — You’re correct, Mr. Speaker. You’ve 
established that there’s a prima facie case of breach of privilege, 
and I stand corrected. 
 
But what we’re doing here, on day number 44 of this Assembly, 
is not debating the real issues of the province of Saskatchewan 
that pertain to working people in this province and small 
business. We are debating the real issue of the government’s 
record, the fact they’ve been mismanaging the province’s 
finances, the fact they’ve been wasting millions of dollars. And 
the auditor’s report has been a searing indictment and a 
confirmation of all of the things that have been said around this 
province with regard to their dismal record with regard to 
finances. 
 
(1200) 
 
We are debating, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, a motion, and 
I’ll read it out: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his Legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
Statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the role of a government is threefold as I see it. The 
role of a government is to pass laws and follow the laws that they 
pass. Secondly, their role is to raise money and to outline and 
through a budget process, how they will spend that money and 
implement policies and programs that are directly related thereto. 
But they also, Mr. Speaker, have to be accountable and 
responsible for those actions. That’s the third role of government. 
 
And we have seen, as a result of the auditor’s report, that the 
government, the Conservative government opposite, have broken 
the laws. They have not followed the laws that they’ve passed 
themselves. They have not been accountable to the people of this 
province, to the Legislative Assembly, for the expenditures that 
they’ve made, the taxpayers’ dollars that they’ve raised, and the 
taxpayers’ dollars they’ve spent. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, they have not shown any leadership in 
any of those areas. Rather than look at the auditor’s report, the 
damning indictment of their incompetence and their waste and 
their mismanagement and the breaking of their own rules, and 
responding to it in a positive way; rather than do that, rather than 
say to the auditor, yes, we’ve got some problems here, let’s look 
at the problems, let’s try and resolve them; rather than do that or 
even rather than saying, well, we’re defending the policies that 
we’re putting forward because our policies are right; rather than 
choosing one of those two options, they’ve chosen instead, Mr. 
Speaker, to attack the auditor in a personal way. The member 
from Kindersley has come in this Assembly and accused the 
auditor of   



 
May 26, 1989 

1411 
 

impropriety and has failed to follow through with any evidence. 
 
And I’d like to just spend some time on that issue in a few 
moments, Mr. Speaker. Before I get there, I want to say that we 
in this Legislative Assembly have witnessed the provincial 
government, the Conservative government, break promise after 
promise. 
 
They promised to eliminate the gas tax and never reintroduce the 
gas tax. And now we not only have a reintroduction of the gas 
tax but an increase of 40 per cent. 
 
They promised to eliminate the sales tax of 5 per cent. And I 
suppose they’ve eliminated the 5 per cent sales tax, because now 
it’s 7 per cent. But rather than eliminate it, they increased it by 
40 per cent to 7 per cent. 
 
They also promised to reduce personal income tax by 10 per cent, 
but instead they’ve increased the personal income tax burden of 
the taxpayers of this province by over 100 per cent. 
 
They also, Mr. Speaker, promised to balance the budget that we 
have seen in eight consecutive budgets put forward, but they have 
not balanced any of the budgets. In fact, they’ve run up the 
largest, fastest-growing operating deficit in western Canada. 
 
We have witnessed as well the government selling off profitable 
Crown corporations after they promised not to sell them off, but 
in fact to improve the corporate sector in this province. We’ve 
seen the sell-off of the profitable corporation of Saskoil. We’ve 
seen the sell-off of Sask Minerals, the computer utility, to name 
a few. 
 
And now we’re seeing, contrary to their commitment to the 
people of this province, the sell-off of public utilities such as 
SaskEnergy and SGI. And they’re also selling off a very 
profitable corporation, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
And now in this last week we have witnessed, Mr. Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government of this province breaking 
their own laws regarding the marketing of SaskEnergy shares. 
They broke the law by disregarding that law. What has to happen 
in this province is you have to issue a prospectus before you can 
advertise. They’ve been advertising across the province. And 
rather than to follow their own laws, they’ve changed them 
retroactively. 
 
And this comes immediately following a scathing report, as 
we’re talking about today, of the auditor on the government’s 
record in terms of expenditures and in terms of breaking their 
laws, which have applied. And our colleagues, the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount and Regina North East, outlined in detail 
how this government and how often this government has broken 
the law over the last fiscal year. The member from Saskatoon 
Westmount went on at length about the 45 to 50 different times 
the government has broken the law, the laws of this province that 
they were responsible for putting together. 
 
And I want to now turn, Mr. Speaker, to the report and 

make a few comments about it. And I want to deal with the 
responsibility of the auditor, which is similar to the responsibility 
of the government of the day. On page no. 7 the auditor says, and 
I quote: 
 

Under the law, the Provincial Auditor is responsible for the 
audit of 100% of the public purse. The law permits the 
Provincial Auditor to carry out his responsibilities by 
relying on the audit done by an appointed auditor. The law 
requires the Provincial Auditor to use his professional 
judgement to justify this reliance. 
 

And he goes on to say: 
 
With the appointment of more private sector auditors the 
Provincial Auditor now sees about 50% of the expenditures 
from the public purse. 
 

Only half of the expenditures of this government are now audited 
by the Provincial Auditor and reported thereto, or therefrom, to 
the people of this province. 
 
And we now see a change from 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, to a 
year previous, 1987, when the auditor had the opportunity to 
review over 90 per cent of the expenditures. 
 
As well, the auditor goes on to say: 
 

Appointed auditors as professionals serve their client, the 
Executive, (which is the cabinet) with the same integrity I 
serve my client, the Assembly. However, no person can 
serve two masters who have different requirements and 
where conflicts of interest can arise. 
 

And what that means, Mr. Speaker, very simply, is that the 
auditors that are appointed privately by the cabinet answer to the 
cabinet and do not answer to the people of this province, because 
the cabinet has refused to share that information with the 
Provincial Auditor. And the auditor continues on, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In my opinion, the accountability process must be repaired 
so I can effectively serve the Assembly. I recommend the 
process be changed so the appointed auditor and the 
Provincial Auditor work together on crown corporation 
audits as joint auditors or with some similar arrangement. 
 

Rather than come in this House and respond to that by saying, 
we’ll be looking at it or we’ll try and change it, they attack the 
auditor in a personal way; they attack the integrity of the office 
of the auditor and thereby, I think, interfering in the process of 
how government runs. And they as well, Mr. Speaker, have really 
done severe damage to the integrity of the provincial 
governments, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout the 
province . . . or throughout the country of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now we can go on and talk about a lot of these 
things that are happening, and we can continue and talk about, as 
my colleagues have, about the severity of the attack that the 
Minister of Justice has made on the auditor, rather than to 
respond to the auditor’s concerns   



 
May 26, 1989 

1412 
 

and his report. 
 
And I think that that’s an incredible situation, Mr. Speaker, 
because we see here in this motion that the government has 
refused to provide information that has in the past been 
commonly available to all the auditors of this province, and 
they’re hiding information and becoming very secretive. 
 
But it’s even more incredible when you look at the person who 
is involved with hiding this information, and I refer to the 
member from Kindersley. I have here, Mr. Speaker, a copy of a 
speech the member gave in 1980 when he was in opposition, and 
it was in response to an Act respecting the Right of the Public to 
Government Information. He put forward in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, a private member’s Bill which would increase the 
access of information that the government had by the people of 
this province. 
 
And he goes on . . . I want to read some excerpts from this 
because it’s very relevant to this debate. Here we have a senior 
minister who is on the ropes in terms of his credibility. He has 
attacked in a personal nature the auditor of this province, the 
office of the auditor, and thereby the institution of this 
Legislative Assembly, without any evidence. And he’s doing 
that, Mr. Speaker, at the same time keeping information secret, 
the cabinet keeping more and more information secret from the 
public, rather than provide more information to the public. 
 
And I want to now read some excerpts from the speech the 
member from Kindersley gave when he was in opposition and 
about the great position he took at that time. And it’s in regard to 
a second reading of the Bill entitled, The Right (of the Public) to 
Government Information Act, otherwise known as freedom of 
information. 
 
And I want to go on and say this. He quotes, Mr. Speaker, page 
3594, May 27, 1980, in Hansard. He talks about quoting a 
number of individuals that he supported in terms of their 
providing more information to people like the auditor. And I 
quote: 
 

Many people have addressed themselves . . . to this whole 
subject of freedom of information and I wish at the outset to 
quote a few of the people who have spoken on this subject. 
The first one is James Madison, former president of the 
United States. 
 

The quote from Madison is: 
 

A popular government without popular information or the 
means of acquiring it is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy 
or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever govern ignorance 
and the people who mean to be their own governors must 
arm themselves with the power that knowledge gives. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — This is what James Madison said. This is what 
the member quoted and the member supported in 

May 27, 1980, and what does he do? Rather than support this 
kind of a quote and support his own speech, he gets up in this 
House and does the opposite, and by his actions as a minister of 
this government has done the opposite. And he goes on to say: 
 

I think that is very true. The other quote I wish to advance 
is one made by Pierre Elliott Trudeau in 1964 . . . What Mr. 
Trudeau had to say in 1964 was this: 
 

And I quote: 
 

Democratic process requires the ready availability of true 
and complete information. In this way people can 
objectively evaluate the government policies. To act 
otherwise is to give way to despotic secrecy. 
 
 
 

This is what the member from Kindersley read out in this 
Assembly in 1980. This is what he concurred in terms of 
supporting these remarks. Yet the actions of this government 
show very clearly that they’re not providing information to the 
auditor and to the public of Saskatchewan, but in fact what 
they’re doing is giving way and supporting despotic secrecy — 
words of his own using. 
 
And he goes on to quote . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The member for Weyburn, 
why is he on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Speaker, could I get leave of the 
Assembly, and with apologies to the member who’s in the middle 
of his speech, could I get leave of the Assembly to introduce 
some guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as well 
thanks to the hon. member. On behalf of the Premier and the 
members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to all members of the legislature, some 
15 grade 11 students seated in your gallery, sir. They are from 
the Lampman School in Lampman. They are accompanied by a 
teacher, Pat Spelay, and as well a chaperon, Margaret Agyeman, 
and bus driver Bert Hale. 
 
I hope that they will enjoy their tour and their stay here in Regina, 
and the legislative tour is part of that visit here today. I’ll be able 
to meet with them, Mr. Speaker, at 1 o’clock for pictures and as 
well, I think, a chance to visit with them in room 218. I 
particularly want to welcome them on behalf of the Premier, who 
cannot be in the legislature this morning at this very time. And I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming these students here from Lampman, Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

  



 
May 26, 1989 

1413 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Report of the Provincial Auditor 
(Continued) 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition I would like to extend a warm welcome to the grade 
11 students from Lampman as well. I hope you enjoy the visit to 
Regina and the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley in his speech in 1980 
talked about what the Canadian Bar Association had said as well. 
He said the association: 
 

. . . has made an extensive investigation and extensive 
studies and has published two books on the subject of 
freedom of information. 
 

And he goes on to quote: 
 

At the outset, however, it is important to stress the bar 
association’s view that the right of information must be 
regarded as a fundamental rather than procedural. Access to 
information as a prerequisite to the exercise of other 
fundamental rights and freedoms and without such access 
other rights lose much of their meaning. Information is 
power (it goes on to say). Concealing information can lead 
to the abuse of power. As well, information is essential for 
a working participatory democracy. The citizen’s ability to 
participate depends directly upon the amount of information 
at his disposal. As well, freedom of information legislation 
is essential for the protection of civil liberties and the public 
rights . . . 
 

(1215) 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’ve seen in terms of the member’s actions 
in the last couple of weeks, and particularly the last week where 
he’s made not one charge but two charges with respect to the 
auditor, is something that he is doing that’s contrary to what he 
said in the past. It’s a complete flip-flop. Either that or he believes 
that concealing of information, as he said which was an abuse of 
power, is good. He’s now decided that that’s a good thing for this 
government to be doing, and they’ve been hiding that 
information that should be available to everybody. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What changed his mind? 
 
Mr. Solomon: — My colleague, the member from Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, has asked, what has changed his mind? And 
that’s a good question. I’d like to ask the member from 
Kindersley, and I’d be happy to give some time to him to answer 
the question as to why he’s changed his opinion about the secrecy 
of government and the abusing the privilege of his position in 
cabinet. 
 
But he goes on, Mr. Speaker. He quotes not only all these 
individuals and associations I refer to, but he goes on to quote 
Mr. Joe Clark, the former prime minister, and . . . in a speech that 
he was making in the House of Commons, and he quoted Mr. 
Clark by saying: 
 

Let me emphasize that the burden for making that argument 
must rest not on those who want sunshine, which must be 
the norm, but on those who want secrecy, which must be the 
exception. 
 

This is what the minister has quoted Mr. Clark as saying in 
supporting of his comments. So what he is doing by his actions 
is that he’s creating an exception. He’s saying that himself. The 
quote goes on: 
 

That is the essence of freedom of information. 
 

That is the essence of freedom of information. It must be the 
norm, not the exception. 
 

Any law not based on the principles will make a mockery of 
the law of its own commitment, not just of freedom of 
information, but to basic democracy. 
 

So we have here, Mr. Speaker, a government that is hiding 
information, that is interfering with the due process of the law, 
that is changing laws that it cannot follow, changing them 
retroactively. And yet we have one of the cabinet ministers who 
stood in this House as a former . . . as an MLA from Kindersley, 
making speech after speech and quote after quote. 
 
And I know that that kind of behaviour is unjustifiable, is 
unacceptable, and is only characteristic of a despotic 
government. So he’s characterizing his own government now. 
He’s characterizing the government that he’s a senior minister in 
right now. A despotic government — that’s what he’s calling 
himself. 
 
But I’ve got other quotes here as well. He continues on: 
 

The present situation in government today is this (says the 
member from Kindersley): all government information is 
secret unless the government decides it should be released. 
That is the situation now, both in Saskatchewan and in 
Ottawa. Those who oppose that view, including most of the 
proponents of the freedom of information legislation, 
basically say the reverse should be true — all government 
information should be released (this is what he says, and I 
quote): 
 
. . . all government information should be released unless 
the government can make a strong case as to why it should 
not be released. 
 

He stood in this Assembly nine short years ago and said that all 
government information should be released unless the 
government puts forward a reasonable argument as to why it 
should not. We have seen the total rejection of his former 
philosophy. He’s been doing the opposite; the Premier’s been 
doing the opposite. Now they don’t even answer questions in 
question period on simple matters of $2.2 million that the auditor 
has raised, that the government will not account for. Rather than 
defend those actions, or explain them, or even tell us why they 
shouldn’t be made available, why they should be kept secret — 
rather than do that, Mr. Speaker, he attacks   



 
May 26, 1989 

1414 
 

the auditor on a personal way, on a personal nature, without any 
evidence whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue on. He talks about . . . the member 
from Kindersley talks about an example that he was raising with 
regard to freedom of information, and he talked about a farmer, 
a land bank farmer from the south-central part of Saskatchewan, 
and he talks about this farmer’s problem with respect to getting 
information from the government and unable to defend himself 
with respect to his land bank land. 
 
And he goes, Mr. Speaker, and I quote from the member of 
Kindersley of May 27, 1980: 
 

. . . in the type of situation where perhaps this scenario can 
develop. People come in and make an accusation against 
this man. The accusation cannot be substantiated, but who 
knows if it can or cannot be countered by other arguments? 
Why should the man not have that? (and in brackets I add 
information). Why should that man not have the information 
against him? I suggest that type of thing is what freedom of 
information can address itself to. 
 

Yet he stands up nine years later in this House as a minister of 
this Conservative government and makes an accusation against a 
man, the one he was defending nine years ago — not the same 
man, but a similar circumstance — making an accusation without 
proof of evidence of his accusation, and yet he’s not allowing the 
opposition request to bring this person before the bar to at least 
defend himself in face of the accusations which have been falsely 
put forward by the member from Kindersley. Unbelievable what 
this member has done. This minister has totally lost sight of 
reality. He has come in this House; he has made accusations. The 
auditor has in the meanwhile documented, with facts and 
statistics, all of the problems this government has. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A good report. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — And it’s a good report, the member from The 
Battlefords says, and I want to just share what the Provincial 
Auditor has said with respect to this government and with respect 
to their financial position. And I quote from page 2. Chapter 2 is 
about the accountability process needing repair: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly (and 
the people of Saskatchewan — and this is the auditor saying 
this). I recommend the process be repaired to require that 
appointed auditors and the Provincial Auditor work together 
on crown corporation audits as joint auditors or with some 
similar arrangement. 
 
Also, there were a number of cases where I could not get 
information that, by law, I was entitled to receive. 
 

That by law I was entitled to receive, I couldn’t get the 
information. This is from a government that stood in this House 
with members of this government saying that 

access to information is the most important fundamental, 
underlying principle of democracy; in particular, a government 
that is responsible and a government that is accountable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor continues . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have been listening to the 
member’s speech carefully, and I would just like to bring his 
attention to rule 328 which reads as follows: 
 

A Member may read extracts from documents, books or 
other printed publications as part of his speech . . . A speech 
should not, however, consist . . . of a series of quotations 
joined together with a few original sentences. 
 

You, sir, have probably without your conscious knowledge been 
doing that, and it’s an infringement of rule 328. You may use 
quotations, but you cannot use them in a series interspersed with 
a series of original sentences. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t aware 
of that, and I was trying to add a few comments as I felt were 
appropriate. 
 
The bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, that the member from 
Kindersley, the Minister of Justice, has stood in this House and 
has made accusations without sufficient supporting evidence to 
substantiate his accusations. 
 
On top of that, the government, the Conservative government of 
the Premier of this province, have not provided sufficient 
information to the auditor in order for the auditor to perform his 
job in a proper and responsible and accountable way. 
 
We have seen the government opposite not only hide information 
but, on more than 46 occasions in the last year, break the laws 
that they are elected to create and follow. They’ve broken their 
own laws. And what is the redress for the opposition? What is 
the redress for the people of this province from a government 
who refused to follow their own laws, their own laws that they 
have passed in this Assembly? 
 
What kind of an example is this government providing to the 
children, the students of Lampman and other places that have 
come to this Assembly? What kind of leadership from a 
government that breaks its own laws 46 times in one year, at 
least, that we’ve been able to count so far, and expect these 
students in this Assembly, who are here from Lampman, to 
follow the laws of this province? 
 
Why would we as elected members force the people of our 
province to follow the laws that we make in this Assembly when 
the government of the day does not follow their own laws? There 
doesn’t seem to be any kind of rationale or reasonableness about 
that action of that government to date. 
 
And I’m sure the students from Lampman will be asking the 
member from Weyburn, when they meet with him, why have you 
not responded to this report in a sensible, responsible fashion? 
Why haven’t you looked at the   



 
May 26, 1989 

1415 
 

problems that we’ve got, that have been outlined by the auditor, 
and why won’t you at least try to comply with the laws that 
you’ve broken? 
 
They’re going to ask that question when they meet with the 
member from Weyburn. And I hope the member of Weyburn, 
rather than stand in front of the students and attack the auditor 
without any evidence, attacking his integrity and attacking the 
office of the auditor — rather than do that, why doesn’t he go 
over the 46 or 50 ways that they broke the law and explain why 
they broke the law, justify why they broke the law, and justify to 
the students and the people of this province why they feel they 
should not try and repair the breaking of the law that they’ve been 
involved with? 
 
So I’m asking the students, when you get to meet with the 
member from Weyburn, you ask that question. You also ask the 
question why the government has not provided, according to the 
law of this province, information which is absolutely necessary 
for the auditor to carry out his job. 
 
This government is responsible for billions of dollars of 
taxpayers’ money. They raise the money through taxes, and 
they’re accountable as a government and responsible as a 
government to tell the people of this province what they spend 
their money on and how they spend it. And the Provincial 
Auditor’s role is to make sure that they’ve spent the money in a 
legal way, according to generally accepted accounting principles 
in this country. 
 
And the auditor here says, on more than 46 occasions they’ve 
broken that law. What kind of an example, what kind of a 
leadership for the children of Lampman and other parts of this 
province does the member from Weyburn and the Premier of this 
province display. They want these people to run our province? 
You’ve got to be kidding. They break the laws; it’s incredible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice has 
unjustly and unjustifiably attacked the integrity of the Provincial 
Auditor, thereby doing irreparable harm to the office of the 
Provincial Auditor and the reputation of Mr. Lutz. The attack is 
misleading in every sense of the word, as seen by this auditor’s 
report that we’ve briefly talked about this morning. And this 
special report demonstrates — not this one, but the special report 
that the auditor provided to this Assembly, this one we had talked 
about through another motion — demonstrates very clearly that 
Mr. Lutz, the auditor, acted professionally, properly, and within 
the mandate of The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that our side of the House 
supports the special order motion that has been moved. And I 
want to read it one more time before I conclude my remarks, and 
that is: 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial 

Auditor to fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified 
in the statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the member from Kindersley in 
previous speeches in this House tell us one thing, tell us how he 
respects democracy, tell us how he feels that information should 
be made available in every circumstance unless reasonably 
explained why it shouldn’t be. 
 
And yet in this example . . . leading by example, they’ve shown 
that the remarks that he’s made nine years ago are out the 
window; they’re not worth the paper they’re written on; that he 
has no integrity himself. He has no reason, no basis in terms of 
integrity, to stand in this House and accuse anybody of anything 
other than positive things. And he stood in this House and 
accused the auditor of things that were totally unfounded, and yet 
in his remarks in the past he has said that this sort of action is 
totally unacceptable in democracy as we know it today. 
 
So I conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying that we support this 
motion, and that I ask the member from Kindersley, on the basis 
of the evidence that we’ve put forward this morning, and the 
evidence that people and my colleagues have put forward in the 
past, that he does the honourable thing — that he apologies to the 
auditor, he apologizes to this Assembly, he apologizes to the 
people of this province, and he submits his resignation forthwith. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening I was 
speaking on the other motion of privilege that is before this 
Assembly and the clock ran out before I was able to conclude my 
remarks. So I take the opportunity today to speak again, this time 
on the motion of privilege which the member from Regina North 
West has just read out to us, involving the Provincial Auditor 
being impeded in his work. 
 
And when we look at this issue of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re looking at a lot of principles and a lot of concepts 
of democracy which I want to address here today. Mr. Speaker, 
the British parliamentary system, in Canada particularly, is based 
on the concept that we as Canadians believe very fundamentally 
in peace, order, and good government. And this legislature is a 
symbol of good government for the province of Saskatchewan. 
And since I came here in 1986 as the MLA for Saskatoon Centre, 
I have become increasingly uneasy about the PC government’s, 
opposite, commitment to the democratic system that we have 
here in Canada. I become increasingly uneasy about their 
commitment to democracy. 
 
And I remember in 1986, when we were first here, that the very 
first thing that happened before we could even speak to the throne 
speech, was that the government opposite brought in a motion to 
change the way in which the rules of this Assembly were made. 
 
Formerly the rules of the Assembly had been made by consensus 
through an all-party committee. And that was   



 
May 26, 1989 

1416 
 

an important concept, Mr. Speaker, because in the Canadian 
parliamentary system we have the government side of the 
legislature and the opposition side of the legislature, and the role 
of us in opposition is to be critics of government policy, to be 
watch-dogs on the government, and to continue to challenge the 
government in the decisions that it makes and the legislation that 
it tries to bring through. That’s the role that we play. 
 
Many people in my constituency have expressed to me some 
dissatisfaction about this in the sense that we’re always fighting 
each other in the legislature, and question period gets very 
raucous and sometimes we don’t seem to be listening to each 
other. 
 
Well I took those comments to heart, Mr. Speaker, when my 
constituents raised that with me. And when I came here I was 
interested to see how the system works, being part of it from the 
opposition; how I would feel about it, and what my concerns 
would be representing my constituents who’ve questioned me on 
this. 
 
And I found that the concept that the rules of the Assembly were 
made by consensus a very interesting one and one that I thought 
we should all support. But the very first thing that I had to speak 
to here in the Assembly as a rookie MLA was a movement by the 
government to change the way in which the rules were made, to 
destroy that concept of consensus, to destroy a participatory 
democracy consensus-building system. And I was offended by 
that, and I spoke about that at the time, as we all did in opposition 
here, because we would like to see areas in this Assembly where 
we do work together, where there is co-operation. But the 
government threw out that idea and would not support it. 
 
And then they brought in the government reorganization Act, 
which allowed them to make decisions completely outside of 
debate in this legislature, changing departments and annihilating 
departments, building new departments, doing whatever they 
like. And we’ve certainly seen it with this privatization move that 
they’ve gone forward with, the department of so-called Public 
Participation being set up. 
 
And again I was worried, Mr. Speaker, very concerned about that 
development, that this government opposite, the PC government 
opposite, want to go against the rules and the procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly. And since 1986 I have seen a constant 
action by the government that indicates to me and to my 
colleagues opposite the failure of this government to respect the 
legislature and to want to work inside this Legislative Assembly 
for the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The government opposite obviously does not respect this 
legislative process. We’ve had government by media release, Mr. 
Speaker, where the government has made ministerial statements 
to the media outside of this legislature instead of making the 
statements here first so that the opposition can respond. 
 
We have seen, and I have seen many, many times in this 
legislature over the years I’ve been here, the failure of the 

government to answer questions in question period. We’ve asked 
very good questions, questions that the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to have answers to, and this government has failed to 
answer those questions. 
 
They have failed to respect the British parliamentary system of 
the opposition’s right to ask questions and to get answers to those 
questions. And they have stonewalled many, many times. 
 
And the third thing that the government has done, Mr. Speaker, 
that has made me increasingly uneasy, is their failure to debate. 
 
When we were out with the bell-ringing action that is legitimately 
an action that we can take here as opposition members when we 
are deeply concerned about actions of the government side, we 
were ringing the bells to let the people of Saskatchewan know 
that this government was proceeding with plans which they had 
promised in the legislature and promised at election time that 
they would not proceed with. So we rang the bells within the 
British parliamentary system, within the system of democracy. 
That was our right to do that. And the government opposite said, 
get back in the legislature and debate. 
 
And I said on the radio in Saskatoon on the Roy Norris show, 
they won’t debate; they won’t stand up and justify their 
legislation; they won’t stand up and justify their actions in this 
legislature. They are bypassing the legislature and disregarding 
this whole tradition in Saskatchewan and the tradition in Canada 
for peace, order, and good government. 
 
And what we have now, Mr. Speaker, and I have seen in the last 
week here a very sinister development based on what’s been 
happening before. So I’m not completely surprised by it, 
although I was quite horrified and shocked to see the Minister of 
Justice’s performance here a week ago today when he maligned 
the Provincial Auditor with a most foul action in using a letter 
and quoting it in only sections and then trying to justify his 
actions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have seen this legislature disregarded by the 
government opposite for too long now. And with the people of 
Saskatchewan, I say very strongly, the government has gone too 
far. And the government opposite is now in complete chaos with 
this last sinister move to disregard the office of the Legislative 
Assembly and to disregard the procedures of the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
And they have, the government opposite has the audacity to stand 
up and criticize us as socialists saying that somehow we have too 
much faith in government and they want to take government off 
the backs of the people as free enterprisers. What they mean by 
taking government off the backs of the people is to destroy the 
government process in Saskatchewan completely and to break up 
the system of the Legislative Assembly. I for one want the people 
of Saskatchewan to know that I and my colleagues will not 
tolerate this kind of disregard for the legislative process. 
 
The government opposite has done just exactly what they want 
to do. They’ve given government such a bad name   



 
May 26, 1989 

1417 
 

that they have fed the political cynicism in this province to a 
degree that’s really painful to witness. They have destroyed the 
concept of good government. They have made people very 
suspicious. 
 
What this auditor’s report does is just confirm in spades what 
we’re worried about. It is a real indictment of this government, 
and as I said, it’s a sinister development, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of what the government should be. 
 
Now last night when I was speaking to this motion of privilege I 
noticed the Minister of Parks and Recreation waving a white flag 
at me, trying to signal that he wanted truce and he wanted peace. 
Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Parks and Recreation 
is involved in the executive cabinet that has made this decision 
to criticize the auditor and to condemn the auditor’s report. And 
if he wants peace in this legislature and he wants good 
government, then he better take the Premier to account and the 
Minister of Justice to account for their behaviour in the last week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — And he can wave white flags at me all he likes, 
but until he does that, until he gets the Premier to take 
responsibility for the actions of the government in condemning 
this auditor and the auditor’s report, his actions have no meaning 
to me. 
 
And I have seen the Premier of this province hunker down in his 
seat and refuse to answer questions from the Leader of the 
Opposition regarding the auditor’s report, and leaving the 
Minister of Justice to stand up and try to defend his actions. And 
the Premier will take no leadership in support of the Provincial 
Auditor and in support of good government. 
 
Instead, the Premier has allowed this festering issue to go on and 
on and on. He’s directly involved in condoning what the minister 
of . . . now I call the minister of injustice, because of his attacks 
on the Provincial Auditor. I call him the minister of injustice. 
 
And I fear, Mr. Speaker, that the repercussions of what’s 
happened in the last week go out in a ripple effect to the people 
of Saskatchewan in so many ways. We have a Minister of Justice 
who has come into this Assembly and maligned a Provincial 
Auditor — unfairly accused him; used information in a 
misleading and biased way to impugn on the Provincial Auditor 
bad behaviour and something that’s almost criminal. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve got the Minister of Justice doing 
this, what are the implications for justice in this whole province 
and for people who are in many, many ways trying to live by the 
laws of this land and also sometimes having to have appellations 
in courts against the law of this land. 
 
We have a Minister of Justice who doesn’t seem to care a hoot 
that the government is contravening the laws, according to our 
Provincial Auditor. In fact he wants to cover that up. And when 
we have a Minister of Justice who’s covering up actions and 
trying to frame someone, Mr. Speaker, we have a minister of 
injustice in this 

province, a man who should resign from the Executive Council, 
and a Premier who should force that resignation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it very interesting to address the 
question of who is this Provincial Auditor. To many people it 
may not mean much — a Provincial Auditor. But section 11 of 
The Provincial Auditor Act states that: 
 

The Provincial Auditor is the auditor of the accounts of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 

Which, according to a lawyer who’s written up a report for us 
here, is an undefined term which in the context of the Act must 
be viewed as being as broad as possible in its meaning, and 
requires him or her to examine all accounts related to public 
money. 
 
Public money. Public money is the taxpayers’ money, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the money that the government takes from the 
people of Saskatchewan, which they’ve worked hard to earn. 
 
And they have the right, the people of Saskatchewan have the 
right to know that their money is being well looked after. They 
have the right to know through the Provincial Auditor, who looks 
at the government accounts, that the accounts have been properly 
kept; that public money has been fully accounted for; that public 
money has been applied for the purpose for which it was 
appropriated; and that essential records are maintained. That is 
the role of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And the Provincial Auditor in his report has very clearly outlined 
the accountability process that he adheres to in filling out his role 
as the Provincial Auditor and letting us know what’s happened 
to the taxpayers’ money. 
 
This position, the Provincial Auditor, is a mediator between the 
government side and the opposition side in many ways. He’s an 
independent, impartial officer of this Legislative Assembly, of all 
of us. And I think the back-benchers opposite in the government 
side of caucus should be very concerned about what’s happening 
to this person, the Provincial Auditor. You should be deeply 
concerned because this person is responsible for letting you 
know, as well as us, what’s been happening to the taxpayers’ 
money. And if you think you’ve got the right to take money from 
the taxpayers and not let them know how it’s been spent, and not 
let them have the access to the Provincial Auditor to answer their 
questions, then you are not committed to good government in 
Saskatchewan or in Canada and you don’t deserve to govern this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1245) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Speaker, we should take this accountability 
process very seriously, and that’s why I say it’s a sinister 
development from the government opposite to try to cover up 
what’s been done by the Provincial Auditor in his report. 
 
It is a damning report. It does indicate that the   



 
May 26, 1989 

1418 
 

government has contravened the laws of The Provincial Auditor 
Act and the other laws governing Crown corporations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is a very serious development. 
 
The auditor has the position of bringing to this Assembly 
information that he can get from Executive Council and bring it 
to the floor of the Assembly. We have seen already that in debate 
and in question period, we are not able to get answers from the 
government. 
 
They do have a lot of power in the parliamentary system; the 
opposition has only limited powers. We have only limited powers 
and we have certain rights. And one of the most important rights 
that we have is the right of access to an impartial person looking 
at the government accounts through the Provincial Auditor. We 
have that right, and we have a report that is a damning report in 
terms of the government’s expenditure of the public money, 
public money amounting to $6.9 billion in 1988. 
 
That is a lot of money collected from people in this province. Of 
course we have to know how it’s been spent and what’s been 
happening to it. The accountability process is very important. 
And one of the issues that apparently has messed up this 
accountability process is the development of appointed auditors 
to the Crown corporations, private auditors appointed to look at 
the accounts of each one of the Crown corporations. 
 
And that’s been a procedure in place for some time, Mr. Speaker. 
It was a procedure in place under New Democratic government, 
but it was changed substantially in 1987 with changes to the 
auditor’s Act. And we understand that the private auditors have 
not been willing to meet and talk with the Provincial Auditor and 
to share information. They are obviously, when they are 
appointed auditors, responsible to the boards of the Crown 
corporations that they work for. They are not responsible to the 
office of the Legislative Assembly, as is the Provincial Auditor. 
The Provincial Auditor is supposed to have the final say and 
know exactly what’s happening to a hundred per cent of the 
taxpayers’ money. 
 
And what we find out in this auditor’s report is that the auditor 
has only been able to look at the accounts representing 50 per 
cent of the taxpayers’ money. And the other 50 per cent — 50 
per cent of the money collected from the constituents of those 
members opposite, forming the revenue that the government has 
to set up its programs — 50 per cent of that money is not 
accounted for through the Provincial Auditor at this point in time. 
 
And obviously things have been happening — for example, the 
sale of the dental equipment, which has been mentioned many 
times in this House — things have been happening to government 
money, to taxpayers’ money that’s not accountable for, and the 
auditor is raising those concerns. 
 
Now what is supposed to be the relationship between the 
appointed auditors, the private auditors, and the Provincial 
Auditor? Section 11(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act deals with 
the appointed auditors and is the critical section. It provides that, 
and I quote: 
 

(1) In the fulfillment of his responsibilities as the auditor of 
the accounts of the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
provincial auditor may rely on the report of the appointed 
auditor of a Crown agency or Crown-controlled corporation 
if he is satisfied that the appointed auditor has carried out 
his responsibilities pursuant to section 11 with (regard) to 
that Crown agency or Crown-controlled corporation. 
 

Now the Provincial Auditor is not satisfied, Mr. Speaker. In his 
report he describes how he has not been able to get answers to 
questions regarding some of the Crown corporations. 
 
And I find it very interesting — and I shared this last night and I 
will again today — what the Minister of Finance said when we 
criticized the changes in The Provincial Auditor Act. When we 
asked him what the relationship would be between the Provincial 
Auditor, who’s an officer of this Legislative Assembly, an officer 
for all of us, and the private auditors who only work for the 
Crown corporation to whom they are appointed as auditors, we 
raised the question, and the Minister of Finance had this to say: 
 

What the objective of the legislation is is to have the private 
sector audit that, and the Provincial Auditor, in the case 
where the private sector auditors are used, to have an 
override. If he’s not satisfied, then he can go through and do 
an audit. There’s nothing to stop him if he’s not satisfied and 
if he gives reasons. 
 

And he has been stopped. The Minister of Finance says there’s 
nothing to stop him. The auditor says he’s been stopped. He’s 
been prevented from doing the work for the people of 
Saskatchewan, that he was appointed to do. He has been blocked 
by this government opposite and the people who are working for 
them, from finding out what needs to be found out in order to 
account for our taxpayers’ money. 
 
And when I think of the way in which the money could be spent, 
Mr. Speaker, the things that my constituents need, the services 
that they need, services that are needed across this province; 
when we’ve got farmers and farm families who are suffering so 
much from the changes in the economy, and when we have 
people in Saskatoon who are on minimum wage which has not 
been raised for years, and when we have people on social 
assistance, the people that I have in my constituency trying to live 
on $345 a month — and there are no jobs for people — and the 
minimum wage gives you, if you work a 40-hour week — and 
many people are not lucky to get that much even — gives you 
$9,000 a year to live on, and we could use money to help people, 
and instead . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — . . . and instead, we have the money going out we 
know not where. 
 
There have been many people speaking out lately with their 
concern about the government and the way in which its been 
operating. I’ve said it’s a sinister   



 
May 26, 1989 

1419 
 

government. I’ve described that I’m really very concerned about 
the way in which the whole legislative process is grinding to a 
miserable halt, and I fear very much what we may replace it with. 
 
We have to make this system work. We have to make it a good 
system. We have to recognize the value of the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have to, in particular . . . we have, in 
particular, to deal with the taxpayers’ money and know that we 
have spent it well and that we are accountable. 
 
Of course we are accountable in the next election, and I expect 
that the people will speak loud and strong and vote this 
government out of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I certainly want to see that happen. And I’ve just 
been given an article from the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Speaker, that 
just says, Bob Andrew should pack it in, for his own sake as much 
as Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — I couldn’t agree more. I don’t know whether 
that’s unparliamentary language, Mr. Speaker, but pack it in he 
should do. He should resign. He is not a Minister of Justice and 
has not been able to conduct himself properly at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the auditor has said that the laws have been 
broken by officials by not providing him with information, and 
as a librarian I want to reiterate what my colleague has been 
saying about the freedom of information, the need for 
information. I value that very much, and so I find it really 
distressful to see that the auditor is saying that the laws have been 
broken by not providing him with information. There’s two 
issues there — breaking the law, and not providing information. 
 
But unfortunately there are no penalties under The Provincial 
Auditor Act to enforce that contravention of the law, so that is 
why we are calling for the Provincial Auditor to be able to come 
in here to the legislature and answer to this. 
 
The government opposite has said that there was a turf war 
between the Provincial Auditor and the private auditors, but there 
should be no turf war because the Provincial Auditor by 
legislation is mandated to override the private auditors and to get 
the information that they need. 
 
But a breach of the auditor’s Act has to be dealt with in the 
legislature, and that’s why I say that this issue is so sinister. We 
have a Minister of Justice who is acting unjustly, and we have a 
Provincial Auditor who’s accusing the government of breaking 
the auditor’s Act. And the only way that can be dealt with is to 
bring that issue to the floor of the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the minister opposite 
has been such a chameleon in changing his colours from what he 
said he supported in 1980 to what he says he supports now, and 
his behaviour now. In 1980 

he was full of what turns out to be hot air, in terms of support of 
principles of freedom of information and democracy and all the 
good things that he wanted to talk about when he was an MLA 
in opposition. And now when he’s a Minister of Justice, he 
behaves entirely differently — entirely differently. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — The Minister of Justice is a chameleon, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why I say he’s now a minister of injustice. 
He has sat on the rock of corruption and he’s changed colour, and 
he’s become the colour of that corruption, and he should resign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — He should resign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Smart: — He has not earned the right . . . He has no right to 
continue as Minister of Justice with his defence of his behaviour 
lately. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a very serious issue. There are audits 
that have not been completed, a long list of audits that have not 
been completed, a long list of inadequate financial statements and 
annual reports, and that is the taxpayers’ money. That is one of 
the bases of this government, is what we do with the money. 
 
And I think that in closing, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read into the 
record an editorial that I found in The Globe and Mail on May 
22, which I think is a very good one, “Regina vs the auditor”, and 
it says this: 
 

The Saskatchewan government appears to regard the 
province’s auditor as a kind of Peeping Tom, a prowler in 
the backyard of its fiscal business and a rude intruder on its 
private affairs. 
 

Its private affairs, Mr. Speaker. The government is treating it as 
if it’s a private affair. What the government does is a public 
affair; it’s an affair for the people of Saskatchewan. But the 
editorial goes on: 
 

Thus, when Willard Lutz came to call with briefcase, 
clipboard and calculator, the response of the government 
was to rush around the house closing curtains, bolting doors 
and exhibiting other signs of inhospitability. This has 
gravely displeased Mr. Lutz, as well it might. It should 
equally disturb his clients, the members of the 
Saskatchewan Legislature and the citizens of the province. 
 

I can’t say it more clearly, Mr. Speaker, than that: “It should 
equally disturb his clients, the members of the Saskatchewan 
Legislature (that’s all of us; that’s all of us) and the citizens of 
the province (and that’s all the people of Saskatchewan).” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why I would, speaking here on this motion, 
in support of this motion: 
 

  



 
May 26, 1989 

1420 
 

That this Assembly regrets that the Provincial Auditor has 
been impeded in effectively carrying out his role to watch 
over the public purse for the Legislative Assembly, and that 
this Assembly direct the Government of Saskatchewan to 
make available full information, and the necessary 
co-operation, in order to allow the Provincial Auditor to 
fulfil his legislative responsibilities as specified in the 
statutes of Saskatchewan. 
 

And I defy the government members opposite to vote against this 
motion. If you vote against this motion, you vote against peace, 
order, and good government. You are voting in favour of your 
partisan politics, which are obviously corrupt and are obviously 
a great disservice to the people . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It being 1 o’clock, the House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 2 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 
 


