





























































Hansard: August 09, 1989


August 9, 1989 
 

The Assembly met at 8 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill 
No. 20 – An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan be now 
read a second time, and the amendment thereto proposed by Ms. Simard. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Speaker, you will understand this will be a very unique experience for me. In 
1975-76 I sat through well over 100 hours of debate on the creation of the potash corporation and other 
ancillary legislation. 
 
In this particular debate, Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat through well over 75 hours of debate on the destruction 
of the potash corporation. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. Order, order. 
 
An Hon. Member: – Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: – What’s the hon. member’s point of order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Members opposite seem to want to have more time to speak, and I think by leave 
we could extend the debate for . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: – Order. The member does not have a point of order. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Speaker, as I said, this is a unique experience. I think the house is well aware 
of the fact that the Deputy Premier has had his six minutes in this debate. It’s interesting to note as the 
debate flows along, Mr. Speaker, prior to closure being invoked by this government, it took charges of 
dynamite to get the member son the other side out of their seats. But now that closure has been invoked 
by this government, been rammed down the throat of this legislature, they’re up every time there’s a 
chance to speak; they’re on their feet. Cabinet ministers all over the place want to speak on potash and 
the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It’s an interesting development, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re in the dying days of the discussion of this particular Bill, No. 20, and it’s dying, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the kind of conditions that this government has put on the debate and the kind of intentions 
they have about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. This is actually the great potash debate 
number two. The great potash debate number one took place about 13 years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that many members on both sides of this House can agree with me that 
this debate is even more momentous than the first potash debate in 1975. My reason for saying this is 
that this legislation, Bill No. 20, The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act, which is 



in fact organizing the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan out of existence – that’s really what it’s 
doing – is irrevocable in so far as the extent of relinquishing Saskatchewan control over potash for ever. 
By that I mean the amount of control that Saskatchewan may exercise over this important resource can 
never been increased, can never be increased. 
 
Article 1602, subsection 5 and 6 of the free trade agreement will not permit the 45 per cent which is 
available for foreign control to ever be lessened So this is an important step we’re talking, Mr. Speaker, 
and something obviously that should not be treated lightly. 
 
Given this government’s failure to keep its promised, I fear later this government may attempt to give 
away even more of our potash resources to foreign investors. The question is, will they break their 
promises, Mr. Speaker, will they deviate from the legislation they’re bringing in now. The evidence to 
support the fact that they will break their promise is growing and diversifying with every speech this 
government makes, with every passing year, with every passing budget. 
 
Remember they said they would cancel the sales tax. Well they broke that promise; it went from 5 per 
cent to 7 per cent. They said they would lower income tax; they added on the flat tax of 2 per cent. They 
broke their promise again. They said they would give us sound, business-like administration, yet the 
debt of this province in the administration alone is reaching $4 billion. Sound, business-like 
administration – they’ve had eight successive deficits in their budgeting. Mr. Speaker, that’s poor, that’s 
inefficient, wasteful, and yes, even corrupt management of Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a fair-minded person need only read the Provincial Auditor’s report, the most critical 
report I’ve ever seen, to confirm that this government has the province in severe economic disarray. 
Growing and diversifying with each budget, Mr. Speaker. The familiar phrase of the Premier is growing 
and diversifying. Well his debt and the disarray in the economics of this province is growing and 
diversifying with every passing budget that this government brings in. 
 
The devastating consequences of a continuum of broken promises by this government can now be seen. 
Population dropped 13,132 in the first six months of this year, on top of 12,346 for all of 1988. That, 
Mr. Speaker, is s total of 26, 478 net population loss in one and a half years. Growing and diversifying 
under this government, under this Premier whose favourite slogan is growing and diversifying, once 
again under a PC government. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I believe that Bill No. 20 is really only phase 1 of the potash corporation give-
away procedures. This is only phase 1. There is a hidden government agenda on potash; there always 
has been – always has been. And we find it disclosed as we go along from week to week, month to 
month, more of that hidden agenda on potash. 
 
No previous mention was made of the PC government’s hidden intention contained in Bill 20. In fact, 
prior to 1986 election this government went out of its way to hint that they saw no reason to disturb the 
operations of PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, suppose that a disinterested outside observer read the 1982 report of the chairman of the 
board of PCS. That person would assume, while there were some problems within the potash 
corporation, by and large, the chairman was most optimistic and in fact authorized a massive expansion 
for future growth of the corporation. This was in 1982, the new Conservative minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what else could any fair-minded person conclude when confronted with these words, and I 
want to quote them right out of the 1982 report: 
 

It was, and is, our firm belief that from these changes, and as a result of these difficult times, a 
new and stronger PCS can emerge. 
 



With this belief in mind, the Board of Directors supported management’s recommendations to 
continue with one of our major projects in Saskatchewan. I refer to the PCS Mining Lanigan 
Phase II expansion . . . 

 
Approved and authorized by the Conservative government in 1982, Mr. Speaker. That statement signed 
by the chairman of the board gave the green light to the corporation. The member for Yorkton was that 
chairman of the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the most recent report of PCS, that’s this money here, showed a profit of $106 million in 
1988 and reported as follows: 
 

As we review the 1988 results with some satisfaction, we are looking ahead to 1989 with 
optimism. We have proven we have the management, the people and the product to be a highly 
successful industrial leader. With positive marketplace forecasts in front of us, we believe PCS 
can continue to improve its position in 1989. 

 
Very optimistic report. That’s the end of the quotation. 
 
Again, I believe, Mr. Speaker, a fair-minded independent outside observer would conclude that things 
were very good in PCS. It too was signed by the chairman of the board, the government’s appointee, 
full-time chairman of the board, being paid in excess of $100,000 a year for his expertise – Mr. 
Schoenhals’ consistent and unwavering chairman’s report on PCS. 
 
If you go back, Mr. Speaker, to the 1987 report, and that’s this one here which I have, the previous year, 
you could find, even though PCS lost of $100 million, Mr. Schoenhals was optimistic when he wrote: 
 

To the employees of PCS, PCS Mining and PCS Sales . . . (He goes on) Your efforts have 
carried us through and placed us in a position where we can look to the future with confidence. 
Together we will continue to build a stronger, more productive and profitable Corporation. 

 
And that’s the end of the quotation from the chairman of the board in 1987. I suspect things were 
looking up, as they say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1988 the corporation mailed this report to every employee of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, even the couple of hundred they laid off. They’d mailed this report to them. Cost in 
excess of $2,000 to mail that. 
 
(0815) 
 
And in December of 1980, a party was held for PCS Sales in Saskatoon at the Ramada Renaissance. 
Each employee attended the free banquet. There was a free bar. There was a framed photos of 
Saskatoon for each of the employees. There was a gift basket of preserves for each employee. There 
was an expensive pair of mukluks for each employee, and there was also an expensive pair of mukluks 
for each employee’s spouse. 
 
So PCS Sales must have been doing pretty good to be able to throw a big bash for the PCS Sales staff at 
the Ramada Renaissance in Saskatoon, similar to the situation where SaskTel was throwing big bashes 
for some of its employees and flying in bands from Toronto at $4,000 a night to spend the taxpayers’ 
dollars. PCS seemed to be having the money and they were certainly spending it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important when we’re examining what is happening here in PCS to find out 
where this corporation, where the government and its head people in the corporation are getting their 
information. It’s important to know what the source of the philosophy is that guides these people across 
the way in the way they handle the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 



Well I want to delve into that a bit, Mr. Speaker, before moving on I have here in my hands, Mr. 
Speaker, a report of the Fraser Institute’s privatization conference held in the Bayshore Inn hotel in 
Vancouver, 1987. And this report says something about the Fraser Institute in British Columbia. For 
those that are unfamiliar with it, the Fraser Institute is a right-wing think tank in British Columbia 
which provides its ideas to people that have the feelings that they should be right-wingers but don’t 
have the brain powers to carry it through. And they provide this service so that the privatization 
movement in Canada can be accelerated. 
 
This conference was held in Vancouver at the Bayshore Inn, had 128 people attend the conference. And 
it says here, interestingly enough: 
 

The Saskatchewan government and Crown corporations’ presence was greater than that of any 
other government in Canada. 

 
So obviously the Government of Saskatchewan and their heads of Crown corporations were seeking 
advice from the fountain of theory on privatization in Canada, the Fraser Institute. And who are some of 
the people that attended the Fraser Institute on behalf of Saskatchewan paid for by the Saskatchewan 
taxpayers, to get up to speed on privatization? Even though they didn’t have the complete brain power 
to handle the subject in Saskatchewan, they thought they could go to the Fraser Institute, be brought up 
to speed, and come back to Saskatchewan and put their plans into effect. 
 
Well the minister in charge of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) was at the privatization 
conference in Vancouver. And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the government was ready to plunge 
ahead on their plans to privatize SGI, but due to the fire-storm of opposition they ran into, they’ve no 
temporarily – and I emphasize that world “temporarily” – shelved their plans to privatize SGI. But the 
minister was there being brought up to speed on privatization by the theoreticians at the Fraser Institute. 
She was accompanied by a ministerial assistant and the vice-president of finance at SGI. So SGI had a 
complement of at least three there. 
 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation had a person there. Some of the other ones that were there were 
Tim Embury, Interface Consulting. Well we know Tim Embury; he’s a defeated Tory minister from this 
government who started up a consulting outfit called Interface, and I’m sure that Interface does a lot of 
work for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The only work they’ve got. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Well could be. I saw interestingly a while ago, a picture of Mr. Embury with his 
first dollar framed, in his company, Interface. I imagine he’s added a lot of dollars to that first one since 
then, at the taxpayers’ expense. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Isn’t that free enterprise? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Well, this is taxpayer-supported free enterprise, my hon. member. This is not free 
enterprise in the full sense of “free” enterprise; it is taxpayer-supported free enterprise which this 
government is heavy on Although the rhetoric is free enterprise, the actual practice is taxpayer-
supported free enterprise. 
 
Some of the other people that were there at this conference in Vancouver to bring people up to speed on 
privatization so they could put it into effect in Saskatchewan, just like they’re doing on Bill 20, some of 
the other people from the Crown Management Board – the president, chief executive officer, and the 
chairman of the Crown Management Board – well everybody should know that the Crown Management 
Board is an overarching board over the Crown corporations, some of which, or many of which this 
government intends to privatize. So the Crown Management Board was there. 
 



Some of the other people that were there, from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, one Paul 
Schoenhals. They spelled it wrong, Mr. Speaker, but we recognize who he is. It’s Paul Schoenhals, who 
is the full-time chairman of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. Even when they didn’t need a full-
time chairman, he was getting paid by this government to be a full-time chairman. And the reason they 
didn’t need a full-time chairman was demonstrated by the government themselves, because they had a 
part-time chairman in there, a half-time chairman, and now they’ve gone back to a part-time chairman. 
So that period of time Mr. Schoenhals put in there as a full-time chairman of the board, being paid by 
the taxpayers, was maybe unnecessary, maybe an unnecessary expense in the potash corporation. But it 
was necessary for Mr. Schoenhals because he’s one of the family – he’s one of the family of Tory 
cabinet ministers which have found their place in the firmament of privatization in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, from other sections of the government, from the civil service, there was the secretary to the 
premier was there. And here’s a name, oh yes, Peter . . . that was Craig Dutton, secretary to the Premier 
was there; and Peter Hole, a policy analyst with Executive Council. Well that’s fairly high up in the 
government he’s a policy analyst with the Executive Council, right in the Premier’s cabinet. 
 
And here’s the interesting name, Morely Leonard Evans – Morely Leonard Evans, policy secretariat in 
the government This is one of the top people in the Premier’s office in the policy secretariat. And I 
thought to myself, I’ve heard that name Morely Leonard Evans before. And got looking around, Mr. 
Speaker, and I did find out something about Mr. Morely Leonard Evans. I found out a while ago that 
Mr. Morely Leonard Evans was recently employed by the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Interesting. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Yes. This is an ad in the newspaper on January 14 ’89. Now in the announcement 
by Roger Phillips of the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise, it doesn’t mention anywhere, or eve hint 
at it, that this person, Morely Leonard Evans, was in the Premier’s policy secretariat. It’s just cold 
turkey. Here’s Mr. Morely Leonard Evans who is now in charge of . . . director of research for the 
Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise. No mention that he was previously in the Premier’s secretariat on 
policy. 
 
One of the first announcements . . . or one of the first stories about Mr. Evans was done by none other 
than Paul Jackson, and it’s a glowing one-page tribute in the Star-Phoenix about Morely Evans, research 
director for the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise. And it’s headed up by Paul Jackson: “Evans 
learned individual’s values from Zen monks.” 
 
Well it’s good to know that Mr. Morely Evans has a broad education to bring first to the Premier’s 
secretariat on policy, but also to the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise. And Mr. Jackson, who is a 
former speech writer for the Premier of this province, was lavish in his praise for Mr. Evans. I wonder 
why? He says, in part, in this article he’s written up about Mr. Evans, he says that: 
 

The youthful Evans did meditate and didn’t leave, and he’s now putting his superbly trained 
mind to grapple with whether (Saskatchewan) taxpayers in 12 Saskatchewan communities, 
including Saskatoon and Regina, would be better off with privatized service. 

 
And it goes onto talk about a study that Mr. Evans did for a city in California about garbage collections, 
street sweeping, road maintenance, building security, convention centre, janitorial services, hospital 
food operations, and tree trimming. So he’s got some specialities in garbage collection and tree 
trimming, Mr. Evans has. 
 
And no sooner had Mr. Evans announced his study and what he thought was best for people in 
privatization, there was an objection raised in Saskatoon. And who raised the objection? Well, it’s Star-
Phoenix, September 1, ’88, and it says, “Wright questions objectivity of privatization lobby group.” 
This is none other than Mayor Cliff Wright of Saskatoon questioning the objectivity of the theories put 
forward by Mr. Morley Evans. 



 
A city cannot be run on ideological lines, Saskatoon major Cliff Wright said Wednesday. He 
was responding to the announced formation of the Institute of Saskatchewan Enterprise, an 
organization which will investigate the privatization of services provided by municipalities, 
among others. 
 
“If their mind is made up that things should be privatized, why do a study?’ Wright said in an 
interview. 

 
Well this could apply to a lot of things that are going on in Saskatchewan today. If your mind’s already 
made up on SaskPower privatization, why are you doing the study? And this government is spending 
probably hundreds of thousands of dollars doing that study on privatization. And the mayor of 
Saskatoon says, why do the study? You’ve made up your mind. 
 
The mayor goes on: 
 

From my personal standpoint, it is a mistake to try and run a city on an ideology, not matter 
what that ideology is 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. Would the hon. member make his remarks relevant to the topic under 
discussion. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to keep my remarks relevant to the topic under 
discussion, which is the ramming through of Bill 20, which is the destruction of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m searching out the sources of information that this government drew from to come to their 
conclusions about Bills like Bill 20. And clearly the government, I don’t think, and we’ve had it 
demonstrated here, that it doesn’t have the capacity on the front benches to think this all out by 
themselves. They’ve had some help, and I think the Fraser Institute has helped them. And I think the 
institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise is attempting in their stumbling way to help them as well. 
 
In order to under the privatization, I believe that we have to investigate the sources of the information 
and the type of people that are putting forward these ideas. This is the director of research from the 
Premier’s policy secretariat I’m talking about, Mr. Speaker. This is not somebody we pulled in off the 
street to examine. This is the key policy person in the Premier’s office, who attended the Fraser Institute 
meeting on privatization and is now the director of research for the Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise. 
 
(0830) 
 
This is not somebody that casually we’re referring to. This is a person that’s been in three different 
areas that are all interrelated, and it all relates to privatization, and that relates to Bill No. 20, the 
destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
I did just a bit more research and I want to report it to you, Mr. Speaker, on Mr. Morley Evans, the 
director of research for the Institute for Enterprise in Regina. 
 
It mentioned quite a bit about Mr. Morley Evans’ vast and varied education, and I thought I’d better 
check that out to see what was his background because this is a person that’s got to be advising the 
government, he’s got to be advising the institute on the privatization of SaskPower. He must have been 
advising the government on privatization relating to Bill 20, and he certainly was at the think tank, the 
Fraser think tank in Vancouver, because he’s listed as one of the participants in the think tank. And this 
was a think tank that had more Saskatchewan government and Crown corporations’ presence than any 



government in Canada; the greatest representation at this privatization think tank at the Fraser Institute 
in B.C. than anyone else. 
 
Now it goes on to state here in some information about Mr. Evans: 
 
Morley Evans likes to talk about his links to a California-based think tank called Reasons Foundation. 
He says that the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise has collegial tines to it as well as to the Fraser 
Institute and Madsen Pirie’s Adam Smith Institute. 
 
Well now this ties it all together in a nice little bundle, all the privatization guys. It mentions the 
institute, the Reason Foundation in California. It mentions the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise 
which has collegial ties, as well as the Fraser Institute and Madsen Pirie’s Adam Smith Institute. And 
the Reason Foundation literature is displayed in the ISE offices – this is the Institute for Saskatchewan 
Enterprise offices. A very close, neat tie-in among all these organizations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Reason Foundation does economic, social and political research and published regular magazines 
and pamphlets. In many ways it seems to be what the ISE would like to be, and that’s something to be 
worried about. 
 
The Reason Foundation is listed in the radical right – oh, oh, radicals. Where have I heard that before? 
The Reason Foundation is listed in the radical right, a world directory as part of the Libertarian new 
right – well there the member for Weyburn has found his niche; he’s a Libertarian, that’s what he is. I 
wondered why he was always shouting out in this House – which advocates the rapid reduction of state 
involvement in the economy and favouring of individuals over collective rights. Ah, yes, it was 
established in ’78 and has now a yearly budget approaching $2 million. This is the Reason Foundation. 
 
The foundation promotes and conducts research on economic, social, and political issues of interest to 
Libertarians. In 1984 it took part in producing television programs on the new right philosophy for 
broadcast in Britain. So it’s world-wide, spread all over. And this is where the people draw their 
sustenance from as far as not having quite enough brain power capability on the front bench, they draw 
from institutes like this, and from people like Mr. Evans, who has this varied background. 
 
Well I was a big more curious about Mr. Evans and what his background was, so I started looking up 
the Union Graduate School of Ohio – it’s where Mr. Evans attended – seeking some information about 
the depth of his formal education, Mr. Speaker. It’s important that we know this, because these are the 
people, the very people that are advising this government on Bill 20. These are the key people. 
 
Apparently the Union Graduate School of Ohio is part of a group called The Union for Experimenting 
colleges and Universities. They in turn are accredited by an organization called the Commission on 
Institutions of higher Education of North Central Association of Colleges and Schools. I was curious 
about whether these would be recognized in the formal array of educational institutions in the United 
States. So I obtained the National Directory of Addresses and Phone numbers – this is of educational 
institutes in the United States – and nowhere, nowhere in this list is it acknowledged that they exist; 
nowhere is it acknowledged they exist. And this is a rather comprehensive list, as you will see, Mr. 
Speaker. There is nothing suggesting that this organization, the Union Graduate School of Ohio, which 
trains little radicals, trains little radicals for the far right, is acknowledged anywhere in the hierarchy of 
formal educational institute in the United States. 
 
I don’t want to say anything more about Mr. Evans. I think his associations and his records speak for 
themselves, he now being the director of research for the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The conference that took place in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, was broken down into three thematic 
segments. They were; how to sell off Crown corporations and other government assets. Well it’s 
important that the people from Saskatchewan, the largest delegation there, learn that, because their 



attempts – and they didn’t learn the lesson well, Mr. Speaker – because their attempts up to this point 
have been bumbling, to say the least. And they also had a section on how to contract out government 
service. Well actually the Government of Saskatchewan is ahead of the field in that area . . . or one of 
the first ones into that field, contracting out the highway maintenance and laying off hundreds of 
highway workers in Saskatchewan. 
 
It goes on to a number of other areas about selling assts. It says you have to have an aggressive 
advertising campaign. Well “aggressive advertising campaign” would be an understatement when you 
talk about the budget that this government has spent on aggressive advertising for privatization. Their 
broad government advertising budget in just four years was over $46 million, and I’ll be they’re 
spending on a pocketful more of money as soon as this Bill is out of the way on advertising 
privatization in general, and PCS in particular, because the demise of PCS will not go down with the 
people of Saskatchewan and may not even not go down with a lot of advertising dollars. But the 
institute told them that they had to have an aggressive advertising campaign, this Fraser Institute in 
British Columbia. 
 
Some of the other people in the Fraser Institute are of course on the board of directors, and it’s listed on 
the Fraser Institute’s material, is Peter Pocklington. Peter Pocklington giving the people of 
Saskatchewan advice on how to privatize! Peter Pocklington, the apostle of free enterprise, always there 
with his hand out, always there with his hand out – 20 million in Saskatchewan, 50 million in Alberta, 
more in Saskatchewan, now more in Alberta – not quite following through on his promises. He’s a 
director of the Fraser Institute where the Saskatchewan people that went to get their sustenance, their 
mental sustenance, so they could carry through on this privatization. 
 
Peter Pocklington’s motto is: do it but do it with other people’s money; do it with other people’s assets. 
And he’s just true to his motto, Mr. Speaker, he’s true to his motto. I just want to quote briefly one news 
article with relation to Mr. Pocklington, and this is from the Leader-Post in July 1989. It’s talking about 
Gainers in Alberta, and Gainers is having some problem – well that’s Peter Pocklington, everybody 
knows that – having some trouble with the Government of Alberta about their performance on their 
huge amount of money they’re getting with their hand-out in Alberta. And the article says this: 
 

We’re reminded of a remark Pocklington made in New Brunswick in 1983 when he was running 
for the federal Tory leadership. “You use other people’s money and other people’s labour to 
build your dreams.” 

 
That’s the practice and the theory of Peter Pocklington. That is a director of the Fraser Institute. The 
Fraser institute is where these people send their key people for training on privatization. 
 
Who were some of the other directors of the Fraser Institute? Well there’s one Alfred Powis. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I think the hon. member is becoming irrelevant in his remarks. I’m sure he 
could go through every director of the Fraser Institute and many other institutes to attempt to make his 
point. But I believe that’s he stepping outside the boundaries of relevancy and I’d like to him to get into 
the topic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to be relevant, Mr. Speaker, because I think this 
material is perfectly relevant to this Bill, Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I’ve already rules that going through detail, the histories of each board 
member of the Fraser Institute, and as I said, I’m sure you could find many other institutes to use, is not 
directly relevant to the Bill. You have used a couple of examples, and I think to belabour the point and 
keep going through board members of that or any other institute is not relevant to the topic, and I ask 
you to get onto the topic. 



 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan believes in what the Fraser 
Institute says. It’s demonstrated by this conference that took place in 1987 where this government sent 
more Crown corporation employees, such as PCS. They sent the chairman, the full-time chairman of the 
board to that meeting on privatization where they describe in the meeting some of the things that this 
government is doing right here and now in this bill, including advertising, massive advertising 
campaigns. They sent not only t chairman of PCS but they sent high officials from the Premier’s office, 
secretary to the Premier, head of the policy secretariat, policy analyst with the Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s relevant that the people I the Fraser Institute are guiding this government in its 
privatization theories and the establishment of its legislation. I think the connection is so strong, so 
interrelated, that I cannot be ignored by the public. The public has to be aware of the fact that this 
government does not have the capacity on its front beaches to carry this out by itself. There is hidden 
agenda and there are hidden supporters, at least they’re partially hidden, and they’re in the Fraser 
institute. 
 
There’s conflicts of interest there. Some of the directors of the Fraser Institute actually own other potash 
companies. They own other potash companies. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Potash city. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Yes, if you take Alf Powis, who’s head of Noranda, Noranda’s in potash mining. 
And Alf Powis . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- Yes, what is the point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- The point of order, Mr. Speaker, is rule 25(2) where a member’s remarks must 
be relevant. You’ve already called this member twice. The last occasion on which you called him was 
when he was going into a diatribe on Alf Powis, chairman of Noranda, and he’s right back at that same 
point, Mr. Speaker. Not only is that not in order, Mr. Speaker, as you have pointed out, but it’s also 
disrespectful and in direct challenge to your ruling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(0845) 
 
The Speaker: – I’ve listened to the point of order and I have . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Speaker, If I could just speak to the point of order, Mr. Minister, I would like 
to say that the Fraser Institute is very much involved in the privatization issue. And I would like to just 
say on the point of order, Mr. Speaker, that this debate is going to wrap up tonight at 10:45. The 
arguments of many people in this Assembly has been that in a time-limited debate that will end at a 
certain time, that repetition is much less important, and I think the leniency should . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. I’ve listened to the hon., member’s point of order, and unfortunately the 
hon. member from Regina Elphinstone is not on the point of order. That was not the issue at all. The 
issue is I have asked the hon. member, whom I have given quite wide latitude to make this arguments 
this morning, that the continuing life history of each board member of the Fraser Institute, and perhaps 
other institutes, which he may or may not have a source to draw on, while it is proper to use one or two 
examples, to go through the whole board of directors and give their life history, is not relevant. And in 
that sense the member’s point of order is well taken. 
 
And the member from Quill Lake who has a habit of interrupting the Chair, and I’m going to once more 
draw it to his attention that he comes into the House and just sits quietly and not sit and immediately 
interrupt the Chair . . . 



 
An Hon. Member: -- Why do I have to sit quiet? 
 
The Speaker: – The member from Quill Lake, I am once more warning you that when the Chair is on 
his feet you do not sit down and interrupt the Chair under any circumstances. 
 
Now the point of order is well taken, and I’d like the hon. member to be on topic. And also to be on 
topic. And also the member from Regina Elphinstone, the member from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: – What’s the point of order? 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Mr. Speaker, in the interpretation of the rules of this House, yesterday the Premier of this 
province spoke for over an hour and used every example of privatization possible and never was called 
to order . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The member’s point of order is not well taken. It is not in fact a point of 
order. It is unfair. Many members in this House have wide latitude, many members in this House, and 
for the member from Quill Lake to stand up and use that as an example is unfair and unjust. The 
member for . . . There is no point or order. I have made a ruling and there is no point of order. The 
member for Saskatoon Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there can be no denying that the relationship between 
the Institute of Saskatchewan Enterprise, the Fraser Institute and Government of Saskatchewan are very 
close indeed. 
 
I’m not going to accept your guidance, Mr. Speaker. You said I should not refer to more than one or two 
directors of the institute . . . or of the Fraser Institute. It was my full intention to refer to only two: Mr. 
Pocklington and Mr. Powis. Mr. Powis is the last director of the Fraser Institute, I wished to address. 
 
And the second example was Mr. Powis, head of Noranda, involved in potash, giving advice to the 
Government of Saskatchewan on potash, on the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
What did Noranda give to the PC Party in 1988 and 1984? They gave to the PC Party $81,377. This is 
the president, the chairman, and the chief executive officer of Noranda, who’s a director of the Fraser 
Institute in ’84, ’88 – gave about $40,000 each year, a total of $81,377 to the PC Party. 
 
And what did Noranda, this director, give to the PC Party of Saskatchewan in ‘82-83? They gave to the 
PC Party of Saskatchewan $29,585.90. This is one of the directors of the Fraser Institute who works in 
potash in Saskatchewan in opposition to the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, is advising the 
Government of Saskatchewan on the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Alf Powis. Back in the beginning of potash when the New Democrats were 
the government, Noranda was one of the companies that was taking this government to court, was one 
of the companies that was taking this government to court over the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
and the attempt to set it up It was one of the corporation, Noranda that refused to pay its taxes to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, a private potash company which was a law unto itself in the ‘70s in the 
potash in Saskatchewan. And it was not the only one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I said I was only going to deal with two directors, Mr. Speaker, and that’s all I intended to deal 
with. But I want to deal . . . and this is a document from the Fraser Institute. This is where the 
government sent its people for schooling, for schooling on privatization. And who are the officers of the 



Fraser Institute, not the directors but the officers? And I just want to deal with one officer of the Fraser 
Institute to illustrate the point. 
 
This is a book put out by the Fraser Institute in October 1987, and it’s followed by other documents 
from the Fraser Institute right up to the present, 1989. And in all these documents the person who’s 
listed as the director of The Centre for the Study of Economics and Religion is Dr. Walter Block. This is 
part of the Fraser Institute. 
 
And I would think out of The Centre for the Study of Economics and Relations this government would 
have got some of its religious fervour for privatizing in Saskatchewan, right from Dr. Walter Block in 
the Fraser Institute, because they were there. They sent their representatives. They sent Paul Schoenhals 
there; they sent people there who are now in the Institute for Saskatchewan Enterprise – paid their way 
with taxpayers’ money. 
 
And who is Dr. Walter block? Well I have an article here about Dr. Walter Block, and I want to only 
read part of it, Mr. Speaker, because I believe that the revulsion at the reading of this article will be 
overwhelming after I’ve read just part of it about Dr. Walter Block . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
it seems like that. 
 
I know that some of the people on the other side won’t want to hear about Dr. Walter . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The hon. members who are interrupting the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount are disrupting the debate – are disrupting the debate. It is my responsibility to bring that to 
the attention of hon. members and I am doing so now. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – This article, and I have it here, Mr. Speaker, on Dr. Walter Block states as follows. 
This is an article written in 1983. I agree that’s a bit stale, but Dr. Walter Block is still there; he’s still 
the director of research and religion or whatever it is, in the Fraser Institute, the Fraser Institute, which 
provides information to the Government of Saskatchewan on the destruction of the potash corporation. 
 
What is the innermost thinking of Dr. Walter Block? Well the article says: 
 

If you’ve ever wondered where the free market theories of the Fraser Institute would lead, if 
followed to their logical (or illogical) conclusion, Blocks rather amazing book Defending the 
Undefendable may provide some answers. 

 
It’s Dr. Walter Block’s book, Defending the Undefendable. 

 
The hard-cover, black book was published in New York in 1976 when Block was an economics 
professor at Rutgers University in Newark, N.J. Block’s central theme is that many of the people 
considered to be the villains in society, like pimps, drug dealers, blackmailers, dishonest 
policemen, and exploiters of child labour, are guilty of no wrong-doing and actually benefit the 
rest of us. 
 
These “undefendable” characters are only engaging in free market trade, Block argues. They 
don’t initiate violence against anyone, they don’t’ force anyone to engage in their trade and they 
should be left along to carry on their business. The real villain of the marketplace is (surprise!) 
government, which forces us, through the threat of violence, to pay taxes for goods and services 
we may not want. 
 
Block has taken a simple principle – the free trade of goods and services among people – and 
extended it to every area of human endeavour, regardless of any moral or social implications. 
Moral judgements are irrelevant to free market forces, Block believes. 
 



For example, Block says there’s nothing wrong with prostitution. It’s simply the voluntary trade 
of sexual services for a fee. Some would consider the prostitute to be a victim of social and 
economic circumstances, exploited and degraded by her trade. But Block dismissed those 
arguments: “ . . . the prostitute obviously prefers her work (he goes on), otherwise she would not 
continue it.” The life of a prostitute is as good or bad as she wishes it to be.” Social workers who 
have documented the lives of teenage prostitutes in Vancouver or Toronto may disagree, but of 
course, what do they know about free market forces? 

 
The Speaker: – Order, order. I have been listening to the hon. member and I have brought to his 
attention two or three times the issue of relevancy. And now he’s on a new topic and I’m certainly that 
I, as well as perhaps other members, might be interesting in seeing how that is relevant to Bill 20, the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. How are the remarks you are now making relevant? Order, order. 
The member from Saskatoon South, I just ask you to allow the debate to proceed. I think that would be 
in the best interests of yourself and the House. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Well, Mr. Speaker, it cannot be denied that the Fraser Institute has played a central 
position in the privatization in Canada and in fact a major central position in the privatization in 
Saskatchewan, witnessed by the fact that the Saskatchewan government sent more heads of 
departments, Crown corporation employees, to the Fraser Institute on privatization than any other 
government in Canada; they sent more people there. And when they were there they were listening to 
Dr. Walter Block, they were listening and getting their advice from Dr. Walter Block, who is the head 
of the Centre for Study of Economics and Relations in the Fraser Institute. This is where they seek their 
advice. This is the source of their information about privatization. 
 
I’m merely referring to Dr. Block’s credentials, and I only want to refer to them very briefly. These are 
the economic thoughts of Dr. Block who was a university professor at Rutgers, who put down his 
thoughts in a book, who is now the head of research and religion at the Fraser Institute advising this 
government. And I only want to report very briefly on what Dr. Block’s ideas are. This is a person that 
guides the Government of Saskatchewan somewhat. Just one small paragraph more, Mr. Speaker, to 
round out the description of Dr. Block, the director of research and religion at the institute. 
 
(0900) 
 

Discrimination against women (this article goes on to say) by paying them lower wages should 
be tolerated, because “the right to discriminate” is a fundamental right of all individuals. 
Besides, if women accept lower pay for the same work, the demand for female workers would 
increase, opening up new opportunities for them. 

 
These are the theories of Dr. Walter Block at the Fraser Institute, theories that cannot be ignored, 
because the Government of Saskatchewan seeks advice from that fountain of knowledge about 
privatization in British Columbia, the Fraser Institute. 
 
It’s a coincidence, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday in the debate, the member for Swift Current, in 
speaking on this Bill to destroy the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, referred to a privatization 
program of the Blakeney government, or some thoughts on the privatization of the Blakeney 
Government, back in 1982. 
 
And I recall the minister speaking about that. And strange as it may seem, here is the same item that the 
minister spoke about in an article from the Fraser Institute, April 1989, the Fraser Forum. And Michael 
Walker, who is the head of the Fraser Institute, is discussing privatization on the prairies and he says in 
one part of his – and anybody can get it, it’s the April 1989, and I imagine the minister must have 
already read it because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, she says she has not read it. The minister 
says from her seat she has not read it. But I suspect there’s such a close connection there that the people 
are going to be judging for themselves whether in fact the minister is conversant with this idea coming 
from the Fraser Institute, because the Fraser Institute says: 



 
As if to underline the point, there has been a recent leak of a cabinet document from the twilight 
moments of the Blakeney government showing that the cabinet was enthusiastically in favour of 
a privatization program which had been devised had they not been defeated, the NDP 
government would have the been the author of the prairie privatization program. 

 
And they suggest, the minister from Swift Current suggests that because we were thinking about that in 
1982, that we’re inconsistent because we’re now opposed to the privatization they suggest for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well it’s quite clean, Mr. Speaker, that what we proposed in 1982 is not relationship to what this 
government is doing in the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan in Bill 20 today, and 
the minister should know that. 
 
If she gave a fair reading to it and analyzed it, she would know the following: that that idea in 1982 did 
not sell off any Crown corporations; that idea in 1982 did not entail the sell-off of any public utility, 
which this government plans to do with the sale of SaskEnergy; did not entail the privatization of any 
public service such as the children’s dental plan, which the PCS have already privatized; that plan in 
1982 did not entail the sell-off of any Crown corporations to foreign investors, to out-of-province big 
business. 
 
So the subtle difference between what we discussed in 1982 and what the minister purports to say that 
we discussed in 1982 only exist in the minister’s imagination, her wildest imagination, because she does 
not report the facts to this chamber. And I suggest to you that she and the Fraser Institute are very 
closely co-ordinated because the Fraser Institute carries articles about this particular issue in its April 
1989 issue. 
 
It suggests n the June 1989 issue of the Fraser Forum that the Premier has made a fatal mistake. He’s 
made a fatal mistake in his privatization, and in this particular instance, although they talk about potash 
and privatization generally, his reference is to. 
 
It suggests in the June 1989 issue of the Fraser Forum that the Premier has made a fatal mistake. He’s 
made a fatal mistake in his privatization, and in this particular instance. Although they talk about potash 
and privatization generally, his reference is to the privatization of Sask Power Corporation. He says. 
 

No foreign residents will be permitted to buy shares in the natural gas corporations, at least not 
upon the initial issue. 

 
And that’s why I say, privatization in SaskPower, privatization in the potash corporation, what we see 
here and now is phase 1; phase 2 is to get rid of it all. Phase 2 is to get rid of it all if they get a chance. 
And that’s what the people of Saskatchewan have to keep their eye on – not giving this government a 
chance to get rid of it all – because the people of Saskatchewan don’t agree that these things should be 
disposed of; that’s quite clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely necessary that members and the public have a clear understanding of the all 
of the major forces bearing upon our Saskatchewan society in order to appreciate how Crown 
corporations fit into the economic picture. This includes the potash corporation, a very big player, if I 
may say so. The existence of Crown corporations reflects the facts of the economic environment in a 
general way in Canada, and in a more specific way in Saskatchewan. 
 
I suggest that the conditions affecting Canada led to the use of Crown corporations as instruments of 
national economic policy by all Canadian governments. Our Canadian economic environment in all its 
aspects dictated, from a practical viewpoint, the use of Crown corporations for a variety of reasons. 
Some of those reasons were related to cultural identity of economic pragmatism, with varying degrees 
of political intensity and application. 



 
In Saskatchewan the forces of the economic environment were, and are, intensified by a severity of 
climate, sparsity of population, distance from markets, etc. Therefore, the use of Crown corporations as 
well as co-operatives were essential component of our economic picture. It is not a surprise to find Mr. 
Speaker, choose to have strong, direct influence in a variety of provincial activity through Crown 
corporations that is not a surprise, Mr. Speaker, Crown corporations controlling power, 
communications, transportation, service industries, and resource development have been supported by 
varying degrees by successive provincial governments sine the province was formed 1905. 
 
As I say, Saskatchewan’s sparse population over a large area dictates that people, through their chosen 
government instruments, must maintain a sufficient economic presence in Saskatchewan’s economic 
picture to be able to balance to external large corporations which daily exert a constant force on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Those outside forces answer to their owners. Their bottom line is the profit they can make. That’s the 
bottom line of the outside forces. Successive Saskatchewan governments in varying degrees have used 
the Crown corporations as the appropriate response to outside forces or to accomplish what outside 
forces were not interested in doing, at least until there was a profit to be made. 
 
Those governments realized a Crown corporation could provide a service where no service or 
inadequate service was being provided in a power distribution system, in an insurance system, a 
transportation system, a marketing system, a communications systems, to mention but a few. 
 
We must understand the context, Mr. Speaker, we must understand the context of our provincial 
economy – what private forces were at work, their successes, if Bill 20, The Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan Reorganization Bill, sends us backwards in history. And I believe it will. 
 
Although potash was discovered many years ago, it was only being produced commercially prior to 
1962 at IMC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (Canada) Ltd.) Esterhazy and at Potash 
Company of America at Patience Lake near Saskatoon. Unfortunately, the Potash Company of America 
had flooded shaft caused by a pressure break from the very high-pressure Blairmore sands area. 
International Minerals at Esterhazy had similar problems. The pioneer potash development companies 
did much experimentation and had significant added expenditures in developing sounds, shaft tubing, 
and associated procedures to deal with those production problems. 
 
New Democratic government of that day, Mr. Speaker, felt that added costs warranted special 
consideration, so an extended low royalty period was initiated as a form of relief to those pioneers in the 
potash development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Interestingly enough, the Liberal Party upon taking government in 1964 on the instructions of Premier 
Thatcher said that all potash companies would be able to benefit from the low royalty period. 
 
What the premier did in 1964 was extend the low royalty period to all the potash companies, not just the 
pioneers that had the extra expenses and frustration of getting to the potash beds and extracting potash. 
The premier of that day proudly stated that the people of Saskatchewan would now see real private 
enterprise development take place. 
 
I recall in this Chamber listening to the premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Thatcher, saying that now you’re 
going to see some real private enterprise develop in Saskatchewan. Thatcher’s brash intervention in the 
potash economy was unfair to the pioneer companies, unfair to Saskatchewan people generally – he 
should have received the full royalty from the new potash companies who were extracting potash – and 
finally, Mr. Speaker, caused the inevitable to happen. Excess production was brought into being, the 
price was driven down drastically, our sales into the U.S. Market, our mainstay market, caused an 
adverse market reaction in the United States. 
 



Premier Thatcher was forced to bring in Draconian potash prorationing. Thatcher’s first nonsensical 
free enterprise intervention in the potash economy cause social and economic dislocation of a very 
serious nature in Saskatchewan. 
 
People were laid off as potash mines cut back t less than 50 per cent of their plate capacity. Revenues 
were in an artificial decline for several years. Within seven years, the people of Saskatchewan having 
seen the drastic economic consequences of premier Thatcher’s intervention in the potash economy, for 
other reasons as well voted him out of office. And I suspect, Mr. Speaker, in due course the people of 
Saskatchewan, having seen in the drastic results of this government’s intervention in the potash 
economy and elsewhere in the economy of Saskatchewan, will vote them out of office as well. 
 
Over the next while, under the competent direction of Allan Blakeney as the premier, the potash 
economy regained a sense of balance in which the revenues and work-force stabilized and then began 
growing rapidly in a manner never seen before in any Saskatchewan resource extraction industry These 
were the golden days of potash development in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This period was not without some bothersome disruption which, in my view, seemed to reflect an 
unusual degree of corporate degree of corporate greed displayed by some of the international potash 
companies. 
 
Let me review how private enterprise potash companies acted in their role as corporate citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And I say to you, I hasten to say to you, Mr. Minister, I wouldn’t bother reviewing this, 
but this government is gong to buy the destruction of the potash corporation, is going to put us back into 
this period, back into this period where most of the potash production in Saskatchewan will be governed 
by international potash companies. We want to know how they performed as corporate citizens when 
they were alone in the field of potash extraction in Saskatchewan previously. 
 
So there is a potential in bill No., 20 for a similar set of conditions to arise when the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan has been destructed by this government. 
 
(0915) 
 
To begin with, a schedule of relatively low royalties was approved by the provincial government in late 
1962. The rates were similar to those in effect in New Mexico, which deliberately allow potash 
companies to recover a major portion of their investment shortly after going into production. 
 
So this shows in 1962 the New Democratic government was sensitive to the need of the potash 
companies to ease the burden of getting into production where new technology was required. And the 
royalties reflected that until 1974, and as I said, for the pioneering companies of Saskatchewan – Potash 
Company of American and the International Minerals – until 1981. In 1964 and I’m coming with some 
detail now, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The Liberal government extended the guarantee of existing low royalties to 1981 for all potash 
producers . . . (also) urged potash firms to make a commitment to start operations in 
Saskatchewan before October 1, ’67 or face higher royalty rates than those enjoyed by 
companies already committed to potash development. 
 
By 1967 it became apparent that the potash industry had expanded too rapidly. The problem of 
over-supply threatened but it was too late to halt most development. Unable to control 
themselves late in 1969 the potash companies requested the government to introduce 
prorationing. 

 
What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is: 
 



. . . Saskatchewan government intervention for the good of the resource and for the very survival 
of the industry itself. 

 
The Saskatchewan government intervention for the good of the resource and the very industry itself. 
 

This had the effect of stabilizing the Saskatchewan potash industry but at levels considerably 
below production capacity. 
 
In 1971 a New Democratic government party was elected in Saskatchewan. In the New Deal for 
People which has been its campaign platform the New Democrats had promised the following: 
 
Review (all) existing royalty and other arrangements with a view to renegotiating, where 
necessary, (of) those not in the interests of . . . (conditions) of those not in the interests of 
Saskatchewan people. Where feasible, we will reclaim ownership and control of foreign-owned 
resources. 

 
We see in Bill 20 a reversal of what was happening then. 
 
Meanwhile in October 1971, the government requested the potash industry to comment on the 
prorationing scheme. The industry was asked for their unqualified support of the program and whether 
they thought it should be continued. The industry responded with their support in 1971. 
 
In December 1971, the government’s potash policy stated the following: prorationing would be 
continued because of its obvious benefits to the industry and, as a result, to the province. Good, logical, 
sound reasoning, Mr. Speaker, not the flighty kind of nonsense we get out the Fraser Institute in British 
Columbia which is advising this government on potash destruction in Saskatchewan. 
 
The second point: there was a need for significant increase in overseas sales and strong marketing 
organization. Well that’s reasonable too. 
 
Government revenues from the potash industry were too low. That’s the final point. Note that, Mr. 
Speaker, this was referring to the Thatcher period. Under the Thatcher free enterprise government 
revenues were too low for Saskatchewan people. So that’s one of the elements of the Thatcher term of 
office in Saskatchewan, that potash royalties were too low for the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
suspect, Mr. Speaker, when the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is completed, in 
due course, if this government has its way, potash royalties will be too low for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In March of 1972 the industry was advised of proposed changes to the prorationing formula. There was 
a general support for the changes, in June 1972, a potash prorationing fee of 60 cents a tone of muriate 
and changes to the potash prorationing program so that production was shared only on the basis of plant 
capacity, instead of plant capacity and market availability, or marketing ability, as was the case 
previously. 
 
Canpotex was originally set up in 1970 as a marketing agency for some Saskatchewan producers. It 
represented these companies in bidding for Canadian foreign aid contracts and other foreign 
government tenders. The purpose of this was to compete with large selling organizations representing 
foreign potash industries. It is ironic, Mr. Speaker, at this time of government sell off of potash, that 
Canpotex deals in large part with foreign governments, not foreign private corporations. They deal with 
foreign governments in the field of potash. 
 
All Saskatchewan potash producers had joined Canpotex by July ’72, and Canpotex became responsible 
for all offshore sales of Saskatchewan potash. In July of 1972, Central Canada Potash challenged the 
province’s prorationing regulations in the courts and asked it be allowed a licence for unlimited 
production. Nearly all the other potash companies appeared on behalf of the provincial government, 



which indicates their continued support for prorationing – continued support for prorationing – and that 
is government regulation. 
 
In November 1972, premier Blakeney spoke of a new strategy for resource development in which the 
public interest, not the private gain, must be the basis. He noted that the government was studying the 
possibilities of public ownership. This is in November ’72. It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, a clear warning to 
the potash companies, that coupled with the 1971 party platform shows that the international potash 
companies were warned if they continued to care very little about Saskatchewan people, action would 
be taken to protect Saskatchewan people. 
 
In December, 1972, the . . . (inaudible) . . . I’m getting a report from one of the outlining ports there, 
Mr. Speaker – the member for Regina Wascana, member for Regina Wascana. I have a suggestion for 
the member for Regina Wascana. I’ve taken the opportunity over the years to visit many potash mines, 
go through the mills, go down the shaft, visit the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member for 
Regina Wascana will just listen, just listen, I have a suggestion which may improve his understanding 
of potash in Saskatchewan. And anything that leads to the improvement of the member for Wascana’s 
understanding of potash in Saskatchewan would be a benefit to everyone in Saskatchewan. 
 
I said that I visited many potash mines in Saskatchewan and have gone down the shaft. It, Mr. Speaker, 
is an awesome experience – it’s an awesome experience. You drop down a thousand metres into the 
ground at a speed that makes you swallow several times on the way down to equalize the pressure 
change. You get underneath, you realize the enormity of the potash operation. You drive in a motorized 
vehicle for a few miles underground, horizontally out to the face of the potash, and you get a better 
understanding of what potash is all about. And I wish the member for Regina Wascana had that 
understanding. 
 
Now I suspect he’s been down a potash shaft to see what it’s like and has experienced some of the 
things I’ve experienced in visiting potash mines, but I have a further suggestion for the member for 
Regina Wascana which will improve his understanding of potash mines in Saskatchewan. I would 
suggest that he go underground once more, and I want to suggest the mine for him. I suggest it be 
Kalium. And if the member comes back from that visit underground to the Kalium mine, we will be 
able t confirm that he has water on the brain, because . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. I don’t think we should bring personality and make personal remarks 
about other members. They don’t enhance the debate in the House. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – I think it would be understood Mr. Speaker, if a person visited Kalium mine, you 
would get water on your brain – there’s no doubt about that – because it’s a solution mine. But it would 
be a benefit to the member from Regina Wascana to visit at the Kalium mine and go underground. Take 
your time; take your time. We have no need for your services here. 
 
I want to get on with the thrust of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. In December 1972 Central Canada Potash 
launched another suit against the province’s prorationing program. In an unprecedented move, the 
federal Liberal government joined the suit against Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m sure we were all interested the other day when the Leader of the Liberal Party of Saskatchewan 
managed to get on the front page of the newspaper stating her position, her interesting position on 
Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. And she’s of the old school; she’s of the old Liberal school that 
you should get the government out of the potash corporation. 
 
She’s of the view that the federal Liberal government had in adjoining with Central Canada Potash in 
court cases against the province of Saskatchewan. She’s in league with the old Liberals that sat in this 
House a number of years ago. They’re almost extinct; they’re almost extinct, but she’s bringing forward 
their old ideas that we should get out of the potash corporations. That’s her view. 
 



The federal Liberal government joined in the suit against the Government of Saskatchewan back in 
1972. At this point it is becoming clear to Saskatchewan people that we are being faced with a 
combination of free enterprise, Liberal governments at Ottawa teaming up with the big players in the 
potash industry to deny them the rightful expectation. From her on, hardball was being played in the 
potash scene. From here on hardball was being played. 
 
In October ’73 it was announced that the potash prorationing fee would be doubled to $1.20 per ton of 
muriate; that potash companies would be required to file financial statements with the government, and 
that no new mining of milling capacity would be permitted until a sound plan for general public 
participation had been implemented. So those were the new conditions which were announced by the 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In April 1974 the minister outlined proposals for a new potash policy which included proposals for new 
taxes and for government participation in future development of the industry. Also the companies were 
asked to file financial statements as part of the policy which had been announced in October ’73. 
 
Thereafter in July 1974, the potash producers provided detailed response to their proposed new potash 
policy in which they disagreed with the new tax proposal and plans for greater public participation. By 
August of 1974, production quotas were lifted from the potash industry because of the accelerated 
demand for Saskatchewan potash allowed the industry to compete at full capacity. 
 
So here we have a government in Saskatchewan which, through its careful regulation of the industry, 
had, by 1974, got the industry back up to full capacity with no casualties. And I think we can thank Mr. 
Blakeney for being one of the main actors in that particular action in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In October 1974 the government’s new potash policy included a new tax called the reserve tax that was 
expected to increase provincial revenues from potash fivefold. The proposed overall level of this tax 
had been reduced to about 28 per cent from the April proposal b because of discussion with the 
industry. 
 
(0930) 
 
The tax was designed with the objective of encouraging expansion in the industry. Government 
participation in all new mine developments, either as a major partner in joint ventures or as a full owner 
of the mine, and the third point in the government’s new potash policy, was as follows: equity capital 
was offered for expansion of existing facilities beyond the rated capacity. So these three points, a new 
tax called the reserve tax, government participation and equity capital being offered, were the salient 
points of the governments’ potash policy in October, 1974. 
 
By November of 1974, the potash reserve tax regulations were initiated. In November ’74, the federal 
Liberal government also reintroduced a budget cancelling the deductibility of provincial royalty 
payments, taxes and fees in calculating corporate income tax. The effect was to greatly increase federal 
taxes on industry, particularly the oil and gas industry, but also potash. Soon the province responded by 
making provincial royalties and fees deductible for the purpose of provincial income tax. 
 
In January 1975 The Globe and Mail reported that Saskatchewan potash companies had announced 
deferment of expansion plans worth $200 million. That would have increased the provinces productive 
capacity by nearly a third. So in January ’74 Saskatchewan potash private companies announced 
deferment of expansion plans worth $200 million, which would have increased capacity by nearly a 
third. 
 
Then on February 4, 1975, potash company of Saskatchewan had been formerly established as a Crown 
corporation with powers to undertake mining developments, joint ventures with others, and to acquire 
interest in the potash operations. On February 10, ’75, the Canadian Potash Producers Association, 
more easily known as CPPA, presented the government with a brief outlining its position regarding the 



reserve tax. They wanted levels of taxation to all governments to be no greater than 50 per cent of pre-
tax profits. 
 
Further, on February 19 the CPPA met with the premier to discuss the tax situation and it was agreed 
that a joint industry-government committee be set up to review the matter of measuring industry 
profitability after all the recent tax changes at both levels of government. So it was agreed that a 
committee would be set up. 
 
It would appear at this point that negotiations in good faith were under way. In May 1975 the 
Saskatchewan Court of Queen’s Bench ruled the province’s prorationing scheme was unconstitutional 
in that it infringed on the powers of the federal government. Premier Blakeney announced the province 
would appeal. Once more, again, a New Democratic government going to bat for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Members should keeping mind that potash prices rose to $75 a ton in 1975, compared to $36 a ton in 
1972. So we see the potash prices more than doubling in a three-year period. In May 1975 the joint 
industry-government committee met for the first time. Significant progress was made on a number of 
issues. It was agreed that the industry would work out is proposal regarding the tax framework. 
 
The industry, however, later declined to meet again in spite of an earlier agreement by both sides to do 
so. Some changes were made to the reserve tax formula because of difficulties that resulted form the 
incompatibility of provincial and federal tax rules which had been brought to the attention of the 
government prior to the February 19 meeting. 
 
On June 11, 1975, the Blakeney government was re-elected in a provincial general election. This is 
significant, Mr. Speaker, because the people of Saskatchewan were in fact endorsing increased 
participation of the Government of Saskatchewan in the potash industry of Saskatchewan. This was 
quite clear from the discussions that went on prior to the election, the literature which was circulated by 
the New Democratic Party stating quite clearly what their position was. So the people of Saskatchewan 
went into that election knowing that their government was going to become more actively involved in 
the potash industry and directly involved. 
 
It appears that the electoral decision of the Saskatchewan people necessitated the potash companies 
going the court option, since their political option had faded when the Liberals or Conservatives failed 
to be elected to government in 1975. Consequently, on June 20, ’75, all producers except Central 
Canada Potash launched a suit against the provincial government attacking the legality of the reserve 
tax. 
 

The companies also refused to pay the quarterly instalment taxes due on that date This again 
reflects the attitude of the multinational foreign potash companies to the proper and correct 
expectation of Saskatchewan people to benefit from their resource development. 

 
In the event that someone had missed that statement – maybe the member from Meadow Lake may have 
missed it – I want to read that again: 
 

The companies refusing to pay their quarterly instalments on taxes due on that date again 
reflects the attitude of the multinational foreign companies to the proper and correct expectation 
of Saskatchewan people to benefit from their resource development. 

 
Taxation and regulation – this government said it can be done with taxation and regulation. The potash 
companies have proven them wrong. The private potash companies have proven them wrong, that it 
can’t be done with taxation and regulation, and they’ve proven also, the private potash companies, that 
they’re unable to control themselves in a situation where excessive production was put into effect. 
 
In August 1975 Saskatchewan potash companies had taxes in arrears totalling about $30 million. This 
was not an insignificant amount of money we’re talking about here, Mr. Speaker, that the companies 



failed to pay and refused to pay. In August ’75, potash companies had arrears totalling $30 million that 
they owed. 
 
Note again, Mr. Speaker, the complex legal action by the potash multinational companies was likely to 
have taken several months to prepare. Consequently, a person could be forgiven for losing some respect 
for the good faith negotiations by the potash companies. It’s questionable whether those negotiations 
were in fact in good faith, because the legal actions were so complex that it would have taken months to 
prepare them. But they were tabled shortly after the 1975 election, taken to the court. 
 
In October 1975, all potash companies, with the exception of Central Canada, which already had a 
lawsuit pending, and Alwinsal, began a court action challenging the potash prorationing fee regulations. 
Now it’s as convenient, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the potash companies to attack prorationing. It’s 
convenient for them to attack prorationing in the courts, when they had supported potash prorationing 
on numerous occasions prior to that time, and in fat had requested it themselves at the beginning, at the 
initial steps. 
 
On November 1975, the government announced in its Speech from the Throne that effective control of 
the potash industry would be acquired through public ownership. This is after the 1975 election. For this 
government to now undo, by Bill 20, that which was put together with popular support, as the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, is an offence against the people of Saskatchewan whose resources will be 
sold off to foreign interests. 
 
In summation, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan potash policy is primarily the result of past struggles 
with the potash industry over taxation and regulation development of the resource. Quite clearly, that’s 
the genesis of the legislation. It’s the struggle over taxing and . . . regulation and taxation of the 
industry. 
 
Regulation and taxation have been the usual methods by which the province has controlled development 
of our natural resources. In most resource sectors, these methods have succeeded in bringing about an 
accommodation with the resource companies to the satisfaction of both the industry and the province. 
But in the case of potash, it has not And on this, I have already elaborated. 
 
So it’s been shown that regulation and taxation, the manner in which these people across the way intend 
to regulate the industry, has not been readily accepted by the industry. In fact, it has been resisted in the 
courts. Provincial resource policies used to be based on the fact that our natural resources belonged to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Although resource companies have been invited to invest and participate in 
developing our resources, the people of the province of Saskatchewan have never given up ownership 
of their resources, nor have we agreed to relinquish control over them. 
 
This position was made clear to the potash companies when they first came to the province, when 
premier Tommy Douglas was in power. He had this to say: 
 

Development of our natural resources must guarantee that the best interests of the people of the 
province are served. The province must, for example, ensure our resources are conserved so that 
they serve both the present and future generations and that the resource development take place 
in the context of social and economic aspirations of the people of the province. Control of our 
natural resources is also essential if we are to guarantee a fair share of the profit for the people of 
the province from our resource. 

 
That’s the end of the quotation from premier Tommy Douglas. And it is frightening to see these people 
stand in the shadow of Tommy Douglas and say that if Tommy Douglas was here, he would be 
supporting them. What utter nonsense. What utter nonsense. And I think the people of Saskatchewan 
know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



Unfortunately, instead of co-operating with the province and achieving these goals, the potash industry 
refused to join in discussion for potash policies and attacked the province’s right to regulate and tax the 
industry. Quite clearly they attacked us in the courts, they attacked us elsewhere, and it ran into the 
hundreds of thousands of dollars for the people of Saskatchewan to defend themselves and assert their 
rights in the field of resource control. 
 
In addition, the potash companies under the federal corporate income tax regulations, were allowed a 
generous tax environment during start-up, on top of which a three--year mine holiday or tax-free period 
was added, during which time the depreciation was held back. This was followed by a period in which 
accelerated deprecation was allowed. 
 
The result is that many potash companies were able to go 10 to 15 years without paying any federal 
income tax whatsoever – any federal income tax whatsoever. Provincial royalty and taxation rates have 
also been low but the potash companies in their day have refused to pay them and taken us to court. 
 
In 1972, for example, the potash companies paid less than 6 per cent of their total gross income in 
provincial royalties and municipal income taxes. Statistics Canada data indicates no payment of federal 
income tax by potash companies that year that’s 1972. 
 
In 1973 the potash companies paid less than 6 per cent of their gross sales in tax to the province. Again, 
Statistics Canada data shows no federal income tax payments in 1973. 
 
(0945) 
 
Rising prices meant windfall profits for the companies. Potash production costs at that time were around 
$25 a ton. The province introduced new taxes, as it had in the case of oil, to ensure that a fair share of 
these profits came to the people of the province. In all cases, the industry was consulted about the next 
taxes before they were introduced. They were consulted when a prorationing fee was introduced in 1972 
and again when the reserve tax was introduced in 1974. In fact, the overall level of the proposed reserve 
tax was reduced by 28 per cent after discussion with the industry, which I’ve mentioned previously, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Efforts to ensure that taxation levels were fair ran into problems when the potash industry refused to 
provide financial information requested by the province. A requirement that financial statements be 
filed with the province was made law but the industry failed to comply and enforcement of the law was 
hampered by the fact that most potash companies had their head offices and their financial records 
outside of the country. 
 
Taxation rates paid by the potash industry were comparable with those paid by other provinces for the 
1973 fiscal year. 
 
An example, Mr. Speaker, the potash companies paid 6 per cent or less of their gross income and taxes. 
In that year the average Saskatchewan taxpayer paid 24 per cent of their gross income in taxes; 
Saskatchewan farmers paid about 21 per cent of their gross income; Saskatchewan doctors paid 36 per 
cent; and Saskatchewan lawyers paid 30 per cent. 
 
So what we have here, Mr. Speaker, is the bill to destroy the potash corporation. The intention is clear 
that this potash corporation, upon its destruction, will fall into the hands of foreign owners and foreign 
governments possibly. That’s quite clear from reading the legislation. And the definition section defines 
non-residents, it defines corporation, it defines foreign government, foreign states, or agents of foreign 
government or foreign states. So quite clearly, if it’s in the legislation, it’s likely to happen, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 



This government is quite fond of saying that it’s a world class, performs as a world class government. 
Well in my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s become quite clear that they’re world class in some areas, 
and I don’t know whether it’s desirable from the point of view of Saskatchewan people. 
 
They are certainly first class in the use of closure, which they’ve used on this Bill. They are certainly 
first class in the use of time restrictions on debates – first time use of closure ever. They’re first class in 
the largest provincial budget deficit ever, and they’re first class in the largest provincial debt ever. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it will be recognized in due course that they’re world class in the most waste ever 
by a provincial government. They have a give-away mentality of Saskatchewan assets to outsiders. 
 
It’s stated by the member from Arm River when he spoke in this debate that this is a . . . he put forward 
as a classic study, this debate, as between state ownership and free enterprise. And, you know who’s on 
the side of free enterprise? Well we have the Pocklingtons, the Weyerhaeusers, the Cargills; all in there 
were state-supported free enterprise, not free enterprise in the true sense of free enterprise, but state-
supported and assisted free enterprise. 
 
It’s not a simple debate or struggle between state ownership or free enterprise. That’s nonsense. 
Anybody that portrays it to this Chamber indulges in nonsense. 
 
What we have in Saskatchewan and had in Saskatchewan is a balanced economy – balanced among 
private co-ops and public enterprise, and never at any tie under our government has one dominated to 
the detriment of another. What we have simply with this bill and with this government is an assault on 
Saskatchewan power by the PC Party. That’s their attitude. They’re carrying it over into the potash. It’s 
an assault on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan by the PC Party. And their actions, in order to 
bring this debate to a close, is an assault on democracy by the PC Party. Closure was never used in the 
84-year history of this province. Never. 
 
When September comes this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this province will be entering our 85th years as a 
province. As we head into our 85th year, this government will have to account for their actions. I’m sure 
that during the 85th year, they will have to account for their actions – their Draconian closure, their 
attempt to hide the deficit, the massive debt in the Crown corporations, the massive debt in the 
government, comprehensive across-the-board increases in all crown corporations and government fees, 
broken promises littering the political landscape. These people are going to have to account for that, 
along with this Bill on the potash corporation. 
 
As a result of PC privatization and diversification, the people of Saskatchewan are voting with their 
feet. I reported earlier, Mr. Speaker, in the last 18 months, 26,478 net population outflow from 
Saskatchewan. They’re certainly diversifying Saskatchewan population. They’re going everywhere else. 
 
By this motion this government seeks to hide from the public, to sweep under the rug through this 
closure moisture to narrow the debate. And I stand opposed to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are plenty of other things that require the attention of this government – estimates in many of the 
departments – rather than this particular Bill. But it’s this government’s intention to go ahead with this 
particular Bill for the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. They’re selling off, this 
government is selling off a major profitable Saskatchewan asset and they will be selling it off at a 
depressed price to foreign investors, a depressed price. 
 
The privatization of PCs is going to benefit big businesses and outside wealthy investors rather than the 
people of Saskatchewan. Oh there’ll be some attempted give-aways, and there’ll be all kinds of 
advertising to help it go down, because the Fraser Institute says that you must accomplish these 
programs by massive advertising programs. Yes, we’ve seen it before and we’ll see it again, and the 
taxpayers will pay for it. 
 



By selling this asset, by the destruction of the potash corporation, the PCs are betraying Saskatchewan’s 
future. How is the economy of Saskatchewan to recover if the profitable assets of the province have 
been sold off? 
 
The Deputy Premier was correct when he said in Crown corporations, we’re going to spread it around 
so far that you can never put it back together. Well I think even with the incredible examples of waste, 
mismanagement, and debt that this government has brought in, I think we can put it back together, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think we can make Saskatchewan economically free again. That will be our goal. 
 
But for the time being, this government, through its closure and time restrictions, will force through Bill 
No. 20, and Act to destroy the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. This will not be in the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. This will not assist the recover of the program such as the dental program. We 
need the viable assets of the province of Saskatchewan if we are to install once more those programs 
that made Saskatchewan a bright light in the Canadian federation. 
 
For that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly find myself in a position where I cannot support bill 20, 
which leads to the destruction of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and I will vote that way 
consequently 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise in this House today to enter in the debate on Bill No 20, 
the Bill that will allow public participation in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I welcome this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased to have the opportunity to elaborate on the Bill and what it means 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my opening remarks I want to address of couple of main points. First, the reason that public 
participation in the potash corporation, must be encouraged, and second, what this initiative will mean 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Like most people, Mr. Speaker, I remember the potash debate of 1976 in this very House when the NDP 
government of the days nationalized the potash corporation. While the government’s actions were 
understandable, I believe this debate will illustrate just how misdirected the NDP motives were and 
demonstrate that the nationalization did not work the way it was intended for that government. I will 
also discuss what is needed to make the potash corporation a stronger, more dynamic company for the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by the time our government was elected in 1982 the potash corporation had chalked up 
profits of over $14 million, and the Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale, constantly 
reminds us of that very fact. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the report of the Crown investments review commission covering the period from 
1975 to 1982 indicates that at that time, the time that NDP formed the government, Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations reported an overall profit of $650 million. That’s a lot of money, Mr. Speaker. That 
money should have been used to improve the quality of life for Saskatchewan people through health, 
education, social service, Mr. Speaker, better roads, better highways, lower taxes, lower fuel prices, and 
lower auto insurance rates. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, of the $650 million profit reported by the Crown, only 145 million was returned to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And out of that $145 million, only $95 million made its way to the 
Consolidated Fund where it could benefit the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that was only $95 
million out of the $650 million, not even 15 per cent of $650 million. 
 
Where did the money go, Mr. Speaker? Well instead of using the funds to strengthen our social 
foundation, the NDP government of the day invested in the resource sector. They bought uranium 



mines, Mr. Speaker. They bought oil. They bought sodium sulphate, coal. They bought potash mines, 
Mr. Speaker. Yes, they bought the potash mines. They never built them; they bought them. They never 
created one new job, Mr. Speaker; they just bought the mines. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is quick to point out that at times of strong markets the potash corporation 
made money, but the NDP leader often has very . . . his memory lapses, I guess. He conveniently 
forgets that while PCS made money, there was never any attempt to pay back the money used to finance 
the purchase of the mine – money that belonged to the people of Saskatchewan, for better roads, better 
hospitals, and education. 
 
(1000) 
 
There never was any attempt, Mr. Speaker, to pay off the loans. They borrowed the money from foreign 
banks to finance the unnecessary expansion of the Lanigan mine. That mine cost over $500 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That money was borrowed from the multinationals, as the member from across from 
Saskatoon South mentioned yesterday. That money was borrowed from the very same people that he 
was criticizing yesterday. 
 
So like any irresponsible manager, during the booming 1970s, the NDP in good times made no effort to 
pay off the debt or equity and protect us people of Saskatchewan against the bad times. Not 
surprisingly, when the world potash markets declined, as they inevitably do, the debt of the potash 
corporation began to climb. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the debt wen this way. So in the 1980s when there were 
no big profits, the profits declined, but the debt remained and the debt kept on growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Conservative government was elected in 1982, there was a primary 
responsibility that had to be met. That responsibility was to address the mismanagement of the NDP and 
pay mounting debt commitments. Through Bill 20, Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity to create a 
dynamic, world-class corporation based right herein Saskatchewan. 
 
Think of the possibilities, Mr. Speaker. By freeing the corporation from the constraints of government 
ownership, I believe we can give this company freedom to grow and diversify beyond out wildest 
expectations. There’s no end to the possibilities, Mr. Speaker. We must encourage public participation 
in the potash corporation and attract the capital that will eventually provide an opportunity for the 
company to diversify its operations. 
 
Bill 20 features a number of safeguards that will protect our province and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a majority of the directors of this new public owned company must be Canadian citizens 
and at least three directors must reside in Saskatchewan, and at least 55 per cent of the company will be 
owned by Canadian residents. And through preferred widespread share offering to the corporation’s 
employees and Saskatchewan residents, plus the number of shares that this government will hold, the 
major portion could be held right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Foreign investors must not collectively hold more than 45 per cent of the company or cast more than 25 
per cent of the votes at the shareholders’ meetings. Excepting the Saskatchewan government, no person 
or group, or persons may have hold more than 5 per cent of the shares. This safeguard prevents an 
individual, or a corporation, or too narrow a group of shareholders from controlling the potash 
corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What about the entire matter of control and ownership, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of valid 
concerns that must be addressed. I would like to turn my attention to these points. There are, however, a 
few myths being intentionally propagated by the critics of bill 20, critics who are handcuffed to an 
outdated philosophy that believes only governments can and should own businesses. 
 



Let’s deal with the real concern and the real facts. Just to mention a few of them, must to mention for 
right now, Saskoil, which I heard the member from Saskatoon South talk about yesterday. Saskoil 
corporation since it went public . . . he talked about the lay-offs of the employees; that they laid off so 
many employees when it was taken over publicly. Down in my part of the country we have a fair 
amount of Saskoil people that were involved. When that company took over, there was one employee. 
He looked after six wells. And when it went public, that same employee looked after 12 wells. 
 
Those holes, Mr. Speaker, were producing holes. So the member . . . his argument wasn’t even valid 
when he talked about lay-offs. That’s what I call . . . that’s what I’d call, I would say, good 
management. 
 
One might claim that the government ownership of potash company, or any other company for that 
matter, means that we as Saskatchewan citizens, who elect our government representatives, actually 
own the company. What is true ownership, Mr. Speaker? Let’s define true ownership. When we own a 
house or a car or a business, we are free to lend, sell, rent, or give away that property. That’s what we 
call true ownership. True ownership allows us to bequeath property to our children, Mr. Speaker, and 
we can borrow against that. 
 
Saskatchewan citizens are not direct owners of the potash corporation or any other corporation. As 
Saskatchewan people, we are required through taxation to pay government debt to finance the company 
while politicians and bureaucrats run the business. Unlike any other true public owned company, we 
cannot participate in shareholders’ meetings and have our concerns heard. In fact there are no 
shareholders’ meetings for the potash corporation. This is not true ownership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before the former government nationalized the potash mines, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people 
benefitted through royalties, taxes and government laws that control and regulate the use of potash 
resource. Herein lies an important part of the debate. The government does not have to own potash 
mines on behalf of the people in order to benefit of mining to be passed along to the taxpayers. That’s 
very simple. 
 
I read with considerable interest a recent letter to the editor of The Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker. The 
letter was from W.F. Avery of Vancouver, a former senior financial officers of the potash corporation. 
Mr. Avery set the record straight on this issue of how taxpayers benefit. He wrote, and I quote, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The main source of the province’s revenue from potash mines has been a provincial mining tax; 
in profitable times, corporate income taxes from the private sector. This revenue flow will 
continue whether or not the potash corporation is privatized. It should increase as, unlike a 
private company, a Crown corporation does not pay federal or provincial corporate income 
taxes. 

 
It is clear that with appropriate government laws, we can tax and regulate potash mines to the benefit of 
the taxpayers of the province. 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to just three of the laws that are available to govern potash, Mr. Speaker: The 
Potash Resources Act, which provides for regulations of potash production; the subsurface mineral 
regulations in 1960, which prescribes potash royalties and lease rates; and, Mr. Speaker, the potash 
refining and air emissions regulations, which control air quality in the vicinity of potash mines. These 
laws and other special agreements allow government to exercise control over environment, the 
production and the taxing of potash for the benefit of all. 
 
We must recognize, Mr. Speaker, that these laws and their benefits are directed by and for the taxpayer 
without putting our hard-earned tax money at the risk in a government-owned potash company – 
taxpayers’ money – and should be used to finance quality health care, education, and social programs, 
Mr. Speaker. 



 
Mr. Speaker, money put at risk in a government-run business is like putting money that cannot be used 
for essential government-provided service for the sick and the needy and the young. 
 
The member from Lakeview, one of the members from the opposite, last week talked about the dental 
program, 400 nurses being laid off. She talked about the negative side, but she never did talk about the 
positive side of that. She never did talk about the dentists that we have in Saskatchewan. She didn’t talk 
about where the parents used to have to go to get their teeth fixed. All she talked about was the 
children’s dental program, the negative side of it. 
 
Right now the dental program in my constituency has two new dentists, satellite offices. Those people 
right now go to the dentists with their parents. The way it was before, the children went to the schools, 
had their teeth fixed; the parents weren’t there. Now they make an appointment and these same people 
take their children and they go to the dentist together. 
 
In my part of the country the closes dentist was 100 miles. Now it’s 20 miles away. And I think that is 
something that the people opposite, they don’t’ like to talk about this. They don’t like to talk about that. 
That is a benefit to our community. We have two new families in there. They visit these people in other 
towns at their satellite offices. The parents bring their children in and they’re there together with them. 
Now what is so wrong with that? What is so wrong with that? 
 
Let’s look at the underlying principle of the public participation of the potash corporation, Mr. Speaker. 
IN order for the potash corporation to expand and further develop its potential as a company, 
widespread public participation is needed. By inviting PCS employees, Saskatchewan people, and 
private sector to participate investing in shares, PCS will have an opportunity to operate as a private 
company, free from the constraints of government, to grow and expand and bring new jobs and new 
markets to Saskatchewan. 
 
We have chosen the direct approach, Mr. Speaker, by public participation, Mr. Speaker, If the potash 
corporation can build, expand, and to diversify, then all of us will benefit from the increased taxation – 
new jobs and new opportunities. This money will come from the people of the province. Some will 
come from outside the province, but it don’t all come from the multinationals in New York. 
 
Under Bill 20, Mr. Speaker, the potash corporation will always be a Saskatchewan-based company. The 
benefits? These benefits – new jobs, new products, new technologies of the future and will become part 
of the province. 
 
Let’s look at who owns and who wins and who loses by selling shares in PCS. All of us win, as the 
company grows and expands and benefit the economy. The employees win because they will have a 
direct stake in their share. Their labour will pay off directly. All of us as taxpayers win, because no 
longer will our money be the sole base of investment and support for PCS. 
 
Just for one example, Sask Minerals. For the first time in the history, they paid a dividend directly the to 
the employees. You go back to Sask Minerals employees now and ask them what they think of where 
they’re working, and they will tell you that they enjoyed that $1,100 dividend, on the average, that they 
received. They have never in the history of the 40-some years of history of the sodium sulphate, Sask 
Minerals has never paid a dividend directly to the employees. 
 
Individual shareholders will win. Their shares will help to build a stronger, more profitable potash 
corporation – one that will not be for ever completely dependent on potash markets. 
 
Generally our province will be better off as the result of public participation In the potash corporation. 
The company will have an opportunity to expand, free of government cons, free to compete in the 
private sector. 
 



(1015) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only loser in this transaction will be those who cling to the 1970s notion that 
ownership by the state is the only answer. Ownership by the state is the only answer – that is the 
philosophy from across the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not saying that government does not have a place in providing essential and good 
quality services to citizens. But state ownership for state ownership’s sake thinking is being retired. In 
over 107 countries around the world, from Australia to England, from Japan to Spain, Mr. Speaker, 
countries of every political conviction, in growing numbers, leaders throughout the world are seeing the 
value of broad, basic public ownership through public participation in the economy of the world. 
 
A philosophic debate like that being waged by the opponents of Bill 20 is not necessary, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe that Saskatchewan people see the need and the opportunity for expansion, growth, development 
of PCS, truly a public company. 
 
In many respects, this initiative starts a new cycle of elevation for the large Crown resource 
corporations. From government stand-alone ownerships to the broad mixture of involved, concerned, 
and interested public investors, employees, and citizens, with less direct state ownership, and 
investment and public participation of individuals helping to build and develop PCS, the future looks 
encouraging, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m sorry that the member from Saskatoon South didn’t’ enjoy my speech, but what I am saying in my 
speech, I didn’t ramble off from one end of the world to the other end of the world, talking about 
everything except potash. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I listened to the member very carefully yesterday. He talked for one whole half hour 
before he even got on the subject of potash. He didn’t talk bout waiting lists and the nursing homes that 
they never built, that they put a moratorium on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- He didn’t talk about the old hospitals that should have been repaired years ago, that are . . 
. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Who was the minister of Health at that time? 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- Who was the minister of Health at that time? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- The member from Saskatoon South. 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- I think everybody knows over here on this side who the minister of health was, who the 
minister was that put the moratoriums on for the sick, for the needy, for the seniors, for the old. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gleim: -- That is one reason why I support Bill 20 and I urge its passage. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The debate that we have over Bill 20 is fundamentally a 
debate over the future of Saskatchewan – not just a debate over the future of the Potash Corporation of 



Saskatchewan, but debate over the fundamental future of Saskatchewan, what kind of future we want 
for ourselves and for our children, where the benefits of resource development are to go, and who is to 
control that resource development to ensure that the benefits go to the people of Saskatchewan and not 
to out-of-province investors. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Mr. Speaker, I’d like to call a point of order, and just before the member gets in to his 
speech, so I don’t have to call it. In rule 5(1) of the members’ rule book: 
 

The presence of at least fifteen members of the Assembly, including the Speaker, shall be 
necessary to constitute a meeting of the Assembly for the exercise of its power. 

 
If at the time of the meeting there be not a quorum, the Speaker may take the Chair and adjourn 
the Assembly until the next sitting day. 

 
My point, Mr. Speaker, is being that there’s only four members of the opposition in the House, is it not 
their duty to participate . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The member from Regina Victoria . . . Order. According to rule 5, 
quorum includes any 15 members; therefore your point of order is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. That member can count as well as anyone else in 
this legislature. He knew that there was a quorum. He just, without reason . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. I’ve made a ruling. The hon. member does not have a point of order. The 
debate will continue. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I resent that kind of nonsensical intrusion, and I think an apology is in 
order for the interruption of my speech for a point of nonsense made on . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The matter has been dealt with, the matter has been dealt with. For the 
best interests of everyone in the House, let us continue the debate, and the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland now has the floor and will have the opportunity to make his remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: -- On a point of order, another point of order, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the opposition, 
given their absence today would like to vote now . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. Would the member be seated. Member be seated. There will be no more 
points of order. These are frivolous points of order which should not enter into debate. And once more, I 
say the matter’s been dealt with. I will accept no points of order. The member for Saskatoon Sutherland 
continues with his remarks. 
 
Mr. Koenker:-- After the introduction of closure on potash, this government only knows how to 
obstruct the opposition with nonsensical points of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: – Who will control the future of this province? This government wants to control the 
future of the province by the invocation of closure on potash It wants to try to control the future of 
debate by raising nonsensical points of order, but I say this debate over potash is a debate over who will 
control the benefits of resource development for the people of the province, and not for their political 
friends like the PC Party does. 
 



I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that this Devine government is selling off a major profitable Saskatchewan 
assets, selling it off for a song to foreign . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. Will the hon. member settle down and let the debate proceed. Now we’ve 
had a little turmoil and perhaps because of that, often further turmoil results. The member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland has the floor. I’d ask him to continue the debate and no longer refer to the ruling that has 
already been addressed, and let us continue the debate in an orderly fashion. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. You’re not being recognized, sir, until I recognize you. What is your 
point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – My point of order, quite simply, is the hon. member has made reference to the 
Premier by his name, and contrary to the rules of this House. Now I know he’s all alone over there, Mr. 
Speaker, but he still can’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. Now the hon. member, of course, we all agree . . . Order. I’m replying to 
the point of order. You may reply to that point of order, but not raise a new one. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I want to comment before you reply to his point of order. 
 
The Speaker: – Fine. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: – Mr. Speaker, I know that you want to b fair in accepting points of order. I start 
from that beginning. And if you accept a point of order from the members over there, I’m sure you wan 
tot accept one from this side of the House as well on this issue. 
 
Now the constant interruptions from that side of the House are interrupting the member. I think he has a 
right to proceed according to the rules of the House, and I think you should enforce the rules on the 
government . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. I’ve listened to the member’s point of order and I’ve listened to the 
response. Order, the Minister of Finance and the member for Saskatoon South. I’ve listened to the point 
or order and, quite frankly, it’s getting silly. 
 
Now if the hon. member used the Premier’s name, of course that’s out of order. To continually refer to 
the absence of members is out of order. For the hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount to suggest 
that only members from the government side are interrupting is also out of order, and is not correct. So 
there is no point in that type of an argument. 
 
We all know that members from both sides of the house from time to time interrupt. So let us drop the 
issue; let us allow the debate to continue in an orderly and democratic fashion with some decorum. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, this debate is a debate over what kid of future we are going to have for 
our province of Saskatchewan, and what kind of future our children and their children will have in the 
province of Saskatchewan by virtue of resource management. 
 
This PC government is selling off in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan a major profitable asset, 
selling it off for a song to foreign investors. And it talks about 45 per cent control over foreign 
investment, but there is absolutely no guarantee on any Saskatchewan ownership in the legislation 
presented in this Bill 20. This is the selling off for a song of the potash corporation to investors. 
 
This is an action of the Premier to ally himself with the big corporations with the Cargills and the IMCs 
of the world, with vested interests that aren’t the interests of Saskatchewan people. And we maintain 



that the public interest needs to be given voice and needs to be defended, so that the benefits of resource 
development accrue to the people of Saskatchewan and not to vested interests. 
 
This government’s privatization of the potash corporation, make no mistake about it, is going to benefit 
big business and wealth investors outside of Saskatchewan. And it will not benefit Saskatchewan 
people. And I’m going to be explaining this in some detail, and I’m going to be taking the Premier’s 
own words to task to argue the case that this privatization of the potash corporation will not benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan but will benefit big business. 
 
By selling off, Mr. Speaker, this major profitable Saskatchewan assets, the PC government is betraying 
Saskatchewan’s future, and all of the profitable Crown corporation are not sold off with the passage of 
this Bill 20 privatizing the potash corporation. The public purse is left with the money-losers. The 
profitable corporations remain in public hands. That’s the kind of business logic that this government 
uses. 
 
But we know that this government uses this kind of business logic because it has allied itself with the 
big-business community – not the Saskatchewan business community, but the big-business community, 
and the interests of the big-business community. 
 
And is it any wonder then, that we see closure invoked on this bill, closure invoked in all likelihood, 
because some secret deal has been made with their big-business interest friends outside the province. 
That’s why closure was used to ram this very debate through to the point where’s it’s taking place today 
on the terms that it’s taking place today. 
 
(1030) 
 
PC privatization has not helped Saskatchewan people to date. It has not helped Saskatchewan people to 
date, and it’s been rejected by Saskatchewan people because it hasn’t done that. And we only have to 
look at the debate and the furore that covered this province in the month of May when the privatization 
of SaskPower was discussed to know that public opinion is overwhelmingly against these privatization 
measures. Whether it’s the privatization of the children’s dental plan, or the privatization of PCS, the 
people of Saskatchewan are opposed to their utilities and their services and their Crown corporations 
and their resource sector being privatized so that the profits can go out of province and only to a handful 
of people. 
 
And the proof of this is found in this very Bill 20 legislation where the hands of successive 
Saskatchewan governments are tied behind their back by virtue of the free trade agreement that has 
been made by Brian Mulroney and the federal Conservatives. 
 
The future of any Saskatchewan government to revert American control in PCs once its’ privatized, 
back into Saskatchewan control, is pre-empted by the free trade agreement. So it doesn’t need to be here 
in bill 20. That’s taken care of nicely by the Conservative government’s friends of Ottawa. 
 
The tie to SaskPower and the privatization of SaskPower is clear not only in that the people of 
Saskatchewan are opposed to privatization, Mr. Speaker, but that this government has no mandate to 
privatize either SaskPower of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And as I’ve aid a number of 
times in the last weeks, the next items on the block beyond the potash corporation and the power 
corporation and the SGI is the privatization of the medicare system. And we’ve already seen that 
implicit in the cut-backs to the dental program and the prescription drug program that this government 
inflicted in the spring of 1987. 
 
So the issue is who will control the future of resource development here in Saskatchewan, and the 
related question of who will benefit. And that’s why this is a political debate in this Assembly and why 
it should be full ranging and free on behalf of the public. 
 



Now I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to the news release put out on April 14, 1989 by the Government of 
Saskatchewan information services on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan entitled, “Public 
participation in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan.” And I want to quote from this news release 
and from the Minister of Finance who said: 
 

Public participation in PCS is a natural next step in the corporation’s evolution. In fact, it is 
needed for PCS to vigorously pursue all of the opportunities available to it as a world leader and 
major contributor to our economy. 

 
This from the Minister of Finance, and I’ll note that there’s even a split infinitive in that sentence. He 
can’t even get it right – the English language – and he certainly doesn’t have it right when he argues 
that “it is needed for PCs (splint infinitive) to vigorously pursue all of the opportunities available as a 
world leader . . .” 
 
Notice that he doesn’t say it is needed for PCs to vigorously pursue all of the opportunities available to 
it because it’s a world leader . . . or to become, rather, a world leader, but “as a world leader” – as a 
world leader. And that’s precisely the point we make as well, Mr. Speaker, that the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan is already a major leader, a world leader and major contributor to our economy. And 
we don’t need to privatize it in order for it to become a major contributor to the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
There’s no economic logic to privatization in that regard . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: – I wonder if I might introduce a group, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: – Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to you, and through you to 
member of the Assembly this morning, 12 students who are here with the Big Sisters of Regina, a seven 
to 13 years . . . They are here for a moment and then they’re gong to be touring the building. 
 
I regret that pressure of other events does not make it possible for me to personally meet with them, so I 
hope your visit is useful. They’re here with Sally Sebastian and Amanda Kelly who, I assume, are 
sitting immediately behind them. 
 
So I hope all members will join with me in welcoming these young people here. I hope their day is 
enjoyable. 
 
Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 20 (continued) 
 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, we don’t need to have the potash corporation privatized in order to 
ensure major contributions to the Saskatchewan economy. What we’re talking about in Bill 20 is a 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan that presently has the potential to provide major contributions to 
the economy of Saskatchewan as it’s presently construed. 



 
And I say that – has the potential – because that potential has not been harnessed and released by the 
government. I say that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has been put on a leash by this 
government and held back so that the private companies, these last eight years, are allowed to pre-empt 
its role in economic development and profit and in overseas markets. 
 
And I’d like to turn now to the Premier’s simplistic defence of his initiative in his comments yesterday. 
I note first of all that when the Premier was talking about this bill to privatize the potash corporation, he 
talked about virtually every other privatization initiative under the sun, except for the privatization of 
potash. And it wasn’t until the very back end of his speech that he introduced the subject of potash 
privatization. 
 
And I think that is very telling. The Premier seems to have sort of credo, take it as an article of faith, to 
bow at the altar of free enterprise, the privatization will be good thing. when he asks the question, why 
privatize? He provides the rousing defence, the rousing answer, why not – why not? 
 
Well can you believe that, Mr. Speaker, that from the Premier of this province, in defence of his own 
primary initiative of this legislative session, when he asks, why privatize? The answer is simply, why 
not? 
 
From the Premier of this province, from the spokesperson for vested interests of big business, very, very 
telling that that is his first and principal and major argument for privatization. Does he give economic 
justification for it? Does he give fact and figure? 
 
Rarely does he get into that. He talks about simplistic generalities. He talks about the question of who 
benefits. And again he asked the question, who benefits? Who benefits? He says. And the answer, 
simplistically, is everyone. Everyone benefits. Seniors benefit, native people benefit, foreigners benefit, 
everyone benefits. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The member from Regina Wascana, why are you on your feet? 
 
Mr. Martin: – Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce some students in your gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Martin: – Thank you. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
House, some 27 students from Quebec who are – la province – who are attending the English As A 
Second Language school over here at the University of Regina. And they are not allowed to speak 
French while they are here, Mr. Speaker, just as our students are not allowed to speak English when 
they go to Quebec. So many of them have gone from this province to Quebec to learn a second 
language, including our four daughters who have been down there at one time or other, Laval and 
Jonquiere, etc, and so it’s quite an experience for them. 
 
I hope the weather is to you liking and that you’re enjoying Regina and learning to speak English well 
so you can go back and put it to use in Quebec. Mr. Speaker, I’d like also to introduce the two teachers, 
Carol Holowachuk and Marie Mendenhall. Where are the two teachers? Would you please stand? Good. 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of you and all the members of the House, our friends from Quebec, 
please welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Maxwell – Merci, Monsieur le president. Au nom du Premier Ministre du gouvernement c’est 
un plaisir pour moi de vous acceulir ici aujourd’hui. Nous esperons que vous aurez enjouir de votre 



visite. Je comprends que vous ne pouvez pas me repondre en francais, non? Peut-etre plus tard en 
anglais, oui? Bienvenue. 
 
(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the Premier of the province, it is a pleasure for me 
to welcome you here today. We hope that you will have enjoyed your visit. I understand you cannot 
reply to me in French, is that correct? Perhaps later, in English, yes? Welcome.) 
 
Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill 20 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koenker: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the Premier asks who benefit from 
privatization, and says, everyone, I want to give one very simple example of how privatization here in 
the province of Saskatchewan has not benefitted everyone. 
 
And I’m talking about the park that’s about 20 or 30 miles outside of Saskatchewan on the Yellowhead 
Highways heading west at the Borden bridge. That particular park was privatized about 2 years ago, 
turned over to the private sector from the hands of the Government of Saskatchewan. And in Borden, 
two weeks ago, I was told by people involved in the tourist industry that for tourists who stop there at 
that park at a picnic table for more than half an hour, they are charged. Can you believe it that they are 
charged to hold a picnic at what was once a provincial roadside park because it has been privatized. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, if you were to drive from Saskatoon to Edmonton the Yellowhead 
Highway and wanted to stop for a bite to eat, if you had your sandwiches made and you coffee was 
already hot in your thermos and you pulled up to that Borden bridge park and you jumped out of your 
car and you gobbled down your sandwiches and you drank your coffee, you wouldn’t have to pay if it 
was less than half an hour. But if you had to boil water for your coffee, and if you had to slap your 
sandwiches together and then to eat them, you’d probably have to pay unless you could beat the person 
who was coming around to collect from you individually. 
 
And this is a service that used to be provided to citizens of Saskatchewan and non-citizens alike by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. And the Premier says, who benefits from privatization – everyone. I say 
the people of Saskatchewan don’t benefit from that kind of privatization, and they won’t benefit from 
the privatization of the potash corporation as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: – Now, Mr. Speaker, I was going to save these remarks for later in my speech, but since 
there are individuals in the gallery from the province of Quebec, I want to spend a few minutes talking 
about the Quebec dental program and how the dental program in Saskatchewan has been different from 
the dental program in Quebec because of this province’s ability to fund health services by virtue of its 
resource policy. 
 
(1045) 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. My goodness. First of all, I don’t think we should involve the members in 
the gallery in any way, in any way at all, and secondly, allow the member to continue. And I’m sure 
we’re not putting on a very, very good display for our guest. If we think we are, we should think again. 
 



Mr. Koenker: – Mr. Speaker, the Quebec children’s dental program was first implemented and 
designed on a number of key principles. First, from the outset, the program envisioned incremental 
expansions on a year-to-year basis. Second, dental services were to be universally available. Third, and 
very important here for this debate on privatization, the program was to be – was to be – publicly 
funded, publicly funded. Fourthly, also very important for this debate on resource revenues benefitting 
the people of Saskatchewan, this dental program was to have no deductible or co-payment fees. And 
this children’s dental program of Quebec was introduced, initiated in 1974. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The Quebec dental program in detail, I fail to realize how it applies to the 
Bill No. 20, An Act respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I think 
the hon. member is a little off the topic, and I do allow fair latitude. I do allow fair latitude, as you all 
know, and I believe that he should keep his remarks more closer to Saskatchewan, especially on the 
reorganization of the potash corporation . . . Order, order. 
 
Now the member from Regina Victoria, I’d just like to call him to order and allow the debate to 
continue. Members seem to be a little edgy this morning for whatever reason. If we co-operate, if we all 
co-operate in this House, the debate will go forward. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, the point to be made about the dental in Quebec is that Quebec became 
the second province in Canada after the province of Prince Edward island to withdraw major categories 
of dental services from groups of children . . . 
 
The Speaker: – Order. Now I’ve already ruled that a discussion of the Quebec dental program, I don’t 
feel, is relevant. Now would the hon. member take that . . . Order, order. Now the member from Regina 
Victoria keeps interrupting the Chair, and I have overlooked it once or twice but I can’t overlook it now, 
and I ask the member for Regina Victoria to rise and apologize. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: – I apologize. 
 
The Speaker: – Now the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, he’s making his remarks. And as I said 
earlier, a detail discussion of the Quebec dental program certainly can’t be construed as being relevant 
to debate, and I am asking him to stay on the topic. 
 
Mr. Koenker: – When the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in this most recent 
annual report from 1988, returns a profit of $106 million to the people of Saskatchewan, then that profit 
of $106 million can be used from the potash corporation to fund programs like dental care here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: – And when provinces such as Quebec introduce a children’s dental-based dental 
program following, incidentally, the introduction of a dental program here in Saskatchewan in 1974 as 
well, as today the people of Saskatchewan still have a universally accessible dental plan even though 
it’s been cut back by this government, and the people of Quebec don’t have that, I say that’s due to the 
resource policy of the Government of Saskatchewan that was inherited from Allan Blakeney and the 
New Democrats that used resource revenue from the God-given resources of the province of 
Saskatchewan for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan and not for outside foreign investors. 
 
And that is precisely the issue that is being debated here today, and that is why I refer to the province of 
Quebec and its dental program, because it hasn’t had a resource policy that will allow the Government 
of Quebec to fund social programs. And I think that’s terribly germane to the kind of debate that we’re 
having about the future of the province of Saskatchewan, based on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



The Speaker: – Now I just want to once more bring to the attention . . . it sounds to me like the hon. 
member, in a convoluted way, is attempting to challenge the Chairs ruling. I said earlier, and I repeat 
again, the detailed discussion of – which you haven’t done now, I’ll grant – but the detailed discussion, 
which you were doing before, was not relevant. And I believe that you should just carry on with your 
remarks, stay on the topic, and the debate will proceed in an ordinary fashion. 
 
Mr. Koenker -- Mr. Speaker, many people might question how the profits of the potash corporation in 
this most recent year, 1988, are relevant to the debate. I say that $106 million worth of profits returned 
from the potash corporation to the people of Saskatchewan is vitally important to the debate before us 
today, dental program or no dental program. 
 
I want to go on, Mr. Speaker, to, in terms of talking who benefits, who benefits from privatization. This 
was question that the Premier asked in his remarks yesterday: who benefits? I want to ask the people of 
Saskatchewan: have you benefitted from previous privatization initiatives from this government? I want 
to ask the people of Saskatchewan, when they consider the privatization of potash corporation, have you 
benefitted from the privatization of Saskoil? Do you see lower taxes because of privatization? 
 
What we see is an increase in the sales tax, the flat tax, hospital lottery tax. 
 
I want to ask the people of Saskatchewan: have you reduced waiting lists to Saskatchewan hospitals 
because of privatization initiative? We certainly haven’t seen reduced waiting lists in Saskatchewan 
hospitals. People wanting entrance to the cancer clinic beds are denied access because the money isn’t 
there. And that’s what we have as a result of privatization. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. The member from Regina Wascana, and any other hon. member, whether 
you object to his remarks is another matter. He has the right to make them as you have the right to make 
them. 
 
An Hon. Member: – On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: – What is your point of order? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Before you rose I think all members of the House clearly heard someone on the 
other side, government members, using the world “lie.” That’s unparliamentary, and I’d ask you to 
make a ruling to get them to apologize. You certainly would have heard that before you rose on your 
point of order. 
 
The Speaker: – If an hon. member, anywhere, made that remark, it is out of order. I’m not sure who 
made it; however, if they did, it’s out of order. And all hon. members should finally realize that those 
types of remarks should not be made so that the member from Regina Elphinstone, for example, doesn’t 
have to rise on a point of order. We have talked about this over and over, and people in this House 
insist, insist on an unparliamentary language, which is very, very poor usage of the language here in this 
Assembly. You just insist on it Now if you don’t’ like what the other person is saying, that’s your 
privilege. You also have the right to make your remarks when you rise, and let’s keep unparliamentary 
language out of this House. 
 
Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his remarks yesterday indicated as part of his credo, his 
article of faith, that privatization is part of a strategy to diversify this province and extend the provincial 
safety net. He talks about the extension of the safety net and how health care has been increased in this 
province as a result of privatization and the diversification that flows from it. And I simply have to look 
at the many cases that come in to my constituency office of people waiting to get into hospitals for 
various kinds of treatment to know that the safety net has not been extended, but it’s been constricted. 
 
I must say, however, I feel compelled to point out that the so-called safety net provided by the 
Government of Saskatchewan has been extended to a select few. The safety net was extended very 



comfortably by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and this government to one Paul Schoenhals 
after he was defeated in the last provincial election – public money sued to extend the safety net for 
Paul Schoenhals. 
 
And I point out that that’s very characteristic of this government to extend the safety net of pubic 
protection to Peter Pocklington to build his bacon plant in North Battleford, and to extend the safety net, 
in fact, to Cargill corporation, the largest private grain company in the world, when it comes to $290 
million worth of loans and loan guarantees to build a fertilizer plant in Belle Plaine outside of Regina. 
 
So it is true, in a sense, to say that the safety net has been extended by this government, but the point 
must be made: for whose benefit has the safety net been extended? And that safety net certainly hasn’t 
been extended to the people of Saskatchewan when it comes to health care and the constrictions on and 
the restrictions on the prescription drug plan, which requires individuals to front the costs of their drugs, 
as was the case when the cuts were made in 1987. 
 
The wonderful profiteering from sale of shares that Saskatchewan people will partake in – the 
wonderful profiteering that the Premier points to when he talks about Bill 20 and the share issues for 
Saskoil and WESTBRIDGE, Mr. Speaker, are wonderful only for a few, and benefit only a few. 
 
And I want to refer to the privatization of SaskCOMP, and note, as the Premier did, and note that over 
the last five years of its existence as Crown-controlled company, SaskCOMP made a profit in each and 
every year, with a total profit over those last five years of $16 million for the people of Saskatchewan. 
In 1987 alone, its last year in government hands as Crown corporation, SaskCOMP made a profit of 
$3.4 million for the people of Saskatchewan, representing a return on investment of 37 per cent for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And do you know, Mr. Speaker, that now that SaskCOMP has become WESTBRIDGE, that the 
Minister of Finance’s former law partner, Peter Whitmore, was legal counsel to SaskCOMP? And that 
the member from Yorkton has a friend, Ray Malinowksi, of Yorkton, who has been a political associate 
of the member from Yorkton, who has been appointed to the board of WESTBRIDGE? And there’s a 
Sonya Precesky of Remai Investments who’s also on the board of WESTBRIDGE. 
 
So the wonderful profitability of shares from WESTBRIDGE, for example is there again for a few – for 
the hot shots and the big rollers and the friends of the PC Party. But it ignores . . .the Premier ignores 
the fact that only 14 per cent of Saskatchewan people own shares in various . . . 
 
The Speaker: – It being 11 o’clock the House stands recessed until 1 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 1 p.m. 


