


















































April 13, 1989 Hansard Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 13, 1989 
 
 

799 
 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 7:03 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 18 — An Act Granting to Her Majesty certain  
         sums of Money for the Public Service for 
         the Fiscal year ending on March 31, 1990 

 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 7:05 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I wonder if all members would join with 
me welcoming a group of Lakeview Brownie Pack No. 26 to 
the Assembly tonight. I’m introducing them on behalf of my 
colleague from Regina Lakeview. I know that all members will 
want to join with me in welcoming them here tonight. The 
process that we have seen here, the few minutes that they have 
been in the Assembly, was the Royal Assent to a Bill that the 
legislature passed and accepted yesterday. 
 
I want to say that we enjoy having the company of the group 
here tonight, along with their chaperons and guides and the 
teachers, and I know all members will want to join with me in 
welcoming them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. May I just 
describe to the Guides that what we’re doing this evening is 
discussing the estimates for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, and on this side of the House I am the critic for the 
housing issues. 
 
Mr. Minister, yesterday in discussing housing estimates, we 
talked about the implications of the federal PC government’s 
proposed national sales tax on the housing industry, especially 
as it will impact on new-home builders and first time home 
buyers. 
 
The cost of a new home is estimated to go up by $10,000 if the 
housing industry is taxed with a national sales tax, and new 
housing starts are already down in Saskatchewan. If this tax 
comes into effect, it will be devastating. We learned yesterday 
that the minister believes that the Saskatchewan Home 
Builders’ Association is pleased with the efforts he has made on 
their behalf, although he admits to not doing very much. 
 
We learned that the minister does not believe in taking action to 
ensure that such a regressive sales tax is not implemented. 
Instead he wants to coast along doing 

nothing until the sales tax is here. His method of planning and 
policy making is obviously to close the barn door after the horse 
has bolted. 
 
We learned that the federal PC Finance minister, Michael 
Wilson, has said at some point that the sales tax may not apply 
to “affordable housing;” however, our provincial minister of 
housing has developed no guide-lines or definition of affordable 
housing that would apply in Saskatchewan to new-home 
building. At the same time he told us in the Crown corporations 
meeting on February 6 of this year that he thinks his role is to 
promote affordable housing. I said in the throne speech debate 
that the government members opposite create an 
Alice-in-Wonderland world full of strange characters who don’t 
make much sense, and this is another example of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want now to ask the page to carry over to you 
some documents that I want to question you about this evening, 
and I’ll just wait for a minute while he’s bringing them to you. 
What I have, Mr. Minister, is a certificate of titles for a house 
that was built in Saskatoon, Mr. Minister; a house called lot 
127, block 962 in Saskatoon. And you will see that the house, 
when it was sold to Douglas Ronald Hickson and Heidi 
Hickson, was valued at $73,516, and that it was made by 
Crawford Homes Ltd. in Saskatoon, and that the mortgage is 
held by the Royal Bank of Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, Crawford Homes is one of these developers 
that is producing what’s called sweat equity housing. They 
charge $100 down payment for people to get into these houses, 
and then people find themselves with the mortgage payments 
that continue for some time. The first certificate of title, as you 
see, belongs to the Hicksons. The second certificate of title is 
for the Royal Bank of Canada, which took over the housing 
from the Hicksons when they were no longer able to pay their 
mortgage payments. Subsequent to that the certificate of title 
passes to the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in 1984. Now 
Mr. Minister, this house, which was valued at $73,516 when it 
was bought in 1987 . . . was bought in 1987, Mr. Minister, and 
repossessed by the Royal Bank of Canada in 1988, and was on 
the market — it’s a private developer, it’s a private sale, sweat 
equity house — was listed on the market as being owned by the 
housing corporation and selling for $64,500. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, my question to you obviously is, who has 
paid the difference between the $64,000 that the housing 
corporation now estimates the house to be worth and put on the 
market and the $73,000 that the Royal Bank had in their 
mortgage claim? 
 
I might add, Mr. Minister, that on Whelan Crescent in 
Saskatoon, there are at least a dozen homes in the hands of the 
banks and the trust companies, and more in the Dundonald area. 
So this is not a unique incident. CMHC (Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation) apparently doesn’t guarantee these 
homes, but the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation does. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know here we’ve 
got a case again of my critic just not at all being 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

800 
 
 

familiar with the real estate industry. Unfortunately, my critic, 
the member from Saskatoon Centre, just absolutely doesn’t 
understand real estate one single, solitary bit. And it’s really 
unfortunate. I’m going to answer the question; don’t get 
excited. 
 
First of all, why doesn’t she take a real estate course if she’s 
going to be your critic? Don’t lecture me, don’t lecture me on 
the weakness of your critic with experience about real estate. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why don’t you offer a course? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m not teaching real estate any more. I 
used to when I was president of the Regina Real Estate Board. 
It’s unfortunate . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — This isn’t even a question for this kind of a 
forum. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Of course it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It isn’t. I’m going to answer it but it’s not 
even a question for this kind of a forum. It’s a silly question to 
bring in here. 
 
Yesterday, she was bringing in, Mr. Chairman, questions on 
affordable housing and on the national sales tax which is 
non-existent. A non-existent tax. She wants the answer. If the 
member from Prince Albert would just quit jumping up and 
down . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. Order. All members will get 
opportunities to ask questions in Committee of Finance so allow 
the minister to answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’m trying to answer; you people aren’t 
allowing me to answer. Just sit down and pay attention, I’ll give 
you the answer. 
 
Let’s talk about the housing situation first that she brought up, 
and the system of affordable housing and a non-existent 
national sales tax that she was blurbing about yesterday 
afternoon. 
 
I have a press release issued November 11, 1988 by the 
Canadian home builders, two months before we went into 
Crown corporations on this very corporation on hearings. Same 
thing in Crown corporations — the NDP questioned me for 
about 45 minutes on the national sales tax, when this press 
release was issued two months prior. 
 
(1915) 
 
And in the press release, Mr. Gary Santini, the president of the 
Canadian Home Builders’ Association, said: 
 

This means (talking about the national sales tax) housing 
will not be subject to the disruptive and unpredictable 
effects of quick-fix remedial government programs 
designed to compensate for the sales tax . . . As a result, we 
are satisfied that sales tax reform will not affect the 
affordability of housing for Canadians (will not affect the  

affordability of housing for Canadians, and that) . . . The 
association will continue to work with the Department of 
Finance in the design of such new tax. 
 

Now I can’t be more clearer than that. That’s the Canadian 
home builders. 
 
As far as your accusations, I’m going to set for the record one 
more time, because your accusations are totally unfounded and 
have nothing at all to do with the fact. The Canadian home 
builders and the Saskatchewan home builders know full well 
that I carried out my responsibility effectively and efficiently 
regarding any representation on the national sales tax. So let 
that be clearly understood. 
 
My Minister of Finance went to Ottawa with that Minister of 
Finance to represent the home builders of this province on the 
national sales tax issue. And for you to publicly state that we  
did nothing is an utter fabrication; that is nonsense that I will 
not allow stand in this record. That’s number one. 
 
Number two, you talk about affordability of housing, and I was 
trying to compare it with a question that my grandchildren ask 
me. How high is up? Same thing, same thing here. We 
researched . . . Today I researched a LePage Melton national 
magazine on housing prices, which you could very well have 
done and armed yourself with, if you would have paid some 
attention to your job and come in here with a little bit of 
background and knowledge, instead of coming in here asking 
questions that you shouldn’t be asking. 
 
Out of that same catalogue from across the country, a typical 
detached bungalow of 1,200 square feet, three bedrooms, bath 
and a half, one-car garage, Mr. Chairman, full basement, on an 
average 50- by 110-foot lot, ranges in price from south Halifax, 
$180,000; Montreal, $175,000; Toronto, $340,000; Manitoba, 
$104,000; Calgary, $177,000; Vancouver, $315,000. All right? 
All for the same house, all in the same general area, all in the 
same lot. Well in Regina and Saskatoon, we’re looking at 90 to 
$94,000. With such a discrepancy like that across the country, 
how are you going to have one definition? It’s impossible. And 
anybody can figure that out. You don’t have to be a mental 
giant to understand that. 
 
Now as far as it relates to your question regarding that 
particular seizure, if you would have taken the time to study 
that back in 1986, when this government introduced the first 
time home buyers grant, we also guaranteed the mortgages for 
the first time. Under that mortgage guarantee, what we said to 
the people of this province is, yes, we will help you find 
affordable housing. We gave them the $3,000 grant, guaranteed 
their mortgage. Obviously, this family who you choose to drag 
through publicly again, through this Assembly — and I won’t 
refer to their name — had difficulty in making their payments. 
The Royal Bank, the mortgage holder, then processed, Mr. 
Chairman, to take this house back. 
 
Now under the term of the guarantee, which is a public program 
that the critic should be aware of, we come in and we reimburse 
the bank and end up owning the  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

801 
 
 

property. We have it appraised by an independent appraiser and 
we put it out on the market to try to recover the taxpayers’ 
dollars. Now it’s just that simple. That question shouldn’t even 
be in this Assembly, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, this house was bought in 1987. I 
understood that that grant was only available in 1986. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, in order to assist the home 
building industry, because we’re concerned with them and as 
everybody knows, there was a certain section of houses that 
were approved to various builders at the tail-end of the program 
that they could carry over and be sold in the next year so long 
as they were started in 1986 . . . And they had until, I think, the 
end of March, as I recall, to put in the foundations and the end 
of July to sell the house. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The minister has said at least 10 times 
tonight that these questions are not in order in the Assembly. I 
notice that you haven’t ruled in that manner that they’re out of 
order. I wonder if you would take the time, having listened to 
the questioning — we feel they’re in order — for you to make a 
ruling whether, in fact, the questions are in order, and the 
minister would quit his nonsense of saying they’re not. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I find the questions in order. They’re 
related to housing. So the estimates will continue. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the point is this, two things: one is, the sweat 
equity program allows somebody to buy a house for $100 
down. You’re saying that the mortgage that you gave them, 
some mortgage . . . the mortgage supplement, so that they could 
pay into their house . . . If that was the case, Mr. Minister, why 
didn’t you have the same kinds of controls on that mortgage 
program that you have on the loan program, the $10,000 at 6 
per cent, which has to be approved by the lender, Mr. Minister? 
 
The lender, the banks presumably, or whoever they’re getting 
their loan from, has to approve that loan. A person who can 
only pay $100 down on a house is not even within the CMHC 
guide-lines which said that 10 per cent of the house should be 
the down payment, Mr. Minister. 
 
So it seems to me that what’s happened here is that the 
province, the province with that mortgage payment has taken a 
bath in terms of the public money — that you have paid to the 
Royal Bank a lot of money, and the people still have no house, 
that they’ve been able to get into a situation where they have 
lost their home, the taxpayers have lost their investment, and 
the Royal Bank makes more profit, Mr. Minister. That’s what’s 
happened with this program. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, I want to turn to something else here. And I 
want to talk a little bit about the co-op housing. Mr. Minister, in 
the Crown corporations discussion on February 6, in response 
to a question regarding the PC government’s failure to support 
co-operative housing, you said: 

There is no demand for that particular kind of housing. 
And we have the budget dollars if the demand were there. 
It’s just that simple. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, just lately, April 7, 1989, there was an 
article in the Melville newspaper about a seniors’ project being 
rejected. This was a project for co-op housing. CMHC turned 
down the proposal by the Co-operative Housing Association of 
Saskatchewan in December, and an appeal by that association is 
being dropped. 
 

The co-op housing association, a private consulting 
organization which works with groups involved in co-op 
housing, received more than 50 applications from local 
seniors when it held an information meeting here in 
September. The city council (in Melville) has disputed the 
CMHC’s findings, citing a zero vacancy rate for quality 
senior housing in Melville, and large waiting lists for the 
limited number of local housing projects for seniors. The 
chairman of the local ad hoc committee involved in the 
application said if more senior housing isn’t built here, 
seniors wanting to move from their homes into rental 
housing will be forced to leave the city. 
 
Seniors who reside in co-op housing are eligible for 
monthly rent supplements depending on income. Tenants 
own and operate the housing project with volunteers 
forming an executive to determine design, location, and 
policy. 

 
Now, Mr. Minister, can you tell me then how you justify saying 
that there’s no demand for that particular kind of housing when 
there obviously was a project in Melville where seniors wanted 
to have a housing co-operative, and you said you had the budget 
dollars there if the demand were there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I wrote that member 
a letter earlier in the year about all of this, but in any event, the 
co-op housing program is delivered by Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation. The co-op housing program is not 
delivered by Sask Housing. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I received that letter, Mr. Minister, but I’m 
holding you accountable to what you said in the Crown 
corporation, that there was no demand for that particular kind of 
housing and that you had the budget dollars if the demand were 
there. The demand is there in Melville. You are the housing 
corporation minister representing groups, like the seniors 
wanting a co-op housing, to the federal government, and you 
would have had the power to support that project if you had the 
will to support co-operative housing. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, in co-op housing wealthier people subsidize 
the less wealthy by the rent brackets that people are in. And you 
said in the Crown corporations regarding co-op housing — 
which you don’t support and we know that because your 
government has done away with the department of co-ops — 
but you said in the Crown corporations meeting, “I’ve got a 
little bit of trouble with government building a housing project 
that will be used by some professional that’s earning 60 to 
$65,000 a 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

802 
 
 

year.” And that was one of your reasons for not supporting the 
co-op housing because someone with that kind of an income 
might be able to be part of that co-op housing; a senior with a 
good bit of income might have been part of that co-op housing 
and then another senior on a lower income could have been 
subsidized. 
 
Now we’ve got those kinds of housing developments in this 
province in many places, which you could look at as examples 
if you wanted to inform yourselves about how co-op housing 
works. 
 
But I was interested in that statement, Mr. Minister, because 
where you say that you have a little bit of trouble with the 
government building a housing project that will be used by 
some professional that’s earning 60 to $65,000 a year, you turn 
around and support the home improvement plan which provides 
people with $65,000 and $100,000 homes and on beyond that 
with money for jacuzzis and swimming pools, and you don’t 
seem to have any trouble with that, Mr. Minister. You don’t 
seem to have any trouble with that program. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, the home improvement plan, which you 
don’t seem to have any trouble with, which gives money to 
people who are already wealthy, takes up two-thirds of the 
budget for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation right now. 
 
As I said earlier when I was talking about the sweat equity 
program, the home improvement loan application, which people 
have as part of this home improvement program, means that 
you have to qualify with a lender for the amount of that loan. 
You can’t qualify with a lender in the private sector unless 
you’ve got the money to start with, so it’s a program for people 
who are already wealthy. 
 
And your own chamber of commerce, your business people, 
have said in their news-letter that: 
 

While the construction industry is currently very slow, 
contractors of all sizes have felt that the home 
improvement program overheated construction activity and 
forced projects that may have been spaced over a period of 
years into a concentrated time frame. This same concern, 
although less strenuously, has also been expressed by 
certain retail outlets catering to the home repair market. 

 
So that’s some criticism from the chamber of commerce. 
 
We have had a number of people contact us about the home 
improvement program, saying that there’s been a lack of 
inspections; that there have been the possibility of fraud with 
that program — of people filling out applications for money 
that they never used on repairs. 
 
And I want to compare that, Mr. Minister — your lack of 
inspectors on that program, your lack of any kind of security as 
to how that public money is being spent — I want to compare 
that with the heavy inspection, almost a Gestapo type 
inspection, on the poor people who are getting social assistance 
in this province. And for a mere pittance of money that they get 
from the government, they 

go through all kinds of surveillance these days, Mr. Minister, 
but not the people with the jacuzzis and the swimming pools; 
they don’t get that. 
 
Now in your response to the throne speech, Mr. Minister, you 
referred to your research surveys which show the job creation 
that the home improvement program has made, even though 
jobs in the construction industry have not increased. And I want 
you to tell us now who did those surveys, how much they cost, 
and will you table them in the legislature. 
 
(1930) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know . . . She asked 
a lot of questions in there. I suppose that I should start with this, 
the home program that she seems to be unhappy with. 
 
In Saskatoon, the number of loans under that program, 13,754 
— 13,754 — almost 14,000 loans. You go back to tell 
Saskatoon that 14,000 home owners over $65,000 or without 
affordable housing didn’t take advantage of that loan program 
and spent over $83 million. That’s on the loan side — $83 
million. And don’t even begin to try to tell the public there’s 
14,000 jacuzzis and swimming pools and the like in that one. 
 
Now let’s talk about the grant side. Another 53,500 in 
Saskatoon — 53,500. You go back to tell Saskatoon that it’s a 
lousy program where they spent almost $37 million improving 
their homes. You go back and tell your constituents what a 
lousy program that is, and let’s just see how far you get with 
that nonsense. 
 
Let’s talk again about affordable housing; let’s talk to the 
people. You speak with pride about the property improvement 
grant. A lousy $230 is what your government came up with, and 
had nothing to do with the economy. Let’s talk about, even 
now, the mortgage protection plan at nine and three-quarters, 
where if a person’s mortgage would be thirteen and a half per 
cent they save $100 a month, today — $100 a month! 
 
What did you do in 1982, your government, in 1982 when the 
interest rates went up to 20 per cent? You know what you did 
for the home owners? Zip, nothing! Zero, zero you did. And 
you stand there and contradict the home program. You say 
nothing about the mortgage interest protection plan. And if the 
member from Quill Lakes has a question, let’s have it after I’m 
done with my answer. Until then, if you’d give me the 
privilege, I’m trying to answer your critic that is asking these 
questions with some kind of information that hopefully she’ll 
get a message with. So I’ll talk to you in a moment. 
 
But in the meantime, and getting back to the co-op housing, the 
co-op housing program is delivered by Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation. That is not our program. All right? So if 
they choose not to deliver one, I can’t help that. That’s a federal 
matter. But I can tell you this, I can tell you this, that during 
each of the past three years, the co-op movement has failed to 
utilize the existing rent supplement budget of 36 to 40 units — 
failed to utilize three years in a row. Well what do you expect 
Canada Mortgage to do if the co-op movement won’t use 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

803 
 
 

that for three years running? 
 
And also, we, the province, are concerned over the fact that 
there has been no family project developed under the co-op 
housing, no family project under co-op housing for the last 
three years even though a budget was allocated for that. So your 
facts are not quite straight. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, may I remind you that I asked you 
three questions regarding the research surveys that you’ve done 
on the home improvement program. I asked you who did the 
surveys; how much they cost, and whether you will table them 
in this legislature. Those are the three questions I asked you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been advised that my 
corporation officials, using studies that were available to them, 
and I’ll give you the three studies that they used: “Labour 
Requirements For Residential Construction”, Hansen, Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation 1975; “Labour And 
Material Requirements For Residential Rehabilitation”, Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation 1983; “Renovation 
Construction Economic Impacts”, Clayton Research Associates 
1985. Now using those studies, corporation officials put 
together the numbers that you’re referring to. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well you called it a research survey, and I 
assumed that it meant some understanding of what was going 
on actually with that program, but it obviously doesn’t. It’s a 
way of looking at some other numbers and putting them 
together in some sort of a magic pot and stirring them up and 
coming up with whatever. I mean, if you want to table the 
formula that you used in putting those things together, that 
might give us a little bit more insight into it. But at the moment, 
I think, all we can say is that the figures that you come up with 
are your own. And given the credibility of someone like 
yourself in terms of speaking the truth, I don’t know that what 
you have to say is of much value. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, I want to talk now about the public housing 
and ask you to follow me, please, in this concern about the 
funding for public housing because there are many words being 
used by the housing corporation in terms of enriched housing, 
innovative housing, public housing, non-profit housing, etc., 
and it becomes a bit difficult to unravel it. 
 
In the Crown corporations meeting . . . Now people are still 
saying, Mr. Minister, and it was quoted in the Star-Phoenix in 
1988, that public housing is funded . . . This was an article, July 
of this year in which you announced 22 housing projects 
approved for Saskatchewan. In the Star-Phoenix they were still 
saying that non-profit organizations get CMHC mortgages and 
subsidized portion of it. CMHC pays 75 per cent of the cost, the 
province 20 per cent, and the municipal government 5 per cent. 
When I’ve been talking to other officials, those are the figures 
I’m still getting. 
 
But I realized, when I read the Crown corporations meeting, 
that since 1987 the federal government, through CMHC, no 
longer puts up any capital to meet social housing needs in 
Saskatchewan. Apparently they pick up the amortization in their 
subsidy. So that what happens is  

that the province, you say, all that we do is put forward the 
original capital to get the project built, and then over the years 
we get the money back through the subsidization. 
 
And you are, according to your annual report of 1987, on page 
34, the housing corporation totally owns non-profit housing in 
the province and owns 95 per cent of the public housing in the 
province — 95 per cent ownership, Mr. Minister, but you admit 
that you go to the private sector for capital through the 
innovative housing project. 
 
Now I want to know where the money is in the housing 
corporation budget, because I don’t see any item that would be 
big enough to cover 95 per cent of the cost of any public 
housing, Mr. Minister, in this budget for the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation. I don’t see any money that would 
possibly contribute to the capital funding of public housing. 
 
I guess I understand what you mean when you say you go to the 
private sector for the capital in the innovative housing program, 
because you are bringing together non-profit groups and 
developers, and somehow encouraging development there. But I 
don’t understand where the money is in the housing corporation 
budget to build public housing. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, there’s two sources. First of 
all, it’s unfortunate . . . And I’ve heard this before; I’ve heard it 
in Crown corporations; I’ve heard it again tonight. I will 
apologize to my officials at Sask Housing because the 
opposition doesn’t believe that they are qualified to do the work 
that they do with regard to the methodology of the job creation 
statistics. And it’s unfortunate that they hold very little value for 
the professional civil servants in the employ of the government. 
But that’s in fact what they are saying, Mr. Chairman, when 
they don’t hold out the credibility for that. 
 
I can tell you, however, that our estimate is much lower than 
even the estimates that I referred to in those three studies done 
by the others because they were talking in relationship to direct 
jobs only. Our figure is lower and also is meant to include direct 
and indirect and induced employment. So that I believe that my 
officials have done their homework rather well and are well 
qualified to come up with that kind of a number. And I do 
apologize to them for what the NDP feel they can’t do their job 
right for. 
 
Regarding the financing, Mr. Chairman, all of the financing, or 
not quite all, but under the innovative housing is done by the 
private sector, and there is no capital required. The mortgages 
are indeed basically 100 per cent. The mortgage insurance . . . 
The mortgage is then guaranteed by Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation. Where the corporation does indeed 
deliver direct units to rural Saskatchewan, we have a capital 
fund that we use that as a source of income. That fund is 
continually being replaced by people that are repaying their 
mortgages to Sask Housing, and as a result, those pool of funds 
just simply sit there and it’s kind of a revolving credit kind of a 
scenario that just keeps building up. We haven’t had to borrow 
funds for capital since  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

804 
 
 

1984. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Well, Mr. Minister, I asked you where that fund 
is in the budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — It doesn’t appear in the budget. It’s not a 
budgetary item. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Doesn’t appear in the consolidated funds or 
anywhere else? It’s just income that floats in and floats out. 
That’s quite interesting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it 
does. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to call on the member from 
Athabasca to take the time now to finish the questions regarding 
housing in the north. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I only have a 
few questions, Mr. Minister, to ask you, and then we can get on 
with the estimates. 
 
I was talking about the study that you have initiated last night 
when we closed. And you closed off, Mr. Minister, by 
indicating that you thought that I was proposing that civil 
servants pay a higher rate of rent for the houses they have in 
northern Saskatchewan. And most certainly, Mr. Minister, you 
indicated also that you were going to go back and indicate to 
them that this was the case. I assure you that’s not the case, Mr. 
Minister. All I was indicating to you that your department 
should bring fairness to housing in northern Saskatchewan. As 
it is right now, it’s not fair. 
 
I know the study you’re undertaking now is looking at some of 
the shortfalls. And I sincerely hope that when that study is 
finalized that you will come out with some recommendations 
that will solve some of the shortfalls that we have now. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: when do you expect that 
study to be finalized? And when it is finalized, would you make 
a copy available to myself and to the rest of our members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member from 
Athabasca well knows the concerns that we have for housing in 
the North, and I appreciate his concerns. And he is as familiar 
with the problems up in the North regarding housing as I am. 
And I think that it’s fair to say that we’re trying to get to the 
same place on it. 
 
To correct the statements of last night — because the member is 
asking good questions — he was kind of confusing two areas of 
housing, Mr. Chairman, and that’s why I responded the way I 
did. 
 
The housing study that we’re talking about now relates to the 
rural and native housing program, and the staff does not live in 
those houses. Staff housing is a different program. So we can go 
back and discuss that more on the staff housing, if you’d like, 
and clarify that end of it. 
 
But regarding the study on this one, the member is aware of the 
joint study that’s going on. And we had pushed Canada 
Mortgage and Housing very hard to get this study under way. 
And we have been meeting with most of the  

mayors, particularly along the west side, as the member knows. 
 
(1945) 
 
And we were able to get Canada Mortgage and Housing to 
commit the start of the study perhaps about six months earlier 
than they wanted to. That was number one. So that kind of 
pleased us. And then where they were going to take quite a 
while to get that study done, at the urging of the mayors along 
the west side, we all came to the conclusion that their time 
frame was not acceptable to us. So we are pushing Canada 
Mortgage and Housing. 
 
I was hoping that we could get the study completed, certainly 
by the end of this current year. I don’t know that we’re going to 
be able to make that target, because Canada Mortgage is going 
to be doing the same kind of a study almost across the country, 
and it’s going to be slowing it down a little bit, coupled with the 
fact that, as I speak to the west side people, some of the 
investigation that’s being done, I think, should be improved 
upon. And as we ask them to improve that to gather more 
information, that will delay it a little bit. 
 
But hopefully, the study will be done in time that we could see 
some changes being implemented as early as 1990. And I think 
that that is good news, you know, if we can start changing for 
the better some time within the next 12 to 18 months. It is out of 
our hands, but we are pushing CMHC. And certainly, just as 
soon as I have anything at all that could made public on it I will 
put something into the member from Athabasca’s hands to keep 
him fully informed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I 
wonder — you’ve got about a year to 18 months before the 
study is finalized — if you would consider, you know, not 
evicting anybody out of their homes because of problems they 
do have with mortgages right now. That’s a question. And 
could you give me the number of houses. Of the 1,380 houses 
that you have under your jurisdiction up North, how many of 
those houses are permanent mortgages and how many are under 
the rental agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — There was two questions there. Regarding 
the evictions, we’ve been working hard with the people from 
the North and the new young leaders up there are really 
interested and concerned about their communities, Mr. 
Chairman. And I’m happy to say that our eviction rate has 
improved dramatically. It appears that the new leaders up there, 
the duly elected officials, are helping us or talking to the people 
up there, and we are consulting quite a bit and the eviction rate 
is dropping. The people are recognizing that when they fall into 
arrears they try to make up the difference and it’s working out 
pretty well. So our eviction rate . . . We don’t actively go out 
and move people out. And particularly now with this study 
going on, we’re just trying to encourage everybody to keep their 
payments up. 
 
As far as the second part of the question is concerned, there are 
about 200 units on that rental arrangement, I’ll advise the 
member, about 200. 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

805 
 
 

Mr. Thompson: — So there’s 200 on the rental and then I can 
assume that there is approximately 1,100 that have permanent 
mortgages, is that right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, I’ve been advised that either 
permanent mortgages or interim occupancy agreements which 
are tantamount to the same thing as a mortgage, as far as the 
corporation is concerned. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Could you give the number of 
individuals who have those homes who have either 15-year or 
25-year mortgages and at the end of the mortgage they will own 
their home? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been advised that the vast majority of 
them . . . We don’t have the exact numbers but the vast 
majority, according to my officials, would be 25-year 
mortgages, and that, assuming that all of their payments would 
be made, they would definitely own their homes at that time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay, then. Is it fair to say then that there’s 
approximately 1,100 homes up there that, if those individuals 
go through the proper mortgage, that they will have title to that 
house and that property at the end of the mortgage term? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — According to my officials, assuming that 
they made their payments and the like, yes, the member is 
correct. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could 
indicate how many public housing, or government houses, that 
you have turned over to local authorities in northern 
Saskatchewan. I know you may not have that figure at your 
fingertips, but could you pass that on to me. The number of 
housing units that you have turned over to the local community 
authorities — and these are public housing units. Yes, you 
could pass that on, Mr. Minister. 
 
Also, could you indicate, of the Atco units that you brought in 
from Calgary, the Olympic housing, are they permanent 
mortgages or are they rental agreements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve been advised that, 
regarding the public housing, the first part of the member’s 
question, we have established now eight housing authorities in 
the North and we’re working daily to set up even more. So in 
those eight communities where the housing authorities are, they 
run the same way as we do here in the South now. And the 
housing authority has taken over the management control of the 
units. So that’s that part of the question answered. 
 
The other question regarding the Atco trailers, those were 
delivered by Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. That 
was their program, and we’re not familiar with the details of 
what they’ve done or what arrangements they’ve made with the 
individuals or the communities on those units. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Saskatchewan Housing Corporation had 
nothing to do with Olympic housing that has been moved into 
the North. Is this right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the member is  

right. That was totally done, organized, delivered by Canada 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation, and Sask Housing 
Corporation doesn’t have a thing to do with those units. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, just a couple more questions. 
I wonder if you could indicate, out of the 200 rental units, 
would it be fair to say that in the last few years, that that is 
when those agreements were signed, and that you are not giving 
out any more permanent mortgages up in the North? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I’ve been advised that of those 200, we 
would still supply mortgages if the people would want to 
convert to a mortgage and indeed buy the house. 
 
The problem that we’ve got up there, as you’re very well aware, 
is establishing a market value on these units. And being that 
CMHC is a partner with us, where we might want to make a 
deal, our partner may not be willing to make the deal. And 
that’s part of a process that we’re going to try to employ with 
CMHC to see if indeed we can develop some kind of an 
agreement with them regarding some of the problem houses that 
you referred to earlier, that you are familiar with because you 
live up there. 
 
The other part of the question was . . . Oh yes, the balance of 
the rental accommodation now, the new rental housing that’s 
going in is being delivered by Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation. As you’re aware, we turned most of those 
programs back over to Canada Mortgage and Housing so that 
the local communities wouldn’t have two government agencies 
to deal with. They were very pleased with that. So they now 
only have to deal with Canada Mortgage and Housing, and of 
course we become involved and assist them where at all 
possible or work with them on the units that we still administer 
and try to slide over into their own local authorities. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When you talk 
about market value in northern Saskatchewan, and that’s what I 
was indicating to you, that the market value . . . And taking 
everything into consideration when you come out with that 
study, and the recommendations that I would hope would come 
from your department would be to take a new look at the type 
of payment structure that Northerners are harnessed with. 
 
Mr. Minister, my final question to you would be: do you have a 
policy in Sask Housing that you do not issue any mortgages 
north of Green Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — No, I can advise the member that that isn’t 
right regarding the mortgages. We don’t have a policy like that, 
so we don’t have a problem with issuing a mortgage north of 
Green Lake. 
 
Regarding the evaluation process . . . And you can help us. Tell 
your constituents, particularly those in those houses, to really 
get involved with that study as much as possible, and when the 
CMHC officials, or whoever they send up there, are conducting 
that study, to really get involved deeply in that evaluation 
process. That would help us immensely. As you know, CMHC 
is 75 per cent partner with us on those units. 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

806 
 
 

Now where we would like to do something with these units, as 
a provincial government we’re hamstrung because of our 
federal partner. 
 
And the establishment of a proper market price is the most 
important thing that we can do up there because you know the 
problem. And certainly if we can’t get a reasonable price on 
those things, those houses where they’ve been in default for 
years and years and years, we’ve got a terrific problem with. 
And I think that if your constituents would be encouraged to get 
involved with that process, it would really help us. It would be 
for their own good to get as deeply involved with that study as 
they could. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to make 
this very clear to you that I have been elected by the 
constituents of Athabasca to bring forth their concerns, and I 
have brought those concerns to you, and I get involved on their 
behalf. So I think for you to stand up in the House and say that 
for me to go and encourage them to get involved, that’s just not 
fair. I was elected to do that; I do that on their behalf; I’ve done 
it in the House here; I’ve done it in letters to yourself and your 
officials; and I think that that’s the route to go. You should be 
taking the recommendations that I put forth because they are the 
recommendations that I get from my constituents. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, one final question, Mr. 
Minister. And your senior partner, CMHC, which funds the 
program 75 per cent, do they have a policy that they do not 
issue no mortgages north of Green Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — My officials advise me that they’re not 
aware of any policy that CMHC has like that. 
 
And the member from Athabasca misinterpreted my remarks. I 
didn’t indicate that you weren’t carrying forward your message 
on behalf of your constituents; on the contrary, you do write me 
a lot of letters and you ask a lot of meaningful questions in here 
and you do carry forward their message. 
 
But what I am saying to you, because I know that you talk a lot 
to them, is that in your discussions with them advise them that 
you’ve carried this, advise them that you’ve made us aware, and 
that indeed I am aware of the concerns up there. And you’ve 
expressed them, and I’ve met with them, and I know that. But 
we can both help them help themselves by encouraging them, 
when the federal officials come in there, to really co-operate 
with those things, and with the studies to get those evaluation 
processes done because the better understanding, the better 
co-operation, the quicker everything will go, and the smoother 
it will be, and the sooner we’ll get those evaluations. So don’t 
misinterpret what I’m saying. I recognize that you’re bringing 
your messages here, but now I’m saying that together we can 
take that message back to your constituents as well. 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  

And just in closing off, can you guarantee me that CMHC has 
no policy, and they’re your senior partner — you most certainly 
know what the policies are — that anybody in this province can 
get a mortgage. There’s no distinction between northern 
Saskatchewan and southern Saskatchewan. Could you 
guarantee me that, Mr. Minister? And that would be my final 
question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well my officials can’t guarantee that, no, 
because we don’t know what their official policy is, if indeed 
there is one. They don’t indicate to us . . . My officials advise 
me they don’t indicate to us that they have an official policy 
like that; whether indeed they have an unofficial policy, or a 
quiet policy, if you’re running into a problem, we can’t say. 
We’re not part of their policy or information process any more 
than any other member of the public is. It’s their operation; it’s 
their program; and indeed it’s their policy, work, and design. 
My officials aren’t aware of any formal policy that exists, but 
we can’t guarantee it because it’s their policy, not ours. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I had requested from you the other day a breakdown 
from 1980 to the present time, by year, the number of low 
income housing units that your government had built each year, 
and also the number of seniors’ housing units that your 
government constructed each year, and I’d requested those by 
region. I wonder if you’re able to provide me with that 
information now. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you just want to provide it in writing to save 
you reading it out, I’d be quite happy with that. I leave it up to 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well whatever you like. I have part of the 
responses here. What we did after we had that discussion . . . 
Mr. Chairman, the member and I had a discussion in the 
Assembly here the other day and some of the information that 
he asked for wasn’t sent over, and we went back through the 
records and we found out why it wasn’t. It was just confusing 
out of Hansard as to what was wanted, if indeed anything was, 
and part of it was in Crown corporations. So my officials do 
apologize. It was just an unfortunate oversight and we realize 
that you’re not excited about it, and that’s good. 
 
I could take the time and just . . . I have some of the figures that 
I could read into the records but I don’t know if they’d be 
sufficient. If you would rather have it by letter, I have no 
problem with offering to send it to you by letter. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Read something into the record and send 
me the rest by a letter, if you would. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay. First of all I’ll read into the record, 
Mr. Chairman, this. In 1982, we had 421 family units and 344 
senior citizen units; 1982, 320 family, 316 . . . or 616 seniors, 
pardon me; 1984, 310 family, 320 seniors; 1985, 68 family, 730 
seniors; 1986, 252 family, 625 seniors; in 1987, 112 family and 
228 seniors. 
 
Then by region . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Do you have the 1988 figures there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I don’t have 1988 figures. 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

807 
 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Order. When members are asking 
questions, I’d ask them to do it . . . ask the question from their 
feet so it’s recorded in Hansard. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well I’ll add that I stopped at 1987 
because I don’t have the 1988 figures with me. 
 
Now in 1985 there were 11 family units and 159 seniors in 
Regina, and 340 seniors and zero family in Saskatoon, and in 
the balance of the province, 797 seniors and 86 families. In 
1986, Regina had 159 seniors and 65 families; Saskatoon had 
51 seniors and 29 families; the balance of the province had 608 
seniors and 150 families. 
 
In 1987 Regina had 106 seniors, 53 families; while Saskatoon 
had 115 seniors, 31 families; the balance of the province, 61 
seniors and 34 families. 
 
And I do have that breakdown for 1988, so that might help. 
Regina, 48 seniors, 50 families; Saskatoon, 52 seniors, 51 
families; and the balance of the province, 290 seniors and 28 
families. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could explain to 
the Assembly why it is that in 1981, under the New Democratic 
Party government, there were 421 low income family units 
constructed in the province of Saskatchewan; and since your 
election in 1982 that number has consistently declined to the 
point where in 1988, if I understood your figures accurately, 
you constructed only 129 low income family units. I wonder if 
you could explain why the number of low income family 
housing units declined to almost one-quarter of the number in 
1981. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, since 1987 the rural native 
program has been delivered by the federal government, CMHC. 
And as a result, you will notice a dramatic change in numbers 
because I’m only referring to Sask Housing numbers in ’87 
because I don’t have the CMHC numbers. That’s the dramatic 
turn-around once the program went back to Canada Mortgage 
and Housing. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But, Mr. Minister, in 1985 you just indicated 
that you only built 68 low income family units, and that was 
before the rural native housing program was transferred to 
CMHC. So we had a drop between 1981 and 1985 of some 350 
units less that were being built. You built 421 low income 
family units in 1981 and only 68 in 1985. Could you explain 
why you decided not to make a priority of continuing to 
construct low income family housing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes. And 1985 was a good year to talk 
about that, and we put up 730 seniors — 730. If you compare 
the total, in 1985 we had 798 total units, whereas in 1982 we 
only had 765 — so a pretty dramatic increase. 
 
The reason for the seniors, we’ve talked about for years. And of 
course, you know, your prior administration, when you put the 
freeze on the nursing homes, it put a big demand on the seniors’ 
housing. And that is reflected right here in these figures where 
we started playing catch  

up. And I think that you can see by those numbers, particularly 
beginning in 1983 where we went with 616 seniors, there was 
quite a pressure had built up for senior accommodation by that 
time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well we certainly don’t have any problem 
with your record in terms of building seniors’ housing. I think 
. . . And that’s not where we’re debating here. We’re debating 
the lack of affordable housing for low income people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I would suggest that you have 
compounded a very serious problem by consciously deciding to 
dramatically cut back on the construction of low income 
housing for poor families in the province. 
 
I want to ask you just two or three other specific questions 
before turning it back to my colleague, the member for centre. 
One, Mr. Minister, is with respect to the Transcona public 
housing project in the city of Regina, which I might say I view 
to be a good project, and I commend you for the mix of housing 
there and the fact that there are units for handicapped people. 
 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, is: I noted when I visited 
there recently that there was a day-care centre in the facility. I 
also commend you for building that. But my question to you is: 
I also noted that that day care has yet to open, and I suspect 
there’s a good deal of demand for day care from the people who 
are residing in that housing project and round about. Can you 
tell us when you expect that that day care will be able to open in 
the housing complex that you have constructed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — That area is the responsibility of the 
proponent of the whole thing, which is the non-profit group, so 
they would have to go ahead and operate that, and go through 
the proper channels, and the like. We don’t have the direct 
charge of that part of the program. It’s up to them now. 
 
I would mention as well, before I get off the topic of the 
number of units, that the special care beds subsidized by the 
corporation, as well, to be added to those other units: 1982, 200; 
1983, 163; 1984, 325; 1985, 565; 1986, 193; 1987, 54 — for a 
total additional beds in special care homes of 1,500. So a pretty 
significant record. 
 
I might add that when you’re relating then to the number of 
family units, we are limited by our federal-provincial agreement 
as to how many units we can build. And then we have to agree 
on the allocations. So certainly, between the federal and 
provincial governments we saw our role clearly, that of nursing 
homes and senior homes at that particular time. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — A specific question with respect to Saskatoon, 
Mr. Minister. I wonder if you can tell me in Saskatoon, since 
the Saskatoon Housing Authority doesn’t seem to have direct 
responsibility any more for the construction of new low income 
family housing units in Saskatoon over the last three years, who 
has been doing that construction. Who is responsible for 
operating those low income family housing units? 
 
And at the same time, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell 
me whether you have guide-lines with respect to the  
 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

808 
 
 

eligibility of social assistance recipients to take advantage of 
low income family housing in a city like Saskatoon, in a large 
urban centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Under innovative housing, in 1987 the 
Lutheran Sunset Home — and I’m just talking about Saskatoon 
now — delivered 30 . . . We assisted in the delivery of 30 
family units, and they operate that as the sponsor. So they 
would be responsible for the operation of those family units. 
 
Regarding the low cost housing, we do have a point rating 
system that we apply fairly to everybody. And that rating 
system . . . I just responded to, or we just responded to my 
critic, the member from Saskatoon Centre, about a week ago 
and she’s got the whole outline of that point rating system. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Mr. Minister, I would like you just to take us 
through this again, because it’s not clear in terms of the funding 
from the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for public 
housing, particularly for low income families, Mr. Minister. 
 
You said something about your relationship with CMHC 
doesn’t allow you to do certain things, but I don’t understand 
what your relationship with CMHC is. In the annual report for 
1987, under public housing on page 34, you said that the deal 
with CMHC has changed and now the housing corporation has 
95 per cent ownership of public housing. 
 
(2015) 
 
I understand the innovative housing projects that are for seniors, 
and the life lease projects where seniors put in between 60 and 
$90,000 for a life lease into some of those projects and a certain 
number of those units are subsidized. But I don’t see any money 
in the budget for public housing for families. Can you explain 
how you are doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to confirm, first of 
all, with the member from Saskatoon University if he’s satisfied 
with the answers, and can he pick them out of Hansard, because 
those are the things . . . Or would you like us to write and 
clarify? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — But actually, Mr. Minister, what I would be 
very appreciative of is if I could get in writing a breakdown by 
year from 1980 to 1988, and also for the ’89 fiscal year in terms 
of a projection, the number of low income housing units built in 
the province for each of those years, either by fiscal year or 
calendar year, whichever is most convenient for you. 
 
And also, I would appreciate the same numbers with respect to 
seniors’ housing. And I would like to get those numbers as well 
as the provincial totals; I would like to get them by region. So 
I’d like to get them for the Saskatoon area, the Regina area, and 
then the other regions in the province, if I could. I appreciate 
that very much. And if you could attach with them the dollars 
that were spent as well as the number of units, that would also 
be helpful. 

Hon. Mr. Klein: — Okay, Mr. Chairman, thank you. We’ll . . . 
My officials say that they have no problem doing that. We’ll 
pick your request out of Hansard and they’ll deal with it 
accordingly. 
 
In response to the capital, I believe that the member from 
Saskatoon Centre is again referring to capital. I think that that’s 
what her concern is — where does the money come from. I’ll 
try to explain it as simply as I can, I guess, the best way to 
describe it. 
 
If you looked at the Sask Housing Corporation balance sheet in 
the annual report, you will see, under assets, cash and short 
term investments at cost in the area of 32 millions of dollars 
both in 1987 and in 1988. 
 
So when we require capital funding to put up any of the units, 
we have access to those funds. Now then, as we sell land or as 
we receive mortgage payments or whatever, those funds go 
back into the cash investment column, and as a result, is 
replaced. So that that source of funds is available to us for 
capital financing all the time. 
 
Ms. Smart: — I gather then that it’s not in the Estimates for 
1988 to 90. 
 
And I would like to know how much money there is in the 
budget then for this year. How much money, how much capital 
is available to you, to the housing corporation, to invest in 
public housing? 
 
If you want to tell me where it is in the Estimates, or if you 
want to tell me it’s not in the Estimates — I want to know 
where it is and how much it is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I said earlier, and I repeat, 
it isn’t in the Estimates because it’s not a budgetary item. 
 
The number of units that we will be building is part of our 
federal-provincial housing agreement. Those units we 
determine with our federal partners. And we have to come to 
some conclusion because they’re our 75 per cent funding 
partner. They pay the subsidies, and share in the expenses, and 
75 per cent of the funding to get it going, and the like. So that 
appears in the Estimates. 
 
You can see how the subsidy payment in the Estimates goes up 
every year. That’s for the units that we keep putting up. As far 
as it relates to the capital side of it, that’s not a budgetary item 
and the money, again, that we use for the capital, comes from 
the cash that we have sitting in our assets that is replaced as the 
payments on the units are made again. I can’t put it any more 
clear than that, Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Can you tell me then, how many units for 
families, for low income families you’re planning for this year 
to build? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Depending on the results of the innovative 
housing program that we are processing and evaluating right 
now, it will be in the area of 150 to 175 units this year. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

809 
 
 

Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to thank my 
officials for attending and supplying us with the information. I 
hope that the information that they supplied was satisfactory to 
the questions opposite. 
 
Ms. Smart: — Yes, I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials for coming here tonight to answer these questions and 
engage in a discussion of what is an essential need for the 
people of the province, and a very important part of the 
government, the provision of housing. Thank you. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left 
here, I have Bill Reader, deputy minister of Rural Development; 
on my right over here, I have Dennis Webster, assistant deputy 
minister; directly behind me on the left here, I have Ernie 
Anderson, executive director of transportation services; behind 
and beside Ernie is Larry Chaykowski, senior director of 
management services; off to my right here is Walter Antonio, 
director of transportation planning; and at the back, I have Doug 
McNair, executive director of rural services; Sandy Lauder, 
director of extension; John Babcock, director of lands; Lloyd 
Talbot, director of community planning development; and Ken 
Engel, director of municipal finance services. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want 
to initially start with a few preliminary questions which we 
normally ask, and I expect you’ll be able to provide the 
information to me readily. And first of all, what I would like 
you to indicate: what is the complement of your personal staff 
as of this date? How many people do you have on your personal 
staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I have four on staff. I have two secretaries 
and two assistants. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I wonder whether you could provide me 
with the name and the title and the salary of all your personal 
staff, and could you indicate any changes in the  

salaries during the past year. Can you provide that information. 
It’s a standard question, it should be able to be delivered across. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I can send this over to you. There’s been 
no salary changes since the first of 1988. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. While you’re sending that over . . . I 
appreciate that. Also you could provide me with this 
information, for the past year, if you would indicate — that is 
’88-89 — if you will provide me with the number of 
out-of-province trips taken by the minister, identifying in each 
case the following, if you would: the destination, persons 
accompanying the minister at government expense, cost of the 
trip, and purpose of the trip. Can you provide that information, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To be truthful, there was no trips out of 
the province, and I’ll send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have noticed that there are some considerable 
expenses by some ministers in respect to in-province 
expenditures. And I was wondering whether you could provide, 
for the year ’88-89, the number of in-province trips taken by the 
minister, identifying in each case, you know, the destination, 
the persons accompanying the minister, cost of trip, purpose of 
trip. Can you provide that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t have that with me. I have no 
problem in giving it to you, but it would be all trips, either to 
ratepayers’ meetings or meetings of associations. But I can get 
it for you, there’s no problem. But I don’t have it with me here, 
that’s for sure. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Very unfortunate that the minister doesn’t have 
that. 
 
For the year ’89-90, for the current year, is there any amount 
that has been budgeted for the out-of-province trips for the 
minister and/or staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t have the amounts. They’re 
looking. I don’t know if we have the amounts, but there’s 
nothing budgeted for out-of-town . . . or out-of-province travel 
for the minister, and I believe there’s two or three trips for the 
deputy minister for out of the province. 
 
(2030) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like that information provided as to the 
amount budgeted. 
 
For the year ’88-89, could you indicate the total amount that 
was spent by the agency . . . your department rather, on 
advertising? And could you indicate what amount is budgeted 
for the current fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Budgeted for 1988-89 is $425,000, and 
for the previous year . . . or ’89-90 is 425,000; the previous year 
was $383,973.40. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And can you indicate to me whether your 
department during the past year, that is ’88-89, what was the 
total amount that was spent by your department on advertising? 
And also if you would indicate what amount  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

810 
 
 

is budgeted for in ’89-90 for polling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We spent nothing on polling last year; we 
have nothing budgeted for polling this year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Now can you indicate whether the department 
used any chartered aircraft during ’88-89; and if so what was 
the cost in respect to any charters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In ’88-89, there was three flights for a 
total amount of 258 for one, 396 for another, and 152 for the 
other one. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you got anything budgeted for this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, the only time we would probably use 
it is if we had to go up North. As you know, some of the 
departments our stuff is under . . . northern agricultural is under 
our department now. There are three flights to the North. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to get into then to the main estimates, 
Mr. Minister. I don’t think there’s any doubt that rural 
Saskatchewan today is facing tough economic times, probably 
the toughest economic times since there was the last Tory 
government in this province. And I want to say that rural 
Saskatchewan, unless something is done, is on the verge of 
being totally transformed. 
 
You, as Minister of Rural Development must see what is taking 
place, the decimation of rural Saskatchewan — or maybe you 
have closed your eyes, or maybe it is part of the Tory agenda. 
But what I’d like you to do, Mr. Minister, if you would as Rural 
Development minister, if you would stand in this House and 
indicate your analysis of the problems that are being faced in 
rural Saskatchewan, and those that you think are the most 
pressing problems that should be being addressed in order to 
stabilize rural Saskatchewan. I’d like you to put forward your 
idea and your philosophy for dealing with the problems, 
isolating the essential problems and indicate to me what steps, 
in particular, you think could be adopted in order to meet these 
pressing problems facing rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I’d be pleased, Mr. Chairman, to 
first of all . . . If the hon. member hasn’t identified for himself 
the problem that I think everyone on this side of the House 
recognizes out there, is the problem of the farm economy. And 
the reasons for some of those problems, not farmer problems, 
but the reason for the farmer’s problems . . . Anybody that has 
been out in rural Saskatchewan, travelled as much as I’m sure 
the member should have, and the rest of us have, would know 
that there’s three or four major problems that has arisen out 
there due to some things in the past and some things of the 
present. 
 
Back in, as you know — and I know they always laugh when 
you say it — but back in the ’79s and ’80s the interest rates got 
up to 20 per cent, and that has shown its effect over a period of 
time. And a lot of farmers have . . . Their debt has continued to 
rise, and they had that interest rate tacked on, which they had 
trouble meeting then, continued to meet. A lot of it was 
long-term interest rates, has built on and certainly put them in a 
lot of financial  

stress. 
 
The second thing that’s happened out there is that the price of 
grain has fell from almost $5 to, I believe, $2.50 in the North 
. . . or 2.54 in the North and 2.99 in the South, or 3.05. That has 
taken a tremendous toll. And last year . . . In 1985, and then 
again in 1988, particularly in 1988, the worst drought this 
province has ever seen — over 110,000 claims through crop 
insurance, exceeding a total of over 500 millions of dollars. Tie 
that all together and certainly, Mr. Chairman, you’ve got to 
know what the problem is. And the problem is farm debt, where 
they haven’t been able to meet their payments. The level of 
security there, where the crop insurance, the rates . . . A lot of 
changes had to be made; we made them this year. I believe that 
will be of a lot of benefit, a comfort level, and to build and 
diversify rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, for years and years our farmers kept leaving. It 
started back in the ’70s and they continued to leave at the rate 
of about 1,000 farmers per year. And it continued up all the way 
to about into the early ’80s when it sort of slowed off, and there 
has been some lessening of farmers since, but there was almost 
12 to 13,000 farmers left the farm from ’71 to ’82. Those 
farmers left in good times, and now we’re having tough times. 
So you’ve got to appreciate how tough the ones left have it. 
 
To build and diversify our economy — and we have set up, as 
you know, what we call the rural service network. It’s just 
started. We’ve only got three offices open. We plan to have all 
52 open before next winter. And that’s to bring the information 
and the ability to those area community people to both build 
and diversify and to get the information they need to make it, to 
make them a strong farmer, to make the farming stronger, and 
to look at what they can do with their agricultural product 
besides loading it on a truck, raw materials, and shipping it 
down East where all the jobs are. 
 
And you know, the jobs need to be here. We’ve shipped out of 
here for 80 years. We’ve shipped everything to the East in a raw 
form. I believe it’s time we looked at how we can develop and 
diversify rural Saskatchewan, and we’ve done a lot to set the 
stage for it. I believe you’ll see a lot of things happen over the 
next year. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, we have been hearing this 
story ever since you took office, that you’re going to build and 
you’re going to diversify and you’re going to protect. And what 
has been happening ever since you took office? Don’t start 
saying that the debt and the problem was when we were in 
office, because farmers were making money then and they were 
investing in land and increasing the size of their holdings. 
 
Since you took office, over half of the debt accumulated by the 
agricultural community has been accumulated during your 
seven years in office. You take a look at the headlines of what 
is happening: Young people fleeing rural Saskatchewan. In 
1971 there was 37.9 per cent of the population was rural under 
20 years of age; in 1986, 27.2. But I’ll tell you, by now it’s 
considerably less. 
 
Mr. Minister, rural Saskatchewan, despite what you say, is in 
the shambles. We find in rural Saskatchewan the  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

811 
 
 

implement dealership being closed. We see manufacturing 
plants that were operating under our government being closed. 
We see a massive exodus of population. We see the burden of 
debt accumulating, and we see this government passing yet 
more burdens onto rural people. 
 
You say you stand up here and you’re going to protect rural 
Saskatchewan by building, protecting, and diversifying. I want 
to ask you whether you agree with the government’s policy of 
increasing the fuel tax a further 3 cents a litre. I wonder whether 
you agree that, at 45 cents, this is helping to build rural 
Saskatchewan and the R.M.s. And I want to ask you, Mr. 
Minister: did you do a calculation as to the total cost of that one 
single measure, the increase in the fuel tax another 3 cents to all 
the R.M.s across this province? 
 
I’m going to ask you, Mr. Minister, can you give an indication 
as to the impact that that will have on . . . the total impact on all 
of the R.M.s across this province, because they’re going to be 
affected in building their roads and maintaining the roads. 
They’re going to be affected also in respect to the school 
divisions in education. And I’ll tell you, that’s a massive 
transfer of a burden at a time when rural Saskatchewan cannot 
carry that burden. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, you sat in the front benches in cabinet. 
Are you in concurrence with this here massive increase in the 
passing it on to the R.M.s, to the small-business men in rural 
Saskatchewan, to the bus drivers in the school divisions? Have 
you calculated the impact of that one, single measure to rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we could all 
get in a long debate about, you know, how you raise money for 
health care and education, and that’s the two major concerns of 
my constituents. 
 
They certainly . . . You know, and most farmers realize that the 
fuel tax is deductible at source, so it really doesn’t directly 
affect the farmer as per se with the . . . If you’re in a logging 
operation, they’re considered a primary source, so it’s deducted 
too. I guess we’re the only province, I think it’s safe to say, that 
has a rebatable . . . If you’re a resident of the province of 
Saskatchewan, you get your 10 cents a litre back at the end of 
the fiscal year. 
 
In regards to R.M.s, the graders, you know, their operation 
mostly graders — most of them on graders. Basically within the 
new budget, above and beyond revenue sharing, there’s about 4 
millions of dollars available for capital grants, the first time a 
per capita grant — the very, very first time the R.M.s have ever 
had a per capita grant in 83 years, the first time. I believe that is 
extremely important. How that capital grant is put towards both 
stabilizing the R.M.s if they need some help or, in fact, to 
develop and diversify, I think, is going to be terribly important. 
 
In regards to the overall picture of how school buses and that 
. . . I appreciate it’s been in the budget. I believe this year it 
went up something like about 6 per cent, I believe, the 
education budget — something like 841-odd millions of dollars 
in the education budget. 

I believe, Mr. Chairman, that we’ve done a reasonable job 
under very extreme circumstances, fully realizing that our farm 
economy cannot take and . . . Even the personal, the guy with 
the lunch pail, cannot personally take another . . . can’t have an 
income tax increase. So you can’t have a sales tax increase. The 
gas tax is rebatable. The ones travelling through the province 
will probably be the ones to be helping us support our province 
— very, very important to the family, to the stability of it. 
 
And I just bring it to the member’s attention that I’ve been out 
to about 15 ratepayers’ meetings over the last three weeks, and 
you know that never once, never once has that been asked of 
me. And I’m out there talking to them for two or three hours 
each evening, so it’s not the issue out there. The issue out there 
is the farm debt, the price I’m going to get for my grain when I 
sell it, and the level of security that I need for my family to get 
me through into the next year and the year beyond. 
 
(2045) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s how far you’re out of touch, Mr. 
Minister. You made a massive transfer of a tax on gas to the 
R.M.s, both in respect to the maintenance and operation and 
also in respect to the school divisions. I want to ask you: if you 
think it’s not significant, Mr. Minister, then stand up in this 
legislature and tell the people of Saskatchewan whether indeed 
you calculated out the amount that this extra tax is going to cost 
the municipalities on average, the 299 municipalities — the 
combined amount that it’ll cost them for their operation of their 
maintenance and construction, as well as school buses. Can you 
give us a figure as to the impact of what it’s going to cost them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to draw to the 
member’s attention, the member from Quill Lakes, that in 1988, 
municipalities — very few of them raised their mill rate at all. 
In 1988 we did a massive road rationalization program where 
we changed the ways the roads were with the funding we did to 
them to help them through; the main farm access we increased 
so they could continue to build. We have done many things to 
put extra dollars into the R.M.s’ pockets. And one on one, if 
there’s a problem we deal with it. 
 
I don’t believe there’s one R.M. out there that has any kind of 
deep financial trouble at all, at all. And that we are working as a 
department with each and every R.M. out there on an individual 
basis where their problem does arise. And if you don’t believe 
that, you ask the R.M. of Marquis how we have dealt with a 
problem they have. And I can tell you many more, one in the 
member’s riding that we just dealt with the other day. Those are 
facts and that’s the way we deal with it. 
 
We’ve also . . . there’s been no cuts, no cuts at all to revenue 
sharing to R.M.s since I’ve been minister — and that’s been 
quite a while. And this year there’s over 4 millions of dollars in 
a special per capita grant that has never been there before. And I 
believe that . . . and besides that, and besides that, besides that 
we brought in a regravel program a couple of years ago, on a 
temporary basis, which we have kept in place that will put 7.1  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

812 
 
 

millions of dollars available for regravelling and maintaining 
our road systems in this province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Obviously, you’re too ashamed to stand up in 
this legislature. You say it’s no problem. Why don’t you stand 
up then and indicate exactly what transfer of tax took place? 
Ask your officials to calculate on average. 
 
Have you phoned out to the municipalities to determine, on 
average, what they spend and what it’ll mean? Have you 
checked with the school division boards to see what it’ll cost 
extra for the gas in respect to the increase in tax? Have you 
done that, Mr. Minister; can you provide that information? 
Because you said it’s insignificant and nobody cares. 
 
Well I’m going to demonstrate to you, if you could give us the 
figures, that what you’re talking about is a $4 million capital 
grant, and you’ve taken more than that in taxation with your gas 
tax from the municipalities. That’s the fact of the matter. Can 
you stand up here, and did you do a calculation as to the impact 
that it will have on the municipalities and school board 
divisions in respect to buses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well in regards to school divisions, no, I 
can’t give him an answer, because I certainly wouldn’t have 
that. And the Minister of Education will be up. 
 
The member over there from Quill Lakes says it doesn’t matter 
to him. To me it does matter. Mr. Chairman, it matters a great 
deal. It matters a great deal to me. But I’ll tell you, we have 
dealt with it in many ways, and I have met with . . . at the 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention I met with at least 80 R.M.s at the convention, met 
them one-on-one. 
 
Since the budget, I have been out to about 10 R.M.s where I 
met with the R.M. councils. In fact, I met with one again today. 
I have met with them, and never once had they raised it. And I 
asked my officials, I asked my officials, has any R.M., any 
R.M. in the province — 299 of them — phoned in and said, 
hey, I’m going to need more money; or that gas tax is . . . that 
extra 3 cents a litre is going to hurt me? 
 
You know why they haven’t, Mr. Chairman? Because they 
know if they have a problem we sit down with them and help 
them get through it. And most R.M.s are in good sound 
financial shape because they know how to manage it, and 
they’ve done an excellent job of it. And they will continue to do 
an excellent job. 
 
When I was a former reeve of the R.M. of Hudson Bay — and I 
can tell you how we manage money there — we did the same 
thing there as every other R.M. in the province. We know how 
to do it, we know how to build roads, we know how to maintain 
those roads to suit the ratepayers out there. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Chairman, that our department working with 
them — with each and every R.M. on an individual basis if 
necessary — through SARM — and SARM, we meet with them 
on a continuous basis, draw to their attention each and every 
thing that we’re doing so  

they are aware of it. And not one, not one has raised it with me, 
not the amount of the tax. It may be, and it may well be $1,000 
per R.M., I’m not quite sure. 
 
But I’ll tell you something. If you’re running two graders . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ah, get off. A thousands dollars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — You know what, it’s interesting to hear 
the member from Quill Lakes said, get off; you don’t know. I 
was reeve of the R.M. for many years in the R.M. of Hudson 
Bay. And when two graders . . . I know how much fuel they 
use. And I was trying to just sit down and figure out roughly 
how much it would come to at 3 cents a litre; that’s what we’re 
talking about. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Four to five cents. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — At 3 cents a litre . . . well, that’s what 
you’re talking about, the tax that went up. It went up 3 cents a 
litre. 
 
And the other thing that you got to realize, Mr. Chairman, is 
that all the roads that are out here, or all the roads that are 
designated roads that are either being built or rebuilt, if they’re 
contracted out or tendered out, we pick up anywhere up to 90 
per cent of the cost. So we pick up 90 per cent of that cost of 
that 3 cents or 45 cents, whatever, is built back into what the 
rural development pays. So in fact it could be anywhere from 
60 to 90 per cent; depends on how many roads they’re going to 
have to build, and how many dollars they have to build it with. 
So the poor R.M.s certainly get a better share of it. The R.M.s 
that have a fairly large bank account don’t get quite as much 
and they don’t expect as much. 
 
I think it’s been run really well. For years now nothing’s really 
changed the way it’s done. It’ll continue to run that way, Mr. 
Chairman, because the R.M.s believe it’s right, I believe it’s 
right, and the department believes it’s right. And I think when 
the other folks were on this side of the House, they believed it 
was right. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Obviously you haven’t calculated it. You got 
about six, seven officials standing there. You don’t have the 
nerve to stand up and to indicate the total cost to it, because you 
certainly could do it. All you have done is taken, extracted, and 
passed on to the municipalities a very substantial amount of a 
tax burden. And more than that, you’ve passed it on to the 
school divisions. And then you stand up and say, well oh, but 
we’re going to get $4 million. Well, you take more than that 
and you’re going to start standing up and bragging about giving 
them a capital grant for the first time. You can’t fool 
Saskatchewan people any longer. 
 
When you first instituted this here gas tax, I checked with some 
of the municipalities, and I found that . . . and that was with 7 
cents, the month of July . . . it ended up to about $1,120 at 7 
cents a litre, August about $1,347. It came to for the two 
months about $2,467 that they calculated that they would be 
paying. And now what you do is increase it from 7 cents — that 
was for two months, when it was 7 cents. The municipality 
indicated that was their consumption. There was $2,467 extra 
that it cost  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

813 
 
 

them, and now you increase it to 10 cents a litre, 45 cents a 
gallon, and you say there’s no impact at all to the 
municipalities. 
 
I want to ask you then, Mr. Minister, since you won’t come 
clean on this, but the municipalities know what you’re doing is 
transferring another tax onto them; I want to ask you: are you in 
agreement with having the system of taxation on small-business 
men with no rebate, taxation on fuel that is used by the rural 
municipality and no rebate, tax on the fuel that is used by 
school buses and no rebate? Is that your position, Mr. Minister? 
Is that how you’re standing up for rural Saskatchewan? Is that 
what you stand for? Are you satisfied with the present policies 
that are in place by this government and are affecting the rural 
municipalities and the school divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I laid out a few 
minutes ago here some of the things that we’re doing at Rural 
Development that I believe are terribly beneficial to the future 
of rural Saskatchewan. I mean, if we only look at today, only 
look at today in a very, very narrow tunnel vision, then we 
don’t see very far, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But if we look ahead and see what we can do to make rural 
Saskatchewan a better place for us to live, to give ourselves 
some job opportunities, to do some development, 
diversification, manufacturing, processing that has never been 
done out there, then we have to look in a little different way, 
and that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Chairman. 
 
We started out by putting in rural service networks out there, 
bringing all different departments together. We put 
development officers into that area, then from then we’ve got 
development money now available. And if you notice as we go 
through the House, you’ll see there’s other things come up from 
either through SEDCO, and other ways that your capital, which 
is mentioned in the budget, that will give opportunities to 
develop rural Saskatchewan for those small towns. And we only 
think were talking about the R.M.s out there; we’re making a 
mistake, each and every one, if that’s all you think you’re 
talking about. 
 
Every small town and every small village is part of rural 
Saskatchewan. They work together; they go to the same curling 
rink; they go to the same skating rink; they’re part of rural 
Saskatchewan. So as you build a community, you build more 
than the R.M.; you got to think about your towns and your 
villages, where they live and go to school, and that’s where the 
future is. As you build that and you build around that, you build 
a strong R.M. That’s how you build it. 
 
And what we have done, Mr. Chairman, and as I go through it, 
I’ll bring up some more things. And just to touch on it with the 
member’s question about doing construction, if a construction 
job cost $10,000 a mile to build, total construction job, the least 
we would probably pay — the most they would pay — or the 
least that we would pay would be about $7,000, and the most 
that the R.M. would pay would be about $3,000. And that could 
go all the way up until we would pay $9,000 and the R.M. 
would pay $1,000 on construction and reconstruction. 

On gravel, on the regravel program, we pay 50 per cent, 50 per 
cent of the regravel program. Fifty per cent of the gravel, and 
that calls hauling and crushing and all the things that go with it. 
Those are stabilizing effects, and keeps our roads in good shape 
and keeps the R.M. . . . certainly keeps their mill rate down, 
because I believe it amounts to about four or five mills rate 
across the whole province of Saskatchewan by doing it that 
way. 
 
Those are the sound, stable things that keep rural Saskatchewan 
continue going ahead without increased taxes on that taxpayer 
out there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked you a specific question, Mr. Minister. I 
asked you if you are satisfied with the government’s policy 
which has increased the tax on fuel, which is non-refundable, 
which is used by the municipalities, school divisions, 
small-business men in rural Saskatchewan. Are you satisfied 
with the fairness of that Tory policy in respect to the gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the policies we have 
in rural development are looking ahead, they’re looking ahead 
to what we can do for tomorrow. And he says: am I happy with 
the policies? Yes, I am. It’s a long, long ways from where it 
was, a long ways from where it was. 
 
And it’s interesting, I was on a flight going south this winter — 
out of my own expense — and, I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You said you didn’t leave the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Not on government money. And I was 
going south, and I was talking to a fellow who used to be an 
agrologist in the province of Saskatchewan, and he’s now a 
mayor of a small town. And he told me back in 1978, in 1978, 
he suggested to the then former government that what we 
should do is almost exactly what we’re doing now. And he said, 
that’ll never work; just leave us alone; it’s good enough as it is; 
we’re satisfied. That’s what they told him then. And he told me 
. . . and he laid out all the things that he had told them then and 
it’s amazing, it’s almost exactly what we’re doing now. 
 
And I just say that they were behind their times 10 years. We’re 
trying to look 10 years ahead. And if we don’t, the child that’s 
in grade one today graduates in the year 2000 — and that is our 
future. We have to build for the next 10 years ahead, and that’s 
what we’re doing in rural Saskatchewan, that’s what we’re 
doing with the service network, and that’s were we’re going to 
go, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well that’s the strangest building I ever saw, by 
taxing the people that you represent. That’s building in the 
toughest economic times. The minister stands up and says, 
we’re building rural Saskatchewan; we’re taxing the rural 
municipalities; we’re taxing the small-business man; we’re 
taxing the school buses for gasoline. And he said he’s satisfied, 
that’s building. 
 
I wonder if the minister is satisfied that he was able to see that 
the municipalities had to pay the gas tax — no rebate  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

814 
 
 

-- and then when I look at the budget speech, the tax levied on 
aviation fuel and locomotive diesel fuel will remain at the 
existing level. Mr. Minister, do you think it’s fair that your 
government excluded any additional tax in respect to aviation 
fuel and locomotive diesel fuel, but at the same time taxed rural 
municipalities, school divisions, small-business men — all of 
rural Saskatchewan? Do you think that’s fair? 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They . . . the member asked about 
locomotive fuel and I believe a couple of years ago we changed 
the amount that’s paid by railroads that go through our province 
and the amount of fuel they use. I believe we raised it — I could 
be could be corrected — but it was in the neighbourhood of 15 
or 16 cents a litre that we were charging them. And compared to 
Manitoba and to Alberta and the other provinces, we are still 
substantially higher than any other province. 
 
And if there is a limit to how far you can go without being 
considered unfair in any court system or wherever . . . whoever 
may challenge it. So I guess it was felt, and I believe it was felt 
in the best interest, that there’s only so high you can charge 
somebody to still be fair. And we are . . . I believe, I believe, 
Mr. Chairman, that we’re almost twice as much, the locomotive 
fuel is almost taxed twice as much as that is taxed by the other 
diesel fuels. So in comparison, they are paying a great deal 
more in the province. And that’s one reason that it wasn’t . . . 
that we didn’t raise it. So if you . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, yes. That’s the plane fuel you need 
for the big boys. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The aviation fuel? The aviation fuel 
basically was being used for farm spraying and that, and it also 
had been taxed, and so it was left alone. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well do you agree also with the budgetary 
decision that you did increase the fuel tax to the consumers and 
the municipalities and the school board divisions, increase the 
tax on them, but at the same time that you gave a 2 per cent 
corporate decrease in taxation? Are you in agreement with that 
particular position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I understand that all corporations pay tax, 
the 10 cents non-refundable. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’m not talking about gas; I’m talking 
about the corporate tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well we’re talking about . . . well I’m 
talking about gas. The gas tax to all corporations, whether it’s a 
small limited company, any type of a business, it’s not 
refundable, that you pay it. In regards to the . . . I’ll just go back 
a little bit to the locomotive fuel. 
 
I believe the locomotive and aviation fuel, we increased it a 
couple of years ago. The value coming into the province went 
from $3.5 million to almost $20 million, so we have taken a 
tremendous jump there. 
 
And second, in regards to . . . you asked me to . . . do we tax 
corporations or not tax corporations and tax schools  

and R.M.s. Well R.M.s aren’t taxed. R.M.s tax the local 
taxpayers or they collect the taxes the same as the school boards 
do, the same as the school divisions do. So therefore, you know, 
we don’t set those rates, they’re set by either the R.M. 
themselves or by the school divisions. So those are local things. 
 
Provincially, provincially I believe we fund something like 
$841 million towards education — a total. That’s a substantial 
amount of money. And as you know, to the technical schools 
and to the university, it’s plus 90 per cent that we put up. So 
just to put it in proportion that we do, as a province, that’s me 
and you as taxpayers, pay a substantial amount of money to all 
types of education and the taxes that are collected at a local 
level from K-12 are done by the school division, and not by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well are you aware in the budget that the 
corporations corporate tax rate went down from 17 to 15 per 
cent? And that’s what I’m referring to. 
 
And are you in agreement that the corporations in this time 
should have a reduction in taxation at the time that you’re 
tacking on further sales tax in respect to the fuel affecting rural 
Saskatchewan, as I have been indicating? That’s the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if you’re talking 
about . . . he’s talking about the corporate tax, whatever it was, 
from 17 to 15 per cent. 
 
Income tax in this province, income tax in this province, to any 
individual, to any individual did not go up — did not go up. The 
corporate tax in Saskatchewan is the highest, I believe, or the 
second-highest across Canada, in Saskatchewan, the corporate 
tax is. The income tax in Saskatchewan, I believe, is about the 
fourth or third lowest. 
 
And besides that, there’s no health premiums. We don’t pay 
health premiums in this province. We don’t pay no health 
premiums. You don’t pay no gas tax, you get it back — right? 
— if you’re a resident. You get it back. You get it back. 
 
So there’s a lot of things in this province that are not in any 
other province. And certainly it takes money to run a province. 
It takes money to run our health care system, which is about 1.4 
billions of dollars. That’s $1,400 for every man, woman, and 
child in this province each year. And that’s almost a hundred 
. . . that’s 130-some odd dollars over last year for every man, 
woman, and child in this province for health care alone, the 
additional. And if you just start extracting that, you’d see how 
many dollars are spent there. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the budget we brought down, 
it’s fair, it’s equitable, and it allows the working man no extra 
taxes other than the 3 cents which he will get back when he 
keeps his bills. I think it’s fair, it’s fair for the working man, it’s 
fair for the farmer. And the only one that maybe don’t get the 3 
cents back is the two or three — it was one, the school unit 
who’s made up through extra money, about 6 or 7 per cent in 
the budget, and the R.M.s which we have looked after very, 
very well. And I think  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

815 
 
 

each one will tell you that as you go out there. And the 
corporate people do not get it back, they pay it to help pay our 
education, to help pay our health costs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan no 
longer believe your credibility — you have none. In 1982 one 
of the policies that you went to the people, you said that you 
were going to remove the gas tax. Your Premier said that that 
gas tax would not be reinstated — not reinstated. And here you 
have laying it on to municipalities and school boards and 
small-business men and trucking firms across this province — 
no rebate. That’s what you’ve done. And you know what? The 
revenues that you are getting, the tax that you were going to 
wipe out, you know what the revenues that you suck out of the 
people of Saskatchewan, the largest extent — $204 million, 
$204 million. That’s the tax that was going to be wiped out. 
 
I’ll tell you, 45 cents a gallon is what the municipalities pay tax 
on fuel that you promised. That’s the amount, 45 cents a gallon 
that the truckers, who in 1982 you promised there would be a 
removal of the tax. It’s also the 45 cents that’s being paid. You 
recall how you indicated to the farmers that they were paying it, 
when they weren’t. Your credibility is shot, Mr. Minister. In 
fact, your policies . . . you’re so outdated in your policies, your 
own party doesn’t agree with it. 
 
I want to read a resolution in respect to this gas tax, passed by 
your . . . at an annual meeting of the Progressive Conservative 
Party: 
 

That the Progressive Conservative Party urge the 
Government of Saskatchewan at the earliest possible 
opportunity to discontinue the gas tax rebate program and 
instead adjust the gas tax to a level of four cents per litre 
without any rebate. 

 
That’s the policy of your party. That’s your policy. And what 
you stand there and say: oh, we’re building rural Saskatchewan; 
we’re diversifying. You know what you’re doing, your 
government and your actions of you, Mr. Minister, you’re 
wrecking rural Saskatchewan — wrecking it. 
 
And I’ll tell you . . . Take a look at some of the headlines. And 
the member from Saltcoats laughs. “Young people fleeing from 
rural Saskatchewan” — “The number of young people farming 
decreasing”. 
 
Foreclosures — this government here has taken more actions of 
foreclosures and legal actions against the farmers of 
Saskatchewan than at any time in the history of this province. 
Six hundred and twenty legal actions were taken against rural 
Saskatchewan farmers in 1988; 300 more actions were taken in 
the first three months of this year — actions against farmers. 
Legal actions against the farmers in rural Saskatchewan, that’s 
what’s happening. 
 
Farm credit corporation, same thing. Two thousand more 
farmers are being sued, or at least their files have been turned 
over to lawyers for legal actions. And we are building 
Saskatchewan. He stands up and says he can do  

nothing about changing the conditions in rural Saskatchewan. 
Well of course he can’t, because their policies are not designed 
for the ordinary people of Saskatchewan. Their policies are 
designed for their friends, for their friends, and for the 
multinational corporations. 
 
We’re sitting in this legislature now for some 24, 25 days, and 
here we have in this budget some of the initiatives that they’re 
saying is going to be for rural Saskatchewan. Have we seen one 
Bill come forward, Mr. Chairman? Where are the Bills in 
respect to what may help rural Saskatchewan? There’s no 
substance to those programs or they’d bring them forward. And 
what are we spending our time on here? Bill 1 — privatization. 
 
You know what the line-up of the business is for next week? 
It’s another privatization Bill, and they say they’re working and 
protecting rural Saskatchewan. And they won’t even come into 
this legislature and bring forward any legislative bills which 
would provide some protection to the farmers here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are on to 
these boys, and I think the last federal election clearly indicated 
— clearly indicated what was happening. A federal election was 
held, and during that federal election, what happened is that 10 
out of 14 ridings when New Democratic candidates won. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Ten out of 14. The minister stands here and he 
says, oh we can’t do much about it. We’re going to diversify. I 
want to ask the minister: what indications have you of this great 
diversification? You’ve been in there for eight years, and you 
have had an exodus of people from this province the like of 
which you have never seen before; 8,000 people left this 
province in the first two months of this year; 16,000 people left 
this province last year. And he’s building and diversifying and 
protecting the people of this province. 
 
Let’s come straight with the people of Saskatchewan. What you 
have done is that you have placed on the backs of the people of 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you should look at the rates of personal 
income tax. We have the second highest personal income tax in 
all of Canada. We had a province here that had the lowest per 
capita debt in all of the nations. That’s what we had, and today 
under this mismanagement of the members that sit across in the 
front row here, the goofy one from . . . no, not from Saltcoats, 
he is, too . . . but the other one from Weyburn, the two goofy 
twins sitting in the front bench, tweedledum and tweedle 
dumber. 
 
But seriously, I know they don’t want to hear this, but I’ll tell 
you, and you can stand up there, and the member from Morse, 
and you can laugh. But I’ll tell you there’s no laughing matter 
out in rural Saskatchewan. And what is even worse, you stand 
in this legislature having deceived the farmers of this province. 
That’s what you’ve done, you misrepresented the facts. You 
tried during a federal election to indicate that you’re going to 
have a drought payment, and what happened? You reneged on 
that  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

816 
 
 

promise. 
 
And where is the agricultural legislation that should be before 
this legislature? Where is the programs from the Department of 
Rural Affairs? Where are they? You can’t find them in this 
budget, I’ll tell you. 
 
But you go across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and I’ll 
tell you, it’s never been this bad since the last Tory government. 
That’s what it is; my father remembers it, and I’ll tell you 
history records how bad it was. 
 
(2115) 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take a look at your budget. You’re 
saying that you’re really helping rural Saskatchewan. I took a 
look at your budget, Mr. Minister, and all of the items that were 
in your budget last year. And what you have done now is added 
some additional items to your budget. 
 
Well, if you take a look at transportation and planning, 
absolutely no increase — the same. If you look at municipal 
finance and advisory services, it’s down. If you look at 
community planning, it’s exactly the same, no increase. Road 
services is the same. Drafting services is the same. Bridge 
services is the same. Ferry services is the same. Extension 
branch is down. Those are the items in your budget last year. 
 
And there’s only one item that is slightly increased, and that is 
rural community development which went up from 515,200 to 
606,000. That’s the only single item of the budgetary items that 
was in his department last year that was increased, one single 
item. And that minister stands here and says he has a budget to 
help build, diversify, and protect rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Well let’s take a couple looks at a few more items here. Let’s 
take a look at the revenue sharing grants to R.M.s. Revenue 
sharing grants to rural development, grants to rural 
development, Mr. Minister — that’s $48,062,000, grants for 
rural development. 
 
Do you know what the estimates in 1986-87 estimates were for 
the grants to municipalities? They were forty-eight thousand, 
five hundred and forty-seven thousand dollars. In 1987-88 you 
set the estimates at $48,062,000. That’s what you set it at. That 
was in 1987-88. Well guess what the grants to the 
municipalities is today: 1987-88, $48.062 million, Mr. Minister; 
1988-89, $48.062 million; 1989-90 estimates, $48.062 million 
— three consecutive years. Not only that, you brought them 
down, from ’86 to ’87, $500,000 approximately, and for the last 
three years they have been frozen at $48.062 million. That’s a 
freeze, Mr. Minister. And what I’d like to ask you, Mr. 
Minister, is that how hard you fought in the cabinet to get a 
reasonable amount of money for the R.M.s in respect to the 
grants — grants for rural development? 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve frozen them for over three years after 
having cut them by $500,000. I ask you, Mr. Minister, is that 
one of the items that you’re proud of, that you’ve stood up and 
you’ve fought, and you got more money for the R.M.s? Is that 
one of the items? 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, he covered a lot of 
territory there, about 25 different items. I’m not sure just which 
one to start on. I noticed him going through our budget, through 
the estimates, and he probably conveniently, or just by accident 
he left out a couple of things that I think he should . . . the 
public should be aware of. 
 
Our rural service network which last year had 1.5 millions of 
dollars in it, this year it has 5 millions of dollars in it. In another 
area that he . . . And besides that, there is, as you notice, there’s 
33 new jobs there, all in rural Saskatchewan — each and every 
one will be in rural Saskatchewan. Then another area that I 
noticed that he conveniently missed out was our rural 
development grants which is all for rural Saskatchewan, 
$500,000 last year. It’s 1.1 million this year. And rural 
development per capita grant of 4.2 millions of dollars out of 
that share that comes out of there, he didn’t mention that. 
 
It seems to me . . . And what he didn’t mention, that the total 
budget for this year, for the total budget for this year is 77 
millions of dollars for the Department of Rural Development. 
That’s for rural Saskatchewan, all for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now he asked me another question I think is pretty important to 
recognize. And he said, you haven’t . . . tell me what you’re 
doing out there in rural Saskatchewan to develop and diversify 
over the last three or four years. That you’ve been here for 
seven years — I think the words he used, and he said eight, but 
it’s really only seven — and what have you been doing? 
 
Well we have done a complete catalogue of everything that’s 
either in the process of being set up or completed. And to give 
you an idea: under the RDC program, rural development 
corporation concept program, nine in the province right now, 
they’ve identified 54 projects and they’re looking at about 
approximately 714 jobs with a total value of about 80 millions 
of dollars. Now some of them aren’t completed, some are only 
starting, but that’s what they’re working on right now in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The CED, community economic development program, which 
was there for the last quite a few years. Since we started, there’s 
428 projects, and that would be anywheres from a service 
station in a town, to bringing in professional people, to putting 
up an industry. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan 2,135 jobs have been identified for a 
total value of almost 500 millions of dollars in expenditures. 
That’s what’s going on out there. Those are either in the process 
of being . . . they’re all completed, or in the process of being 
completed, or some are just in the planning stages. That’s 
what’s been going on out there over the last two or three years, 
and that’s only a start, Mr. Chairman. There’s much more that’s 
in the planning stages. 
 
An Hon. Member: — There’s so much more we could be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s right. There is a lot more each and 
every one of us can be, and there’s a lot more rural 
Saskatchewan could be if we give them the opportunity.  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

817 
 
 

And we are giving them the opportunity like they’ve never had 
before. And we’re going to work with them, we’re going to 
work with them to see that it comes about and that we give 
opportunities for jobs for young people in rural Saskatchewan 
in each and every small town and each and every R.M. in this 
province. 
 
The other thing I just want to mention, and he went back to this 
corporate tax. And I was just looking in the budget. If he looked 
in the estimates, the revenue estimates, he would have noticed 
that from last year, from 133 millions of dollars, that the 
corporate tax is expected to go up to 148 millions of dollars. So 
that it will be an increase in revenue of $15 million to this 
province and to the taxpayers of this province. And I believe 
that’s significant, and that goes a long ways to help and to do 
some of the things we want to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, Mr. Minister, on the item in respect to 
the grants to the R.M.s, I think there is no doubt that the records 
will indicate that 1986-87, that the total amount of the grants 
that were given to the R.M.s was $48,547,000. That has been 
reduced in 1987-88 to $48,062,000. That has been frozen for 
three successive years. Those are the facts. Those are taken 
from your budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you to take a look also at the ferry service in 
this province. In 1982-83, the staffing was 44.3, the budget 
estimate was $1.4 million. And at the present time in ’89-90, 
that’s reduced to $1,093,000. So what you have done here in 
respect to that item, staffing has been cut almost in half and the 
funding is about two-thirds of what it was before. 
 
So we take the grants to the municipalities, they’re down from 
the three years ago. If you take in respect to the ferry service, 
down substantially — staff and also funding. Mr. Minister, you 
can’t deny those facts. Those come from your performance and 
from your previous budgets. 
 
If you take a look at road service branch, here we find that in 
1983-84, Mr. Minister, in respect to road services branch, 
staffing was 60.4, budget estimate was 2.966 or $2,966,000. 
You know what it is in ’88-89-90? It’s down to 44.4 staff and 
$1.7 million, $1.7 million. This is a cut of 1.22 million since 
1983. Certainly there is a further erosion of the funding that was 
provided previously. If you want to take a look at the bridge 
services that have been cut in the recent years too, Mr. Minister. 
Let’s take a look at 1983-84. There was staffing of 7.5 and a 
budget of $293,380. Today it’s reduced down, ’89-90 to 6.1, 
down to $264,500. That’s how you’ve been supporting the 
services in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Similarly, other grants that were given, a modest grant, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities was given. 
And also to the R.M. administrators’ association, there’s a grant 
of 4,000 in ’80-81, and in 1983-84 was 6,000. That grant has 
been totally eliminated. 
 
If you go on into other construction of roads on Indian reserves, 
take a look at the previous budgets and what  

was allocated. In 1986-87, $196,000; in ’88-89 totally 
eliminated; ’89-90 nothing. In ’86-87, Indian reserve roads got 
196,000, heavy-haul roads got 2 million, and there was one 
other item for 2.4 million. That’s missing from the budget. 
 
The following branches of your department got cuts in this 
year’s estimates compared to last year: municipal finance and 
advisory services have been cut; extension branch has been cut; 
assistance to general agriculture interests have been cut; 
acquisition to land and improvements have been cut. 
 
And the following items have been frozen, exactly the same 
either as last year or for several years: revenue sharing, 
transportation planning, community planning, road services, 
drafting services, bridge services, ferry services, 4-H grants, 
capital expenditures — all of those have remained the same. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know how you can stand up in this 
legislature and defend such a massive amount of cuts from 
previous years in so many of the items in your budget. There 
has to be an erosion of some of the services that were provided 
before. What I’m saying here, Mr. Minister, what you failed to 
do is to sit in the cabinet office and to get a fair allocation of the 
budget for rural Saskatchewan. That’s the truth of the matter, 
that you have failed to get a reasonable amount for rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister: how can you defend a budget where 
there has been decreases in so many items in your budget that 
have been frozen substantially for a number of years? How is 
that protecting and building in Saskatchewan? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting to 
note that he went through the budget and he picked on road 
services, and he said 44.4 people down from whatever number 
he used before. 
 
The other interesting thing is that at the SARM convention our 
department got, I think I can honestly say, a great deal of praise 
from the SARM executive and the 2,000 delegates that were 
there. A very, very good reception and a lot of praise on how 
well they have been doing the road services and the extent to 
which they go out there and work with the R.M. That was 
brought up at the SARM . . . a person from the floor, and there 
was just a clap through the whole audience, appreciative of how 
well they’re running it. 
 
It doesn’t take as many people sometimes to do it, but it takes 
excellent people to make it work. And that’s what we have, Mr. 
Chairman, we’ve got a group of excellent dedicated people who 
have been in the department for many years - 
_ we didn’t hire them; they’ve been there for many years — 
who are doing an absolutely excellent job of administering the 
money that’s there, and of working with the R.M.s to see that it 
happens. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Chairman, he was talking about 
efficiencies, and how there wouldn’t be enough to do it.  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

818 
 
 

Last year, in 1988, road construction in R.M.s was up by 19 per 
cent; the largest increase in road construction in this province 
since ever in the history of the R.M.s — ever. They built 1,330 
kilometres, or kilo-metres if you want to put it that way, of 
roads. That’s what they built last year. They reconstructed 377, 
and they oil-surfaced 58 kilometres of road. Besides that, they 
did maintenance on 400 kilometres of oil surface roads, and 
they did basically that, Mr. Chairman, with little — little — and 
in many cases no mill rate increase at all. And there hasn’t been 
any for quite a few years. 
 
So what it tells me, Mr. Chairman, as both the R.M.s out there, 
the 299 of them, and the Department of Rural Development, the 
people who have worked there for years, are doing an excellent 
job putting the money to the best use. The $48 million that goes 
into road construction each and every year out there is being 
spent wisely, creating jobs, and creating opportunities. 
 
And I just want to say one other thing, 98 per cent, 98 per cent 
of all the jobs, all the jobs and all the trucks and all the graders 
and all the contractors was Saskatchewan content by the R.M.s 
out there — 98 per cent in 1988. I think that alone . . . I believe 
that alone is worth recognition. 
 
So I . . . just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. And 
the other thing he said, that’s privatization. Mr. Chairman, they 
basically, basically contract it all out through tender because 
they know how to get the best work for their dollar and how it 
should be done. 
 
So I say, with all due respect to the member opposite, I believe 
both the department and the R.M.s out there have done an 
excellent job of maintaining the mill rate, of not increasing it, of 
building just almost 2,000 kilometres of road, either built or 
reconstructed in 1988. I think that’s just outstanding. And 
besides that, in 1989 we expect almost the same amount. That’s 
in tough times, in the middle of the worst drought in history, 
and a little rain would go a long ways to help them do a lot 
more. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I wonder if the minister could indicate in his 
theme of building, and diversifying, and protecting, how you 
protected the rural families in respect to the erosion of the 
dental care program, and whether you had that request from the 
R.M.s to implement that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it has been 
interesting to hear this member opposite ask about the dental 
care program. And there has been some controversy over it, I 
mean nobody would deny that, there has been some. But, let me 
tell you something, in my town — in the town of Porcupine 
Plain where we never had a dentist before, we now have a 
dentist. 
 
I was up here at, I can’t think of the little name, Hafford I 
believe it was, the town of Hafford here just last fall, a new 
dentist opened in the town of Hafford. And the association of 
dental surgeons told me that at that time there had been 17 new 
dental offices open in rural Saskatchewan to date and he 
expected about 30 more in the planning. 
 
What it tells me is, it not only gives dental care for the  

parent who can take their child to the dentist right in their town, 
but also for me and you who need that dental care too. So, it’s 
building our communities. With the dentist there that’s one 
more opportunity for . . . one more reason for the people to shop 
in their own town, to take the children to the dentist in their 
own town, and to build their community because an 
infrastructure of all the professional peoples are very, very 
important if you’re going to have a strong and vibrant small 
community. 
 
And those are things that have to be done. And they’re coming, 
I mean it’s slow, and it’s coming very . . . but we’ve come a 
long ways, and nothing is perfect, nothing is perfect. But I’ll 
tell, Mr. Chairman, we’re building there and that’s one more 
building stone. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the minister then, would you put 
your credibility on line and indicate whether you think that the 
modifications that you made to the dental program, by 
eliminating the school-based program, has improved the quality 
of dental care to the rural children and rural population? Would 
you indicate whether you think that your party, and which you 
supported, have improved the dental care program in rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, the dental care beyond the 
children . . . I mean, but children are very, very important. The 
dental care being available to take them to a dentist, 
professional dentist, I believe, can’t be . . . at least it has to be 
. . . Those people are as good as or better than a trainee that may 
be out there working on those children’s teeth. I don’t say that 
they weren’t. It wasn’t . . . At the point it was, it might have 
been okay. But I believe that a professional dentist who has 
seven years of training has to have, and should have, a better 
knowledge of what is needed for not only the children, for the 
grown-ups and the rest, and it’s part of building rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s all right to say that the government will do everything for 
everybody, but tell me what it builds out there. For years we 
saw it all dwindle away. From ’71 to ’82, 13,000 farmers left 
this province or left the farm. And where did they go? They just 
left because . . . And this was in the best times the world has 
ever known — the best times. And where did they go? Who 
knows. 
 
We got to start building rural Saskatchewan. We got to continue 
to do the things that bring the stability, the infrastructure, 
because that makes rural Saskatchewan strong. And some of the 
things that we’re doing, I believe, will lead to a strong and 
certainly a long-lasting rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well I’m shocked at what the minister said. He 
stood up in this legislature and he indicated that in his view, in 
his view, the dental therapists and dental nurses were providing 
inferior quality work. That’s what he was saying, and obviously 
that was the position of that government when they unilaterally 
dismissed 400 dental therapists and dental nurses. That’s what’s 
behind it. That’s what’s behind it now. And I hope the dental 
therapists and nurses hear clearly what the minister said, 
because that’s exactly what he said. 
 
He decided that, in fact, the dental therapists, which the  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

819 
 
 

students appreciated, which the parents wanted, and they 
decided on that basis that there was no competence — just 
imagine. That’s what they said. Providing probably the most 
cost efficient program, best efficient program in all of North 
America, one of the finest preventive health care and dental 
treatment in North America. And that guy stands up in this 
legislature and says he’s working for rural Saskatchewan. Well 
you boys, I’ll tell you, you’re not going to be given another 
chance to represent rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask you also, Mr. Minister, since you’re willing to 
pass judgement on people, would you give your opinion as to 
whether or not you favour the big bash, the 85th birthday of the 
province, where we’re going to be spending something like $9 
million on a 85th celebration. Did you support that too, while 
struggling families were out in rural Saskatchewan, and you’re 
going to blow $9 million? That’s how you’re building 
Saskatchewan, I suppose, building rural Saskatchewan, tearing 
down a dental program and putting on a bash for Tories. I want 
to ask you: did you support that? 
 
And why didn’t you go to the SARM convention? And why 
don’t you answer them when they asked you to go to your 
government and do away with this wasteful party? That’s what 
they said. They passed a resolution saying, it’s a waste of 
money. But that wouldn’t be new for your government because 
you’ve been pretty good at wasting money. But I’ll tell you, no 
birthday party is going to get you elected any more. You can’t 
fool the people. 
 
So what I’m asking you: will you agree with the SARM 
resolution where they almost unanimously indicated that they 
would rather have that for gravelling roads and making 
improvements in the R.M.s, rather than waste it, as it’s 
apparently going to be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well before I get onto this final or this 
last topic he was talking about, I just . . . talking about . . . 
Somebody grumbling from the back . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Somebody . . . I just thought I’d mention that if the member 
from Quill Lakes has been talking to any of his folks out in the 
Wynyard area or the Watson area where we’re putting in the 
rural service network, rural service centres into there, or 
expanded service to look at what can be done in their area, to 
help them build and diversify — has he talked to those folks out 
there, as I have talked to those folks out there, about a new 
centre, a new centre in each one of those communities that will 
bring together all the information that is needed; to bring crop 
insurance to each one of them; to bring together extension 
services and lands branch, rural development. The R.M.s are 
working in many cases with this. Has he talked to his two, two 
of his towns out there that will have one in there? I doubt it very 
much. 
 
I was out at Strasbourg the other night. And when I started 
explaining to them some of the things that they can do . . . 
they’ll have a brand-new rural service centre. They got . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, they got a permanent 
agrologist there. They haven’t had one for years there; they got 
one stationed there. He’ll be linking into the total computer 
system which will allow them to link to all 52 centres when it’s 
complete, to the University of Saskatchewan, to the 
Saskatchewan Research Council, to  

Agriculture Canada, and to the others as they focus in. 
 
Availability of information is what our young people will need 
for the future. To take that and then take what we have put 
together, and we call it — it’s a catalogue of opportunities, 
identified . . . we have identified out there, Mr. Chairman, 
1,100-and-some-odd types of industries that could be located in 
rural Saskatchewan. We have put together, through the research 
council and others, through tourism and small business, through 
the eight northern states, in Manitoba, in Alberta, and we have 
even . . . Just what is available, we have searched it all out 
what’s available in records, we haven’t had . . . And we’ve also 
looked at some of the European countries that are looking with 
industries they like to establish because there’s a product, and 
they’re small, from one to 25 industry operation. 
 
The building of an infrastructure in rural Saskatchewan related 
to agriculture, that’s just about complete, that will be available 
to all R.M.s and towns and villages and to the member opposite 
if he would like to look at it. 
 
What can be done out there and within that structure, within 
that structure, Mr. Chairman, will be how many jobs it will 
create; the type of technology needed; the cost of production; 
where’s one located; the markets that’s available in 
Saskatchewan; the markets that’s available within trucking 
distance of Saskatchewan; the cost of putting one up; how it 
could be financed. 
 
And as the member listens as we go through SEDCO’s . . . 
You’ll see that there’s a lot of changes, you’ll see venture 
capital changes. That will all put together, with ideas, with grant 
money, with financing available, that we can do a great deal out 
there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’ll get on to what he called a birthday party. In 1980 they 
had a birthday party for the province of Saskatchewan; I think 
they called it a birthday party. Welcome to Saskatchewan, a 
birthday party. And it wasn’t bad, I would admit, it was pretty 
fair. Yes, it was getting close to election year, they were getting 
ready. They went in the spring of ’82, a little over a year later, 
but it was close. I mean, that’s what they were looking at. 
Irrelevant. 
 
They did a pretty decent job of it and it was pretty good and I 
think most people in Saskatchewan appreciate it. But this, Mr. 
Chairman, it’s not a birthday party. This isn’t what they had in 
1980. In 1980 they had a birthday party. That’s what they called 
it. I mean, they’re still 10 years behind. 
 
This is to bring technology, industries and communities 
together to help build and diversify rural Saskatchewan. And 
the moneys that will be available — the moneys that can be 
allocated to any community — it has to be related to bringing 
industry to your town, what you have available in a raw product 
or you need an industry in there, the technology together to 
build rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It is the first time any government’s ever tried this, Mr. 
Chairman. I don’t know how much will be spent; they say $9 
million. I hope they do, because that means we’re  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

820 
 
 

going to have a lot of industry in this province when we’re 
done, a lot of people coming here to look at it. And if there’s 
some way that some community out there needs some money to 
bring technology, to bring industry to their community, show 
them what they need and what they have available, I urge them 
— I urge them to go talk to the chairman, who is a former 
mayor of Saskatoon, Mr. Wright, to bring . . . to talk to them of 
how that can be done. 
 
(2145) 
 
Because that’s what we need to do, Mr. Chairman. We can’t sit 
here; it’s not in Saskatchewan; it has never been here in 
Saskatchewan, and nobody ever wanted it here in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve always been the shipper of raw materials 
and never, never once worried about keeping our young people 
here and building on all the raw materials we have here. 
 
Forty-three per cent, 43 per cent of all the agricultural land in 
Canada is here in this province, 43 per cent — 68,000 farmers 
here in this province. We can build a great deal with that, Mr. 
Chairman, and I believe that using this $9 million or $3 million, 
whatever needs out of that corporation, the Future Corporation, 
to build its future, Mr. Chairman, bringing that together. I urge 
anybody that’s interested to do it because it’s good for their 
town, their community and their future. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, just to follow up in respect to that, Mr. 
Chairman, I suppose the minister’s saying that the SARM 
representatives who made the motion don’t know what they’re 
talking about, that there is something so significant about 85th 
birthday. What he’s talking about when we had it, it was the 
75th birthday of Saskatchewan. Why didn’t we have one for the 
84th or the 83rd or the 86th? Why 85th? 
 
Obviously what it is, Mr. Minister — and you don’t have the 
honesty or the integrity to stand up and support the R.M. 
councillors that moved the motion censoring this government 
— you’re standing here trying to defend something that is not 
defendable. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan don’t want that wasteful birthday 
party bash put on by Tories for Tories. They don’t want it. 
Eighty-fifth doesn’t mean much to them when they’re losing 
their farms and young people are leaving the province in 
droves. They don’t want to celebrate. They haven’t got anything 
to celebrate. 
 
I’ll tell you where there will be a celebration is after you call the 
next election and you’re thrown out of the office. But it will be 
a birthday party for the people of Saskatchewan — 
self-initiated. But you can’t justify, you can’t justify the 85th 
birthday other than what you’re trying to do is to set up some 
slush fund during an election year. You’re planning on having it 
during the election year or prior to the election year, that’s what 
it is. SARM won’t believe you. They say it’s a waste of money. 
Other small towns and councils have said the same thing. Meet 
people, business people in small towns, they say it’s a farce, it’s 
a waste. 
 
So here is this minister, stands in this legislature saying, I  

am going to defend that birthday party for the Tories. I am 
going to stand up here and defend a waste of 9 or $10 million, 
when the people of Saskatchewan are rejecting it. And he stands 
up here saying, oh we’re really protecting rural Saskatchewan, 
as he crippled and destroyed the best child dental program in 
North America. 
 
Mr. Minister, your rhetoric is great, you pay a lot, your 
government spends somewhere around $20 million a year 
advertising with your clichés, your building and your 
diversifying and your protecting, as the people are leaving the 
province, the people are suffering, the people need to have their 
basic problems addressed. 
 
And you and the federal government have absolutely deserted 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. That’s what you have done. You 
deserted them, and not only that, you misrepresented the facts 
in the last federal election, and you and the rest of you are a 
party to that. And as a result, the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
during the last federal election, sought it out. They knew where 
you’re at, they’d had enough of you, and 10 out of 14 elected 
constituencies across this province elected a New Democratic 
member of parliament. That’s what they did. They’ve had 
enough of Tories’ waste, mismanagement, wrong priorities, 
misrepresenting the facts. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn to one other aspect here, and that is 
the rural development corporations. I want to ask you the 
number that are in operation at the present time, and I want you 
to indicate, list . . . give me a list of each of the rural 
development corporations, what has been undertaken by each, if 
you can do that. And the amount of government assistance to 
each of the rural development corporations that . . . funds that 
have been provided by the government to date. Can you provide 
that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it was interesting to 
hear the member talking about nothing for farmers over the last 
six or seven years from this government or from the federal 
government since 1984. It was interesting to hear him say that. 
Right now, right now, Mr. Chairman, federally, and certainly 
through a lot of provincial co-operation, there’s 420-odd 
millions of dollars going to be distributed to the province of 
Saskatchewan in a grant to farmers — in a grant. Over the last 
six years, and I was just trying to get . . . four years — I was 
trying to get the numbers, but I believe, Mr. Chairman, the total 
amount of money to the farmers in Saskatchewan is getting 
awful close to 6 billions of dollars — 6 billions of dollars. Now 
I don’t . . . no, I don’t have the exact numbers, but I would like 
to have them here for him to look at. 
 
He talked about crippled. He said, you crippled and destroyed. 
Well I don’t know. I’ll tell you who crippled and destroyed 
rural Saskatchewan back in the early 1970 . . . or ’79, early 80s, 
with 22 per cent interest. If you don’t think that crippled and 
destroyed a lot of farmers for the future — young farmers who 
never had a chance — let me tell you something. That really 
crippled and destroyed them. 
 
So I’m not sure who crippled and who destroyed, but I know 
who is crippled when you come to knowing what’s  
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

821 
 
 

all about rural Saskatchewan. It’s interesting to know. I hear 
him talk about . . . I never hear him talk about all the things that 
relate directly to rural Saskatchewan in regards to the 
department? I never hear him talk about the lands branch; I 
never hear him talk about the 4-Hs; I never hear him talk about 
fairs. I don’t hear him talk about any of those, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chairman. I heard him mention once here, 
I heard him mention here once about lands branch and 
foreclosures or something. And we were looking through it 
here. You know how many lands branch and community 
pasture lessees there’s out there? Over 15,000. Do you know 
how many possessions of land that we have over the last 
whatever number of years? Five. Do you know how many of 
them we’ve been working with to resolve so they can maintain 
their home quarter because they’re all working out, or maintain 
their farm site? Three. Do you know how many that don’t even 
live there any more and have just left, barely don’t know where 
they are? Two of those. 
 
So it tells me, Mr. Chairman, that we have done a great deal to 
work with those lessees out there to help them through some 
tough times. And we’ve sat down and worked with them time 
and time again. There’s a few out there has some troubles. We 
know that; there’s always a few. And there’s a few things you’ll 
hear us announcing in the future to help deal with some more of 
those. I believe, Mr. Chairman, we’ve done a great deal out 
there to maintain and develop rural Saskatchewan, and there’s 
been a great deal of dollars put out there. 
 
I have a copy of the rural development corporations that’s listed 
here. We have the possible ones, the ones that are already 
incorporated, the ones that are in the process of incorporating, 
where they are, their R.M.s, the towns. We also have the 
amount of money that’s been paid to them. Now I can either 
read it into the record, which is quite a bit, or I’ll just sent it 
across to him and he can look at it himself. 
 
It’s substantial, Mr. Chairman, and it is building rural 
Saskatchewan. Now if the member would like, I’ll just send it 
over to him and he can look through it. So I’ll just send it across 
to the member and he can look at it. I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, 
what he can do, he can read it tonight. It’ll be good reading for 
him. He’ll know what rural Saskatchewan — how we’re 
building out there. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think you should not try to be funny, Mr. 
Minister, because your incompetence is showing through so 
evidently tonight and the blindness with which you approach 
rural Saskatchewan. You think it’s funny that the situation . . . 
He’s bragging about protecting farmers under lands branch. 
 
And I’ve gone through the statistics. This government has been 
the biggest forecloser and have taken more legal actions against 
farmers than any other government in the history of this 
province or combined governments in the history of this 
province. You took 620 legal actions last year against farmers; 
over 300 the first three months; 2,000 more that legal action is 
going to be taken against. You stand there and say you protect 
rural Saskatchewan. 

Where is the legislation to provide some assistance? You got a 
federal Crown corporation, the Farm Credit Corporation, and 
you don’t stand up to help protect the farmers. You’re Rural 
Development minister. 
 
They had a moratorium on foreclosure under the Farm Credit 
Corporation in 1986 because you birds were going to have an 
election and they didn’t want the farmers being kicked off. But 
right after the election, they took the moratorium off the Farm 
Credit Corporation. And now, your counterparts are also 
foreclosing on the farmers. 
 
That problem out there could be solved, but it would take the 
joint efforts of both federal and provincial government, and 
you’re not prepared to do it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to also ask you: in respect to capital grants 
. . . You alluded to capital grants tonight. Can you indicate . . . 
Are you aware of what capital grants will be provided to the 
R.M.s? I would like to know what amount of money is allocated 
this year to the capital grants for R.M.s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It would be in the neighbourhood of 4.2 
millions of dollars total for the per capita grant. 
 
Tomorrow morning at 8:30 I am meeting with SARM 
executives to go over with them how they feel that this should 
be done. We have it proposed, but I would like . . . I promised 
to take it to them to get either their approval or disapproval on 
it, or their comments or changes. That’s what I told the R.M. 
councils around the province. And if they give approval on it, 
I’m sure within the next week or so that it will be made public 
for everybody. And at that time, you know, I have no problem 
to disclose it. But before that I promised the SARM executive 
. . . the executive of SARM that I would meet with them and 
work it out. 
 
I just want to make one mention that he’s talking about 
foreclosures, and he’s talking about not protecting rural 
Saskatchewan. He talked about 2,000 letters. Those letters, Mr. 
Chairman, were letters that were sent out saying that you’re in 
arrears and asking for payment. That’s a normal way of doing 
business in any business world whether it’s lands branch or 
whether it’s in business or any place else. That’s the normal 
way of doing it. 
 
If they have a problem, the letter also states, if you have a 
problem, can’t make it, please get a hold of a lands branch 
representative; we’ll sit down with you to see how we can 
resolve the situation. That seems a fair and an equitable way of 
doing it. We’ve done that all the way along. I believe, Mr. 
Chairman, that we’ve been fair, we’ll continue to be fair. We’ll 
continue to deal with each on its individual cases. 
 
And the 2,000, who have some problems, I’m sure, as they get 
their money in from the drought, which will be coming — we 
all know it will be coming. As the crop is good and we have lots 
of moisture this year, you’ll see that a lot of things will pick up 
and I think those farmers will walk with them the mile; we’ll 
walk with them too if we have to. 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

822 
 
 

Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to that, I believe what you said 
in that tangled mess of words, I think you indicated that it was 
$4.2 million in capital grants? Is that what you said? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, approximately that, yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I move the committee 
rise and report progress. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, with respect to the capital grant 
then, under what item in your budget is that located? 
 
(2200) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, it’s under rural and urban 
development, it’s under the 16.7 million, about 4.2 million of 
that is for the per capita grant and, you know, that’s where it is 
in there so . . . it’s on page 26 of the Estimates. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Will you be administering that through your 
department, or will that be administered under another 
department? Because it’s not included in your budget, and I 
know it’s on page 26 where you have rural and economic 
development and planning grants and you also have the 16.7 
million municipal capital grants, which is both rural and urban, 
I believe. I just wonder who’s going to be administering it when 
it’s not in your budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It will be allocated to us, and we will be 
administering both the rural development grants and the 
approximately 4.2 million out of the urban rural development 
affairs grants. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And have you set up a formula for the 
allocation of that to the individual R.M.s? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Part of that, in answer to the member’s 
question, that’s why I’m going over to SARM tomorrow, we’ve 
got to put together . . . I want to talk to them about it, to see if 
they feel that’s the right way to go. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Okay. One other area I just want . . . could you 
indicate whether the super grid road program is still being 
developed, and could you indicate, if so, what amount of super 
grid was in fact developed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, when we did the road 
rationalization they were sort of . . . well sort of some of them 
had different names, and we call it primary grid surfacing. 
There’s only five classifications of road now instead of all the 
other. We used to have a whole series of classifications. 
 
And under the primary grid surfacing we have 2,976 kilometres, 
and under the primary grid gravel we have 5,635; under the 
main farm access . . . I might as well give them all to you, is 
29,457; under grid, we have 13,128, and under what we call a 
special road program — that’s where we heavy haul, where 
trucks are hauling — it’s about 2,424 kilometres underneath 
that. 

Mr. Koskie: — Well in respect to what was previously referred 
to as super grid, is that equivalent going on where you’re 
building equivalent road structure and quality? And that’s what 
I was wondering. During the last year, if that’s still in place, 
what amount was in fact constructed, and what amount was 
paved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As the member probably knows, the 
funding varies a bit, but the base is from 40 to 60 plus 30 per 
cent, and they’re still there. They’re called primary grid 
surfacing and primary grid gravel. So it could range, if you 
were a poor R.M., you could get as much as 90 per cent; if you 
were a lower rate R.M., you could get about 70 per cent. So it 
would range from 70 per cent to 90 per cent provincial funding 
for all primary grid and primary grid gravel. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, you’re all mixed up so I won’t bother 
pursuing it any further. 
 
Grants to Rural Development, Mr. Minister, there’s 48,062,000. 
In previous years what I asked you to do is to give me a 
breakdown of that. I have a copy of one I had for a couple years 
ago dealing with conditional grants and unconditional grants. 
And we have for the items like main farm access, reconstruction 
on primary grid road, X number of dollars, and industrial 
access, regional park, so on. So a breakdown of the conditional 
grants and a breakdown of the unconditional adding up to . . . at 
least it should add up to the 48,062,000. Could you provide that 
to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I could send it over to him. 
We have a breakdown of all the grants here for the 48 millions 
of dollars, so we’ll just send it over to him. It’s a breakdown. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 13 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, just in respect to item 13, 
payments to the property management corporation. It increases 
from the previous of just over $2 million to over $3 million. I 
wonder if the minister could provide the details for the 
increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I think I mentioned earlier 
that we’re going to . . . from six rural development offices to 52 
offices when the year is done. So we’ll be running 52 offices, 
instead of six, when it’s all done, as we put it together — the 
reason for the increase. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Items 14 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 18 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 67 
  



 
April 13, 1989 

 

823 
 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 67 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Economic Diversification and Investment Fund 

Rural Development 
Vote 66 

 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Capital Expenditure — Vote 67 

 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 67 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Rural Development 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 43 

 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, 
Advances and Investments 

Agricultural Division 
Rural Development 

Vote 61 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 61 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Resources Division 
Rural Development 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 51 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 51 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1989 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, 

Advances and Investments 
Agricultural Division 
Rural Development 

Vote 61 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 

Vote 61 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, I’d like to thank my officials 
for putting together all this information we have available 
tonight, for running a department, I believe, very, very 
efficiently, and supporting and working with rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to thank the opposition member for his questions. They 
were . . . And again I would just like to say thank you to all my 
officials for all their work. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I want to join with the minister 
to thank his officials for the very difficult job they had in 
providing the minister with the information. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:15 p.m. 
 
 


