


















































May 25,1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 25, 1989 
 

1345 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall 
Monday next move that an order of the Assembly do issue for a 
return showing: 
 

The total amount paid by each government department, 
agency, and Crown corporation for the period May 17, 
1988, to the date shown in this return, was ordered to 
commercial airlines, travel agencies for air fares, including 
in each instance: (1) the names and positions of those 
whom the fares were authorized; (2) the cost, purpose, and 
destination points for each trip; and (3) the air carrier on 
which each trip was taken. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I give 
notice that I shall on Monday move an order for the Assembly 
do issue for a return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered, the amount paid to the firms of Dome Advertising 
Ltd. and Dome Media Buying Services Ltd. by each 
department, board, commission, Crown corporation, and 
agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each 
case, the nature of the work performed. 
 

I further give notice, Mr. Speaker, that I shall on Monday next 
move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste, its mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars, of public funds and public assets; and 
further, that this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to the 
privatization of 2.2 million of dental equipment, as noted 
on page 98 of the auditor’s annual report. 
 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that on Monday next I shall move that on order of the 
Assembly, that a return be issued showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered: (1) the amounts paid to the firm of Roberts & 
Poole advertising corporation by each department, board, 
commission, Crown corporation, and agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan; (2) in each case, the nature 
of the work performed. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I further give notice that on Monday next I shall 
move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the 1988 annual report of the Crown 

investments corporation, and for having broken the law. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Monday move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

With respect to D-Mail Services Inc., the contracts that this 
company received from May 17, ’88, to the date of this 
return was ordered, from any departments, Crown 
corporations, boards, agencies, or commissions, or the 
Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 
(1) the amount of the original contract; (2) the amount of 
any contract costs overrun; (3) the purpose of the contract; 
(4) the work performed by the company; and (5) whether 
or not the work in question was awarded by public tender. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next move that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered, the number of public opinion polls and market 
researcher projects ordered, performed, or commissioned 
by or for each government department, agency, and Crown 
corporation, including in each case: (1) the purpose of the 
poll or project; (2) the total cost of the poll or project; (3) 
the method by which the work was awarded; (4) the names 
of the individuals or organizations who performed the 
work, the results and analysis provided to the government. 
 

Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Monday move that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered: (1) the total number of out-of-province trips made 
by each minister of the government; (2) in each case the 
destination and purpose of the trip; (3) in each case the 
names and positions of those who accompanied the 
minister at government expense; (4) in each case the 
amount charged on behalf of each person travelling at 
government expense; (5) in each case the total cost of the 
trip separated according to costs incurred for: (a) air fares; 
(b) hotels; (c) ground transportation; (d) meals; and (e) 
entertainment expenses. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And further I give notice of motion that on Monday next I shall 
move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and its 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1346 
 

mismanagement of taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds 
and public assets. And further, that this Assembly 
condemns the Government of Saskatchewan for its 
mismanagement with respect to the Meadow Lake Sawmill 
as noted on pages 79 and 80 of the auditor’s annual report. 
 

And I so move as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Monday 
next, I move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and its mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds and public assets; 
and further, that this Assembly condemns the Government 
of Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to the 
Department of Parks, Recreation and Culture, as noted on 
pages 67 and 68 of the auditor’s annual report. 
 

I also give notice that I shall on Monday move that on the order 
of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

The names, titles, and remuneration of all non-clerical staff 
employed in or assigned to the ministers of the 
Government of Saskatchewan for the period May 17, 1988, 
to the date this return was ordered. 
 

I so do move. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give notice of a 
motion for return. I give notice that on Monday I move than an 
order of the Assembly do issue for a return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date of this return was 
ordered a detailed list of the aircraft chartered by each 
department, agency, or Crown corporation of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, including in each instance: 
(1) the purpose of the charter and the minister who 
authorized it; (2) the name of the individual or company 
who provided the charter service; (3) the total cost of the 
charter and the name of the department, agency, or Crown 
corporation to which it was charged; (4) the date of the 
flight; (5) all destinations on the flight; (6) the names of 
each MLA or government employee on the flight; (7) the 
number of family members of MLAs on each flight; (8) the 
total number of passengers on each flight. 
 

Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday move that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered, a detailed list of the flights taken by the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s executive aircraft, 
including in each instance: (1) the purpose of the flight and 
the minister who authorized it; (2) the date of the flight; (3) 
all destination points of the flight; (4) to which department, 
agency, or corporation the cost of the 

flight was charged and the amount of that charge; (5) the 
name of each MLA on the flight; (6) the name of each 
government employee on the flight; (7) the number of 
family members of MLAs on each flight; and (8) the total 
number of persons on each flight. 
 

Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday move: 
 

That on order of the Assembly due issue for a return 
showing for the period May 17, 1988, to the date this 
return was ordered, a list of all reports, studies, 
investigations or projects awarded to external consultants 
by each government department, agency, and Crown 
corporation, including in this case: (1) the name and 
purpose of the report, study, investigation, or project; (2) 
the total cost; (3) the method by which the work was 
awarded; (4) the name of the external consultants who 
perform the work; and (5) the recommendations or analysis 
provided to the government. 
 

Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice today 
that I shall on Monday move that an order of the Assembly due 
issue for a return showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date this return was 
ordered, a list of the executive motor vehicles purchased 
by the central vehicle agency, including in each instance: 
(1) the make, model and cost of the vehicle; (2) the name 
and location of the dealership from which the vehicle was 
purchased; (3) the name and position of the individual to 
whom each vehicle was assigned. 
 

Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Monday next, move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the 1988 annual report of the Saskatchewan auto fund and 
for having thereby broken the law. 
 

Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next, move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and its mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds and public assets; 
and further, that this Assembly condemns the Government 
of Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to 
SaskPen Properties Ltd., as noted on page 57 of the 
auditor’s annual report. 
 

Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Monday next move: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the 1988 annual report of the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance and for having thereby broken the law. 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1347 
 

Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
Monday next I shall move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds and public assets; 
and further, this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to the 
accounts and records regarding ministerial use of executive 
aircraft as noted on page 99 of the auditor’s annual report. 
 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Monday next, move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and its mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds and public assets; 
and further, that this Assembly condemns the Government 
of Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to the 
Department of Justice as noted on page 65 of the auditor’s 
annual report. 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice of 
motion that an order of the Assembly do issue on Monday next 
showing: 
 

For the period May 17, 1988, to the date of this return: (1) 
a list of all advertising firms employed by each 
department, board, commission, Crown corporation, and 
agency of the Government of Saskatchewan, with the 
exceptions of Dome Advertising Ltd., Dome Media 
Buying Services, and Roberts & Poole advertising 
company. In each case provide the amounts paid and the 
nature of the work performed. 
 

While I’m standing, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to give notice 
that I shall on Monday next move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for its waste and its mismanagement of 
taxpayers’ dollars and of public funds and public assets. 
And further, that this Assembly condemns the Government 
of Saskatchewan for its mismanagement with respect to 
payments made to a consultant by the Crown investments 
corporation as noted on pages 24 and 25 of the auditor’s 
annual report. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce some guests who are seated in the 
Chamber here this afternoon. I’ve had the privilege of meeting 
with them briefly. I wish I’d had more time, but it was an 
enjoyable time to meet with them and discuss a little bit the 
proceedings of this legislature. 
 
They are five students from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council 
here in Regina. The Saskatchewan Abilities Council comes two 
or three times a year with students, and certainly we welcome 
them all the time. They are 

accompanied by co-ordinators Lynn Demeule, Joyce Sevigny, 
Anne McCann, Florence Welin, and Ev Rumpel. I would like to 
ask members of both sides of the House to join me, through 
you, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming these guests to the legislature 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Social 
Services and Minister of Human Resources, Labour and 
Employment, on behalf of the government I would like to 
welcome the people from the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
And I know that you live in various constituencies throughout 
Regina and Saskatchewan. We would like to welcome you here 
on behalf of the government and wish you success in the future. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 
you, and to all members of the Assembly through you, 59 grade 
5 and 6 students from Sunningdale School in Moose Jaw, who 
are seated in the east gallery today, Mr. Speaker. These students 
have already been on a tour of the Legislative Assembly 
building, and I will be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures 
and refreshments and a visit. They are accompanied today by 
their teachers, Margot Swayze, Randy Doering, and Trina 
Templeton. And, Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all members of the 
Assembly to show welcome to these students from Sunningdale 
School in the usual manner. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce a guest who is seated in your gallery, in the 
second pew of your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a Mr. Jim Johnson. 
Mr. Johnson is a member of the city council in Moose Jaw, and 
so I would invite all members of the House to welcome Mr. 
Johnson to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have 
also the privilege and the honour of introducing some students 
who are here in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker, from Princess 
Alex(andra) School — I think it is up in the Speaker’s gallery, 
right? — in Saskatoon, about 28 students. They’re grade 8 
students. They are accompanied by — I hope I get these names 
pronounced the right way — Donna Hrytzak . . . well that name 
I can pronounce for sure; Donna Hrytzak, Sue Barrett, Audrey 
Kear, and I believe, Prudence Ansah. I’m sure that they are 
going to find question period very informative and entertaining, 
and look forward to meeting them after the proceedings are 
finished in question period. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 
SaskEnergy Public Meetings and Saskatchewan Securities 

Commission 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1348 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question’s addressed to 
the Minister of Justice. Earlier this week, Mr. Minister, you and 
your cabinet colleagues decided that you were above the law, 
and by the stroke of a pen you ordered cancelled the Securities 
Commission order which said that you must stop the advertising 
and road show of the SaskPower privatization. Mr. Minister, 
can you outline for us what was the rationale behind this? Why 
did you go ahead and put yourself above the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the legislation that was 
introduced and proposed into the House on section 44 of that 
particular legislation, through that legislation we proposed to 
exempt this particular SaskEnergy issue from the Securities 
Commission — from the purview of the Securities 
Commission. Under section 44, we are exempting it from the 
Securities Commission. 
 
Now when the legislation did not pass and has been put out to 
the Barber committee to review, we were left in a position 
where (a) we were violating the Securities Commission, as the 
Securities Commission found. The Securities Commission then, 
as far as we were concerned, we had three choices. We could 
cease and desist, number one. Number one, we could cease and 
desist, if you want to hear the answer. We could put in a 
regulation that said basically the same thing that was in the Act 
and therefore you could go forward and exempt yourself from 
the Securities Commission, which is what in fact the proposal 
was that we took. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. Since your decision of Tuesday, SaskEnergy can now 
go on with its program of exaggeration, innuendo and 
misrepresentation and half-truths with impunity. That’s what 
you can now do. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: have you studied section 
131 of your Act, specifically section (3)(c), as to the possibility 
of bringing charges against your colleague, the minister 
responsible for SaskPower, and any of his officials for being in 
violation of the Act prior to Tuesday’s cabinet meeting? Have 
you checked into charges being laid? 
 
And while you’re checking that, have you noted the penalty in 
the section which notes that any director, officer of the 
company, or other persons authorized to permit or acquiesce in 
violating the Act is subject to a fine up to $1 million or two 
years in jail? Have you checked that out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I realize the . . . our guests may, from 
time to time, wish to participate in the proceedings, but the rule 
of the House is that guests do not in any way participate in the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I never participated or was 
requested to participate or asked for an opinion, as minister 
responsible for the Securities Commission, as to the action they 
would take. And I don’t think that you would expect that I 
should. 

The Securities Commission made a ruling, as they make rulings 
on various things, and the Securities Commission have the Act, 
Mr. Speaker. They enforce the Act. They can enforce the Act 
how and when they wish, and that’s up to them to decide. It 
certainly is not me, Mr. Speaker, to tell them what actions to 
initiate, and I do not intend to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, you are the minister responsible for The Securities 
Act of this province. You have earlier in this question period 
admitted guilt and that you were breaking the law. My question 
is: are you now considering laying charges against the minister 
and the officials who were in fact breaking the law? Are you 
now doing that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I indicated to the hon. member 
was as follows: if there are charges to be laid, let’s say, in a 
criminal nature by the director of public prosecution, I as 
minister do not initiate criminal action. The director of public 
prosecution does that, and I remove myself from any decision 
on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The same is true with the Securities Commission. If the 
Securities Commission wish to take action, then they take it. It 
is not for me to interfere and tell them when and what to do. 
And if one was to do that, Mr. Speaker, one would be chastised 
severely for that. And that is not the job. 
 
The Securities Commission has the right to do what they wish. 
If they wish to take action and lay charges, then the Securities 
Commission should take action and lay charges, and I am not 
going to sit here as a politician and tell them to do that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I think that all people in the 
province will find this incredible. We have a minister here that 
admits guilt, admits that his government . . . the Minister of 
Justice admits that his government was breaking the law; that 
they were advertising against their own laws that they had 
implemented. No other private company would be allowed this 
privilege. If this were a private company, they would be 
charged. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, have you not in your capacity as 
Minister of Justice checked out the possibility and the 
implications of laying these charges against the minister who in 
fact was breaking the law, by your admission, not by ours? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let’s make it first of all 
clear. Under the proposed Act of the Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation, the legislation says that corporation shall be 
exempted from the Securities Commission. That’s exactly what 
it says in section 44. And, Mr. Speaker, where we took that 
from was the Saskatchewan development fund that was 
introduced by the previous government in — I forget — 1973, 
Mr. Speaker. And in that section 17 of that Act, the 
Saskatchewan development fund, which was to go out and sell 
funds to 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1349 
 

the population of this province — public participation 
NDP-style, Mr. Speaker — the Securities Commission was, in 
the legislation, ruled not to apply, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we’re doing is the same thing that was done by the 
previous government. And that is a government public 
participation initiative, and you exempt yourself, you exempt 
Saskatchewan Energy, Mr. Speaker, just as the Saskatchewan 
development fund was exempted from the purview of the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, once again you’re trying 
and attempting to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Would you please 
indicate a new or a supplementary. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 
minister. What we are talking about here, Mr. Minister, is 
obviously the period before you changed the law, when you 
were breaking the law. Do you understand that? This is the 
period that we’re talking about. 
 
It has nothing to do with what amendments were made previous 
for any other corporation, which in fact would be in order. What 
I’m talking about is the period while you and your colleagues 
were in fact breaking the law of the province. 
 
What I’m saying: have you checked out the possibility of laying 
charges against the officials and the minister responsible? 
That’s what I’m asking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand, the 
Securities Commission came to the view that what SaskEnergy 
was doing was improper and was in violation of the Securities 
Commission. 
 
The Securities Commission then issued an order to cease and 
desist. That was their decision. It was cease and desist (a) the 
advertising, and (b) the programs of public meetings around the 
province. The government cease and desist had the option then 
of (a) continuing the cease and desist order and do that, or they 
could change the regulations, or they could file a prospectus. 
 
Now those are the things. The charges are up to the Securities 
Commission, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there are various times 
. . . And if we simply pose the question to the chairman of the 
Securities Commission, either in Saskatchewan or other 
jurisdictions, various people would violate various sections of 
The Securities Act. They then, Mr. Speaker, can do a variety of 
things. They can issue an order saying cease and desist, or they 
can lay a charge, or they can do what they take as a decision to 
do. 
 
I’m simply saying, Mr. Speaker, the following, is that the 
Securities Commission sits out there as a quasi-independent 
body. And should the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, should 
the Minister of Justice as the minister responsible for that 
commission superimpose 

my views on that independent body? Now should you do that? 
 
And I suggest that you should not, Mr. Speaker. I think it is 
improper. And should I in fact do that, Mr. Speaker, I would be 
accused of interfering in the operations of the Securities 
Commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the 
minister. I find it incredible again that you would condone the 
minister of SaskPower breaking the law; that you, the Minister 
of Justice, would condone that. 
 
You have indicated here that you had a number of choices. I say 
you had a fourth choice, and that would be to lay charges 
against the officials and the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — But your second choice that you listed 
was to present a prospectus to the Securities Commission and to 
the people of the province — perfectly legitimate that you 
should present a preliminary prospectus so the people of the 
province knew what you were attempting to sell. 
 
Why haven’t you looked at that option, which is what you did 
in 1985 prior to bringing in the Bill to privatize the Saskoil? 
You did it in 1985 in this Assembly. You brought in a 
preliminary prospectus well a month ahead of when the Bill 
was presented in the House. Why wasn’t that an option, and 
why isn’t that an option? Why do you choose to deal in 
innuendo and misrepresentation and millions of dollars of 
taxpayers’ advertising to sell something that the people don’t 
want you to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, let me deal with the two 
questions raised by the hon. member. Number one, if the 
Securities Commission were of the view during that period in 
time when they had a finding that it was violation of the law, 
Mr. Speaker, and the time of the cease and desist order, if they 
were of the view that charges should be laid, Mr. Speaker, they 
did not advise me of it. 
 
If they advise me of it, Mr. Speaker, I would simply tell them to 
proceed with laying the charges, as I properly should, and 
would be, and clearly state that to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With regards to why the problem arose, Mr. Speaker, is the Bill 
was presented to this House, Mr. Speaker, for debate in this 
House. Before it was even introduced, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite turned the bells on, Mr. Speaker, and left this 
Assembly for 17 days, leaving the government in a position of 
not being able to disclose what the legislation was and how it 
would be introduced into the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reason why that was done, Mr. Speaker, is the members 
walked away from this Assembly. They were not prepared to 
debate that issue in this Assembly, Mr. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1350 
 

Speaker. We believe that there was a right to go out and tell 
people what the proposal is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the 
same minister, the Minister of Justice, although I’m beginning 
to wonder why he has that title. It’s bad enough, Mr. Speaker, 
in my question to the Minister of Justice, it’s bad enough for 
any minister or any member of this legislature to break the law, 
but when it is the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, it is 
unbelievable that this would be allowed to take place and that 
the Premier would stand by and condone this kind of thing to 
happen. 
 
I ask the Minister of Justice, therefore, the following question: 
how can you explain, Mr. Minister, after admitting the fact that 
there was guilt here, how can you explain that you, as the 
Minister of Justice, are not prepared to undertake the necessary 
step to lay charges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I indicated to the hon. member, there are 
a variety of times when there are violations of the securities 
law, Mr. Speaker. Whether it is a violation by, in this case, a 
publicly owned corporation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Whether it is a government Crown 
corporation . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Give the minister the 
opportunity to speak. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, what I indicate to the hon. 
member is the following. There are a variety of violations of the 
Securities Commission, as there is a variety of violations of any 
other law. I mean, you can compare a violation of the Criminal 
Code with a violation of provincial speeding regulations. Mr. 
Speaker, both of them are violations of the law. 
 
Now the action to be taken there and determined there is by the 
Securities Commission, and that is pursuant to the law, Mr. 
Speaker, that they are the ones that initiate the procedures and 
lay the charges, Mr. Speaker. Now it is up to them to lay the 
charges, and it is proper for me not to interfere one way or the 
other. And that is the way the securities’ laws work and are 
properly supposed to work. That’s what happened here, and it is 
to the Securities Commission to determine what action they 
wish to have taken. And it seems to me that’s in fact what they 
have done. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to 
the minister. Mr. Minister, the minister in charge of SaskEnergy 
obviously broke the law. Officials involved with SaskEnergy 
obviously broke the law. Mr. Minister, it’s your job, as the 
Minister of Justice, to enforce the law. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Why then, Mr. Minister, do you continue 
to stand up in this House and say to the public of 

Saskatchewan that you refuse to enforce the law? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the Securities Commission 
is the agency that will (a) investigate the particular issue, 
investigate the facts of the issue, Mr. Speaker, and then they 
will make their recommendations. If they make 
recommendations for charges, then charges will proceed. If they 
make recommendations for a cease and desist order, or an order 
to do this, this, or this, then that is their order, and properly so. 
Mr. Speaker, it is for them to do that and not for me to interfere. 
If they recommend that charges should be laid in this case, then 
charges will be laid in this case, Mr. Speaker, and Department 
of Justice would co-operate in that. 
 
It is not for me as the minister, Mr. Speaker, as the members 
opposite wish to allege, to step in there personally and say, you 
lay these charges, any more than it is for me, Mr. Speaker, to 
step in in a case of fact, whether it was the government or 
anyone else in violation of the criminal law or of any other 
statute law. For me to step in and tell the RCMP or the city 
police of Regina or any other agency of law enforcement, Mr. 
Speaker, you lay these charges, that is not the function of an 
attorney general, nor should the members opposite suggest that 
it is. When it is recommended, Mr. Speaker, then it would 
proceed through the Department of Justice, as it properly 
should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the Minister of 
Justice, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I think that the editorial in 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of yesterday sums it up very well 
when it writes, the government’s position on this matter is 
contemptuous. And I quote from that editorial which says the 
following: 
 

It is a monumental slap in the face to every honest 
Saskatchewan business that has operated within the 
regulations enforced by the securities commission. 
 

Mr. Minister, everyone in this province believes that your 
actions and their government’s actions are wrong — the media 
does, the public does, and even you do, Mr. Minister — and 
that there is nothing more here than a bald-faced, cynical move 
to thwart the laws of this province for your own political ends 
and the political ends of the Premier. How, Mr. Minister, then 
can you explain this slap in the face to the business community 
which has for years played by the rules because it believes 
that’s the right thing to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, for the hon. member 
opposite to suggest that government should be able to exempt 
itself from the purview of the Securities Commission, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. As I said earlier, I think the 
minister deserves the opportunity to answer the question 
without a stream of interruptions. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1351 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member would 
somehow suggest in the various editorials saying that it is 
improper for government to exempt itself from the rules of the 
Securities Commission. That’s what they’re saying. The 
government should not be exempted from the Securities 
Commission no different than any other company in this 
province. 
 
What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a view that people 
can clearly hold, but the members opposite when they were in 
government exempted the Saskatchewan development fund 
from the purview of the Securities Commission. Did they 
exempt that fund from the law, Mr. Speaker, of the securities’ 
laws of this province? Clearly they did, Mr. Speaker, as the 
government on the Saskatchewan Energy company did as well, 
Mr. Speaker. Both of them exempted their particular 
privatization, public participation initiatives from the Securities 
Commission, Mr. Speaker. We did exactly the same thing. Is 
that proper? That is up to the people to decide. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — A new question to the minister, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, that same editorial goes on to state the 
following: 
 

For the government to cavalierly override the securities 
commission and write its own rules to suit its own share 
offering is ludicrous. It threatens the integrity of both the 
commission and the government. 
 
It’s one thing to catapult SaskEnergy to the top of the 
political agenda. It’s quite another to become so obsessed 
with the issue that the government refuses to play by the 
established rules of the game. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — That, Mr. Minister, is a very searing 
indictment. And the Regina Leader-Post followed up today in 
an editorial which it says the following: 
 

. . . government, as much as governing, is there to set an 
example. It hardly does that if it bends the rules to suit its 
own purposes and intones: “Do as I say, but not as I do.” 
 

I ask you then, Mr. Minister, why do you have one set of rules 
for yourselves and the government, and why do you have 
another set of rules for honest business people who have known 
and have always played by the rules? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite that 
just read the question out, Mr. Speaker, just delivered the 
question out, exempted the Saskatchewan development fund 
from the rules of the Securities Commission — Bill S-14, 1973, 
Mr. Speaker. That fund went out and solicited money from 
peoples around this province, invested it in mortgages and 
bonds, etc., Mr. Speaker, with a chance to make a profit on it, 
Mr. Speaker. That was done. 
 
Now it was exempted from The Companies Act and The 

Securities Act, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because it didn’t have to 
follow the same rules as the private sector companies that did, 
Mr. Speaker. Now what they did in that fund, what we are 
doing here is exactly the same, Mr. Speaker. The problem . . . 
the problem . . . Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. members’ 
argument is to be listened to, what they said is government 
public participation funds should follow the same rules as 
private sector companies. They exempted this one from the 
Securities Commission; we exempted the Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation from the Securities Commission. The Bill did not 
pass; it was put out to committee, Mr. Speaker; therefore the 
regulation was to allow us to go out and tell the people what 
was in that legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to address a question to the Premier, if 
he feels obligated to answer a question. Mr. Premier, your 
Minister of Justice stood in this House today and admitted that 
your government, an agency of government, was breaking the 
law. I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, do you condone that action 
by other members of your Executive Council? And I ask you 
further: when are you going to take charge and show some 
leadership and morality in your government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we will respect the law and 
the laws of the Securities Commission. Make no mistake about 
that. And I will make it very clear to the hon. member and to 
the members opposite that we will respect the Securities 
Commission and the laws as they put forward with respect to 
the Securities Commission. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks if we will respect the 
law as outlined by the Securities Commission, and the 
Securities Commission will lay out the alternatives you have, 
and we will have to deal with those, and we do. And I say that 
very clearly. 
 
Let me also say to the Leader of the Opposition, as I’ve said 
here, and to the public very, very clearly, I’ve made the offer, 
Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have to have public hearings. We 
don’t have to have Dr. Lloyd Barber going out talking to 
people. All we have to have, Mr. Speaker, is have the 
legislation debated here as all of the rest were, Mr. Speaker; 
debate it, vote on it, then let the people decide. But the hon. 
member, Mr. Speaker, won’t let the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order, 
order. Would the hon. members please restrain themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — It does get their attention when I ask 
about bringing it before this House, and I presented this to the 
media several times, and they acknowledge that it’s a 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1352 
 

fair question. Now listen, Mr. Speaker, come on. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just say once 
again to the hon. members, I don’t know why they’re afraid of 
the legislation on the floor of the House. The people of 
Saskatchewan want to know about the legislation. The hon. 
members don’t want to hear about the hearings; they don’t want 
to talk about the cost. 
 
I’ve said many times, Mr. Speaker, bring the legislation before 
the House and debate it here and vote on it. There’s no need for 
public hearings, Mr. Speaker, nor a need for the concern of the 
Securities Commission. None of that, Mr. Speaker. But they’re 
afraid to talk about it in here. So I again say to the hon. 
members, bring it into the House. We could . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I’m going to give 
the Premier the opportunity to . . . Order, order. Order. He’s 
been interrupted several times, and I’m going to give him the 
opportunity to finish his remarks. 
 
Order! Order, order. Order, order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I just say in once sentence. I 
invite the hon. members to co-operate with parliamentary 
democracy and debate the legislation on the floor of the House. 
There will be no hearings, no costs — just debate it here, and 
debate it often if they like, and vote on it. Then let the people 
decide, Mr. Speaker. They’re afraid to do that. We’re not, and 
we will offer that challenge to the people of Saskatchewan right 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

MOTIONS UNDER RULE 39 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
rise pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly to seek leave of all 
members to move a motion on a matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern of 
waste and financial mismanagement of a government and their 
concealment of it. The waste and mismanagement have been 
documented in the annual Report of the Provincial Auditor. The 
auditor has even stated in several instances, the government has 
refused to provide full co-operation and information and has 
interfered with his work. 
 
Accordingly, I seek leave to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 
require that the Crown investments corporation provide full 
co-operation to the Provincial Audit and all of the 
information he requires and is entitled to by law in order that 
the Provincial Auditor may fulfil his legal responsibilities as 
watch-dog of public money 

and a guardian of the public interest. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 39 
and ask leave to move a motion that would deal with the Sask 
Property Management Corporation and the lack of co-operation 
with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And here we have seen a great number of taxpayers’ dollars — 
and I think the auditor agrees with us — wasted, and as a result 
of that, taxes going up significantly and the debt of the province 
rising to close to $4 billion. And for that reason I would move, 
with leave: 
 

That this Assembly call before the bar, Mr. Otto Cutts, 
president of the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation, to be examined regarding his agency’s refusal 
to provide full co-operation with the auditor. 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I arise before orders of the 
day, pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly, to seek leave of all 
members on a very serious matter, and that is to move a motion 
on a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — As I began, Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant 
to rule 39 of this Assembly to seek leave of all members to 
move a motion on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity on 
an issue that is of concern to not only this Assembly but to 
every single resident in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern of 
waste and financial mismanagement of the government opposite 
and the attempt by this government to cover that up by not 
allowing the Provincial Auditor to do his work by providing 
him the information he ought to have. It’s a record of 
mismanagement and corruption, Mr. Minister. It was 
highlighted again, this mismanagement, by the performance of 
the Minister of Justice today. 
 
And so accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the 
following motion, seconded by my colleague the member for 
Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That this Assembly call before the bar Mr. Wolfgang 
Wolff, chairman of the Crown investments corporation, 
regarding his agency’s refusal to provide full co-operation 
with the Provincial Auditor. 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1353 
 

I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also I rise on a very 
important issue, and I rise pursuant to rule 39 to seek leave of 
all the members to move a motion, and I think very, very 
important to the people of Saskatchewan. And again it deals 
with providing information and the accountability of the 
taxpayers’ money which this government has refused to 
provide. 
 
The major concern to the people of Saskatchewan is the 
mismanagement and waste of this government. And that has 
been documented in the auditor’s report. 
 
And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call before the bar, Mr. Paul 
Schoenhals, chairman of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, to be examined regarding his agency’s 
refusal to provide full co-operation with the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Thompson: — Before orders of the day, I rise pursuant to 
rule 39 of the Assembly, to seek leave of all members to move a 
motion on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern — 
waste, and financial mismanagement of the government 
opposite. That mismanagement and waste have been 
documented in the annual report of the Provincial Auditor. The 
auditor has even stated that in several instances the government 
has refused to provide full co-operation and information and has 
interfered in his work. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Quill Lakes: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual 
reports, in the manner required by law, as noted in 
Appendix IV of the auditor’s annual report: Saskatchewan 
Beef Stabilization Board; Saskatchewan Cancer 
Foundation; Saskatchewan Centre of the Arts; 
Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation; 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation; Saskatchewan 
Economic Development Corporation; Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation; and Saskatchewan Government 
Printing Company. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I rise 
pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly and seek leave of all 
members to move a motion on the matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity. 
 
The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern of 
waste and financial mismanagement of the government 
opposite, over $4 billion in debt and a lot of excessive taxation. 
That mismanagement and waste has been documented in the 
annual report of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The auditor has even stated that in several instances the 
government has refused to provide full co-operation and 
information and has interfered in his work. He says that they 
have not also followed the law. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the following 
motion. It’s moved by myself, Mr. Speaker, and seconded by 
the member from The Battlefords: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in the manner required by law, as noted in Appendix IV of 
the auditor’s annual report: Public Trustee for 
Saskatchewan; Regina General Hospital; St. Louis 
Alcoholism Rehabilitation Centre; Saskatchewan 
Agricultural Research Fund; Saskatchewan Agricultural 
Returns Stabilization Fund; Saskatchewan Alcohol and 
Drug Abuse Commission; Saskatchewan 
Anti-Tuberculosis League Employees Superannuation 
Fund (1987 and 1986); Saskatchewan Arts Board. 
 

I move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
(1500) 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise, and the nature 
of the urgency is with the Provincial Auditor’s report for the 
year ending March 31, 1988. And I rise pursuant to rule 39 of 
this Assembly to seek leave of all members to move a motion 
on a matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern of 
the waste and financial mismanagement of the government 
opposite. That management and waste have been documented in 
the annual report of the Provincial 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1354 
 

Auditor. The auditor has even stated that in several instances 
the government has refused to provide full co-operation and 
information and has interfered with his work. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I will be asking leave to move the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in the manner required by law, as noted in Appendix IV of 
the auditor’s annual report: the Prescription Drug Plan; the 
Prince Albert Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences 
Revolving Fund (1987); Public Employees (Government 
Contributory) Annuity Fund (1987 and 1986); Public 
Employees Dental Fund; Public Employees Disability 
Income Fund; Public Employees Group Life Insurance 
Fund; Public Employees (Government Contributory) 
Superannuation Fund (1987 and 1986); and the Public 
Service Superannuation Board (1987 and 1986). 
 

With leave I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Solomon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the 
day, I rise pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly to seek leave of 
all members to move a motion on a matter of urgent and 
pressing necessity. The central issue is the unacceptable pattern 
of lack of accountability, the waste and mismanagement of 
Conservatives in the Conservative government. 
 
That mismanagement and waste and lack of accountability has 
been documented in the annual Report of the Provincial 
Auditor. The auditor has even stated that in several instances the 
government has broken its own laws, has refused to provide full 
co-operation and information, and has clearly interfered in the 
work of the auditor. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the following 
motion, seconded by my seat mate, the member from Prince 
Albert: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in the manner required by law, as noted in Appendix IV of 
the auditor’s annual report: the Milk Control Board, the 
Municipal Financing Corporation, the Northern Revenue 
Sharing Trust Account (1986), Palliser Regional Care 
Centre, Parkland Regional Care Centre, Parkridge Centre, 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute. 

I so move. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of 
the day, Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly 
to seek leave of all members to move a motion on a matter of 
urgent and pressing necessity. The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is 
the failure of the government to co-operate with the auditor by 
choosing to hide information, and also failure of the 
government to abide by the laws of Saskatchewan in order to 
cover up the waste and mismanagement. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in the manner required by law, as noted in Appendix IV of 
the auditor’s annual report: the Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corporation; the Saskatchewan Health Research Board; the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund; the Saskatchewan Horse 
Racing Commission; Saskatchewan hospitalization fund; 
the Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission; the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board; the Saskatchewan Liquor 
Board superannuation fund. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too, pursuant to 
rule 39, to seek leave of all members to move a motion on a 
matter of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
It has to do, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that this government has 
been engaging in waste and mismanagement and it has to do 
with the fact that the Provincial Auditor has pointed this out and 
the Provincial Auditor has indicated that he’s unable to get 
access to accounts and records. And, Mr. Speaker, it has to do 
with the fact that the lack of access to this information amounts 
to a cover-up for the government’s waste and mismanagement. 
 
I therefore seek leave to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in the manner required by law as noted in Appendix IV of 
the auditor’s annual report: Saskatchewan Liquor 
Licencing 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1355 
 

Commission; Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Commission; Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation; Saskatchewan pension plan; Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation; Saskatchewan 
Research Council; Saskatchewan student aid fund; 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications. 
 

Seconded by the member from Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise, pursuant to 
rule 39 of this Assembly, to seek leave of all members to move 
a motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
The issue here, Mr. Speaker, is the unacceptable waste and 
mismanagement shown by the government opposite. This 
mismanagement, as documented by the auditor in his annual 
report where he states several instances where the government 
has interfered, refused to provide him with information, has not 
co-operated with him, and therefore he’s not able to carry out 
fully the duties of his job. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move a motion along 
the following lines: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or the annual reports 
in a manner required by law as noted in Appendix IV of 
the annual auditor’s report: Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company Employees Superannuation Fund (1987 and 
1986), Souris Valley Regional Care Centre (1987 and 
1986), South Saskatchewan Hospital Centre, Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission, University Hospital, 
Wascana Rehabilitation Centre, Western Development 
Museum, Whitespruce Youth Treatment Centre. 
 

Seconded by the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Failure to Table Financial Statements and/or Annual 
Reports 

 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day, I rise pursuant to rule 39 of this Assembly to seek 
leave of the members of this Assembly to move a motion on a 
matter of urgent and pressing necessity. The main issue, Mr. 
Speaker, is the unacceptable pattern of waste and financial 
mismanagement of the government opposite as displayed in the 
auditor’s report, 1988. 

That mismanagement and waste have been documented in the 
annual Report of the Provincial Auditor. The auditor has even 
stated that in several instances this government has refused to 
provide full co-operation and information and has interfered in 
his work. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the 
following motion of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
Moved by myself, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Government of 
Saskatchewan for having failed to table in the legislature 
the following financial statements and/or annual reports in 
the manner required by law as noted in Appendix IV of the 
auditor’s annual report: the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, the Agricultural Implements 
Board, Battlefords Regional Care Centre, Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan, the 
Doukhobors of Canada Trust Fund (1987, 1986 and 1985), 
Fish and Wildlife Development Fund; Judges of the 
Provincial Court Superannuation Fund (1987 and 1986); 
Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation 
Fund (1987 and 1986). 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise pursuant 
to rule 39 to seek leave of all members of this Assembly to 
move a motion on a matter of urgent public necessity. The 
public is concerned across Saskatchewan with the waste and 
fiscal mismanagement of this government and its privatization 
initiatives. 
 
This mismanagement and waste have been documented in the 
annual Report of the Provincial Auditor, and the auditor has 
even stated that in several instances the government has refused 
to provide full co-operation and information for his purposes, 
and have interfered with his work. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to require that WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation 
provide full co-operation with the Provincial Auditor, and 
all of the information he requires and is entitled to by law, 
in order that the Provincial Auditor may fulfil his legal 
responsibilities as a watch-dog of public money and a 
guardian of the public interest. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Full Co-operation with the Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before orders 
of the day, I rise pursuant to rule 39 of the 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1356 
 

Assembly which reads: 
 

A motion may, in case of urgent and pressing necessity 
previously explained by the mover, be made by unanimous 
consent of the Assembly . . . 
 

Now I’m asking for unanimous consent of all members to move 
a motion on what I think is a matter of urgent and pressing 
necessity. The central issue, Mr. Speaker, is the usual but 
nevertheless unacceptable pattern of waste and financial 
mismanagement of the government. 
 
That mismanagement and waste has been documented in the 
annual Report of the Provincial Auditor. The auditor has also 
stated that in several instances the government has refused to 
provide full co-operation and information and has interfered 
with his work. That he is being interfered with is, I submit, 
cause for our urgent consideration, and accordingly, Mr. 
Speaker, I seek leave to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan 
to require that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
provide full co-operation to the Provincial Auditor, and all 
of the information he requires and is entitled to by law, in 
order that the Provincial Auditor may fulfil his legal 
responsibilities as watch-dog of public money and 
guardian of the public interest. 
 

I seek leave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise a 
point of order at this time. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, what we have witnessed 
so far today in the legislature is incredible. We’re talking about 
the Provincial Auditor and, Mr. Speaker, I would like to refer 
you to the Votes and Proceedings, and on the date of Thursday, 
March 9, 1989, I myself, seconded by Mr. Taylor, moved a 
motion that ordered the Report of the Provincial Auditor for the 
fiscal year ended March 31 be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I make that as point number one. The auditor’s 
report has been moved to public accounts. Point number two, 
Mr. Speaker, if you take a look closely at rule no. 39, it says 
that these are items of urgent and pressing necessity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the members of the NDP are 
obstructing this legislature. I believe they are making a mockery 
out of the rules of this legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, beyond a 
shadow of a doubt, what was forecast has come true. It was 
forecast, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 

would be obstructionist. It was forecast, Mr. Speaker, that they 
would make this place ungovernable. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I ask you to rule on this point of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
member from Melfort might save some of his outrage for those 
members who have been breaking the law on a number of 
occasions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, I would point out what I 
would think would be obvious, even to one such as the member 
from Melfort, that we are not asking for a rule 39 debate on the 
auditor’s report, but a rule 39 debate on the failure of this 
government to obey the law and give the Provincial Auditor the 
information he’s entitled to. That’s something quite separate 
and what has been referred to the Public Accounts Committee. 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee, as the 
auditor acknowledges, cannot do its duty without all of the 
information which the Provincial Auditor can get. So this is a 
separate issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the member’s point of order 
and the remarks pertaining to it and given it my consideration, 
and what is happening this afternoon is valid according to the 
rules and proceedings of the House, and therefore I allow it to 
continue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Mr. Speaker, I have a motion to make. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I accept your ruling, but I do have a motion, 
Mr. Speaker, moved by myself, seconded by the member for 
Swift Current, that in light of the incredible move by the 
opposition this afternoon: 
 

 That we proceed to the next order of business. 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. The House has before it a 
motion moved by the member from Melfort, seconded by the 
member from Swift Current, saying: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I move we proceed to the next order of 
business. 
 

The motion is in order. It is not debatable. 
 
Order, order. Would members please allow the proceedings to 
continue. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:18 p.m. until 3:21 p.m. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1357 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Devine  Pickering  
Muller  Martin  
Duncan  Toth  
Andrew  Johnson  
Smith  McLaren  
Swan  Petersen  
Muirhead  Swenson  
Maxwell  Martens  
Schmidt  Baker  
Hodgins  Wolfe  
Gerich  Neudorf  
Hepworth  Gardner  
Hardy  Kopelchuk  
Klein  Saxinger  
Meiklejohn  Britton  
 

 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I once more ask members to allow the 
vote to proceed in peace and quiet and tranquility. 
 

Nays — 21 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Thompson Lautermilch 
Brockelbank Trew 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Simard Koenker 
Kowalsky  
 

 
 
The Speaker: — Does the member have a point of order? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — No, not a point of order. I was asking for 
leave. I’d like to ask for leave to introduce some guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 84 students who are seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the Speaker’s gallery. These students 
and their teachers are from Greystone Heights School in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, and I’m delighted to have them here 
at the legislative buildings today. 
 
The students are accompanied by three teachers, Mr. Speaker: 
Barb Wright, Darlene Abraham, and Jackie Semchuk. I’m sure 
that all members will want to join me in wishing these students 
a very enjoyable visit here to the Chamber, to the legislative 
buildings. I hope very much that you’ll have a good time in 
Regina, and we wish you all a safe journey home later today. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming these students. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before the next order 
of business, I rise pursuant to rule 39 . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. That’s what the 
vote was all about. We must move to the next order of business, 
being orders of the day, and under orders of the day, special 
order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Criticism of the Provincial Auditor 
 
Ms. Simard: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the motion that 
we are discussing, the attack on the Provincial Auditor in 
Saskatchewan, I simply want to say that what the government, 
what we’ve just witnessed a few minutes ago, the closure by the 
PC government on debate with respect to the Provincial 
Auditor, is just a continued pattern of obstruction by the 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And that’s what this whole motion is all about, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what this motion is all about. Do you have 
a copy of it? I’ll just . . . If I may just read it: 
 

That this Assembly . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, order. 
Order. I think in the best interests of the House, and I know 
we’ve had some interesting moments this afternoon, but the 
business must proceed in an orderly manner. And the member 
for Regina Lakeview has the floor, and I ask hon. members to 
allow her to make her remarks in order. 
 
Ms. Simard: — The motion before us, Mr. Speaker, reads as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Minister of Justice for 
having breached the privileges of this legislature by his 
unacceptable and unjustifiable criticism of the Provincial 
Auditor; that this Assembly calls on the Premier to require 
that the minister apologize publicly and resign from the 
Executive Council; and further, that this Assembly 
reaffirms the importance of the office of the Provincial 
Auditor as an officer of this legislature. 

 
There have then been some amendments made to the motion, 
Mr. Speaker, but that is the crux of it. 
 
And in effect, if we are to look at the history that brought this 
motion before the Legislative Assembly, we would say that it is 
exactly as what took place this afternoon by the government — 
obstructing the access of legislation by members of this 
Legislative Assembly and denying this legislature the right to 
information. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1358 
 

And that’s what caused this problem to begin with, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s where it all began, with the PC government 
refusing to make available to the Provincial Auditor the 
information that he required, and now the PC government 
refusing to deal with urgent motions that are being presented by 
members of the opposition, and further, closing debate on those 
issues. That’s why we’re here discussing this motion today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The auditor . . . I just want to sort of deal with the history that 
gives rise to this motion — the fact that the Provincial Auditor 
came out with a scathing report against the government; the fact 
that the government panicked as a result of that report; the fact 
that the government chose, rather than to correct their wrongs, 
to attack the integrity of the Provincial Auditor; the fact that the 
Minister of Justice stood in his chair over there and cruelly and 
heartlessly and unfoundedly attacked the integrity of the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
(1530) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And that’s what I want to talk about today. 
And I think we have to look at the motive of the Minister of 
Justice. And only by talking about that motive can we truly 
interpret his words, the words that are contained in Hansard, on 
which he slandered the Provincial Auditor of this province. 
 
The situation in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
government is breaking the law and breaking its duty to account 
to the people of Saskatchewan. That’s the situation, that’s what 
the Provincial Auditor reported, and that’s why this 
government, the Minister of Justice, is attacking the credibility 
of the auditor. 
 
This is a horrendous situation, absolutely horrendous, because 
never before in the history of this province, nor in the history of 
Canada, has there ever been such a scathing report levelled 
against a government by a provincial auditor — never before. 
And never before have we seen a provincial auditor’s credibility 
attacked in the manner that the Minister of Justice did a few 
short days ago — never before. 
 
We have a situation in Saskatchewan where our tax dollars are 
being frittered away, wasted and mismanaged by the provincial 
government, and the auditor says so in his report, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s the situation in Saskatchewan. And the auditor 
accuses the provincial government of not being forthcoming 
with information, and what do they choose to do? They choose 
to attack the credibility of the Provincial Auditor. And I say that 
that is appalling, Mr. Speaker, and it’s totally unacceptable for 
anyone in this legislature to engage in that sort of slander and 
scurrilous attack on the Provincial Auditor. 
 
We have to examine the responsibilities of the Provincial 
Auditor in this whole discussion, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 
Auditor is responsible for ensuring that this Assembly is 
informed and has all the information about how the executive 
arm of government is spending our tax dollars. That’s the 
Provincial Auditor’s responsibility. 

And the Provincial Auditor is, one might say, a watch-dog of 
the taxpayers’ moneys, a watch-dog of the provincial funds. He 
is there to make sure that things are being done lawfully and 
they’re being done properly. And what happened is he 
discovered otherwise. 
 
He also indicated he was unable to get co-operation from some 
government agencies — unable — a Provincial Auditor unable 
to get co-operation from some government agencies. That’s 
what was happening. 
 
He also expressed concern about private auditors, not because 
they’re not honest, but because their obligation is to their client, 
and that is the executive arm of government. The Provincial 
Auditor’s obligation, Mr. Speaker, is to the Legislative 
Assembly — a different client, Mr. Speaker, a different client. 
And as a result, the potential for conflict of interest arises in the 
sphere of private auditors. That’s what the Provincial Auditor 
was suggesting, not that private auditors were dishonest, but 
that they couldn’t serve two masters. Private auditors can’t 
serve the executive arm of government and the Legislative 
Assembly because their client is, in effect, the executive arm of 
government. 
 
So we have a Provincial Auditor in Saskatchewan that is 
responsible to the people, he’s responsible to the Legislative 
Assembly, who puts a report forth that shows that the 
government is not being forthcoming with information and is in 
effect breaking the law. And what happens is we see the 
Minister of Justice stand up and ruthlessly assault the character 
of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. There are two or three debates 
taking place simultaneously, and once again I remind the hon. 
members that the member from Regina Lakeview has the floor. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Provincial 
Auditor . . . you know the comments of the Provincial Auditor, 
if I can be a little more specific, that prompted the outburst of 
the Minister of Justice, the member from Kindersley, were as 
follows, and I’m quoting from the Provincial Auditor’s report. 
The Provincial Auditor states, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

I cannot effectively carry out my role to watch over the 
public purse for my client, the Legislative Assembly. 
 

He goes on to state on page 2 of his report: 
 

The public accounts are not complete, correct or timely. 
 
There were a number of cases where the tabling of annual 
reports and financial statements did not comply with the 
law. 
 

That’s what the Provincial Auditor states. He further state on 
page 9, Mr. Speaker, that he can: 
 

. . . no longer effectively serve the Assembly (can you 
imagine that?) no longer effectively service the Assembly 
because: 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1359 
 

— he now sees the financial transactions for bout 50 per 
cent of the public spending (and) 
 
— when reliance on appointed auditor is not justified, it is 
no longer possible to carry out the work not done by the 
appointed auditor; and 
 
— I am being denied access to information. (I am being 
denied access to information.) 

 
He goes on to say that: 
 

In my opinion (this is on page 11 at the bottom of the 
report) I have been interfered with in the execution of my 
duties. 
 

Article 2.35: 
 

In my opinion, this action by the Executive is an 
interference with the Officer of the Assembly. 
 

Those are just some of the statements that the Provincial 
Auditor made with respect to the PC government, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say that those statements are a damning indictment of this 
government’s waste and mismanagement and its management 
of the provincial funds and the provincial economy. It is a 
scathing report, Mr. Speaker, a scathing report. 
 
And in Appendix IV of the Provincial Auditor’s report, which is 
what we tried to show earlier today, there were a number of 
annual reports that were not tabled. They were not tabled by the 
government, as required by law, Mr. Speaker, and the 
Provincial Auditor points that out. 
 
The Provincial Auditor refers to dental equipment in his 
comments under the Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation and illustrates that there’s over $2 million worth of 
dental equipment that cannot be accounted for. And the funds 
from the sale of that dental equipment cannot be accounted for, 
and he’s unable to determine what has happened to that 
two-million-plus dollars. That’s the report that the Provincial 
Auditor laid in this Legislative Assembly and that’s the reason 
why the Minister of Justice chose to attack the Provincial 
Auditor in the manner that he did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s another point that I want to make, and that has to 
do with the fact that, in my opinion, what happened in the 
sequence of events is that the Provincial Auditor prepared his 
draft report and presented it to the audit committee — he 
presented it to the audit committee. 
 
And I say that because in The Provincial Auditor Act there is a 
requirement that he present it to the audit committee before he 
presents it to you, Mr. Speaker. He did not — and I think that 
point should be made clear — according to the documents and 
material that I have, he did not present it to the executive arm of 
government. He presented it to the audit committee. 
 
Then the document, I’m not sure how, but I believe it got into 
the hands of the executive arm of government. I’m not 
suggesting there’s anything wrong with it, but that’s 

what happened. And I say that because in the April 20 letter to 
the lawyer for the government from the lawyer for the auditor, 
there’s a statement that the annual report in draft form, which 
your clients have apparently seen — Mr.Neill, the lawyer for 
the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Lutz, says, which your clients have 
apparently seen. 
 
That would suggest to me, Mr. Speaker, that he thinks they’ve 
seen it but he’s not sure, obviously because the report was 
submitted to the audit committee, not to the executive arm of 
government. And I think that’s important when we consider the 
events here. 
 
So what does the government do when they receive access to 
that report? Well they start opening conversations with the 
Provincial Auditor’s lawyer to deal with identifying aspects of 
joint audit proposals, and to negotiate the terms, and to consider 
and approve any required statutory amendments to the 
Provincial Auditor Act. And — and, Mr. Speaker, this is 
important because it’s the lawyers for the government that are 
approaching the lawyer for the Provincial Auditor about the 
third item, to have the participation of the Provincial Auditor in 
determining his successor following his retirement. That was 
initiated by the government, to have his participation in 
determining his successor. 
 
There’s also been statements made by the Minister of Justice 
about a special warrant with respect to retirement funds for the 
Provincial Auditor, and I think it’s very important to comment 
on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A special warrant for the amount 
of the retirement funds does not benefit the auditor, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It doesn’t benefit the auditor. Why? Because the 
auditor by law is entitled to that money and will get it. 
 
But what it does is it protects the office, the people who are left 
behind, so that their budget would not be short. It protects the 
office of the auditor. But the point has to be made is that the 
Provincial Auditor is entitled to that money in any case and will 
get it in any case. The special warrant does not protect him as 
the Minister of Justice seemed to imply; it protects the office of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And the member from Weyburn is sitting, from his seat still 
making unfounded allegations — unfounded allegations. And 
the Minister of Justice tries to make a big deal out of these 
facts. But the fact of the matter is, is the Provincial Auditor, 
with respect to his retirement, was not negotiating anything that 
he was not entitled to by law. 
 
And let’s talk about who benefits from the retirement of the 
Provincial Auditor, because I think that’s relevant. It’s clear 
from the documentation that the government approached the 
Provincial Auditor about his retirement. The government 
approached the Provincial Auditor; in other words, asked him 
whether he’d be interested in retiring. 
 
Why do they want him to retire? Well, the Minister of Justice 
says, well he was raising it before. I think the real answer to 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that the Provincial Auditor, 
because of his report with respect to the government, his 
indictment of the government, has become a thorn in their side 
and they would like to see 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1360 
 

him retire. The PC government would like to see the auditor 
retire. They stand to gain from his retirement, not the auditor, 
Mr. Speaker, not the auditor. The government stands to gain, 
and they initiated the conversations with respect to retirement. 
And I say that if there’s any impropriety, that would be the 
impropriety. 
 
And let’s talk about the Board of Internal Economy. Let’s talk 
about that. The request for officers of the Legislative Assembly 
to be under the Board of Internal Economy is nothing new, and 
the Minister of Justice admitted that in his comments. He 
admitted that by saying the Ombudsman and the Law Clerk and 
other officers of the Legislative Assembly would also like to be 
under the Board of Internal Economy. That is a legitimate 
request for an officer of the Legislative Assembly to make. 
 
It’s legitimate and it’s nothing new, and there is no way that the 
Provincial Auditor personally benefits from that. It’s a 
legitimate request. In fact, in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if 
indeed the Provincial Auditor was thinking of resigning, that 
request would hardly even apply to him, but would apply to his 
successors in office. 
 
And so what we see is a situation where the Provincial Auditor 
wants to make sure that when he leaves his job that the office of 
Provincial Auditor maintains its integrity and maintains its 
independence of the executive arm of government. That was his 
desire and that was his intent. But these members scurrilously 
attempt to imply some sort of wrongful intent and impropriety 
on part of the Provincial Auditor, and I say that that’s appalling, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — that’s appalling. 
 
(1545) 
 
And so the Provincial Auditor talks about the appointment of 
his successor. And in this correspondence it shows clear that the 
government was referring to Mr. Lutz having input into the 
appointment of his successor. That makes it perfectly clear, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the government was even willing to 
consider that. And why? Because it’s a convention; because it’s 
the tradition in this province and many other provinces across 
Canada that the Provincial Auditor would have input into the 
appointment of his successor. That’s the convention. 
 
And for these members to suggest that there is something 
untoward and improper about that, I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is appalling and unfounded. And they should be apologizing to 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
So let’s just go through the sequence of events once more. Let’s 
go through the sequence of events. We see that the auditor 
cannot get the information he needs in order to complete a 
proper and adequate accounting of the provincial funds in this 
province. That’s the first situation that arises. 
 
We see requests on behalf of the Provincial Auditor to attempt 
to get further information, requests that are ignored and refused 
by the government opposite. 
 
The auditor prepares a draft report that indicates that the 
government is not fulfilling its responsibility of 

accountability to the public. And the auditor obviously presents 
that report to the audit committee in accordance with the law 
and the Act. 
 
The executive arm receives a copy of this report, I’m not sure 
from where, but they receive a copy of it. And they approach 
the Provincial Auditor to see whether or not there is anything 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize for the 
interruption, but I would like to ask for leave to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 
a great pleasure at this time, through you to members of this 
legislature, to introduce some guests, 18 grade 12 students from 
the town of Waldheim, and their teacher, Mr. Dave Hinz. 
 
They’re in here for the day. They just got in and have been 
listening to the member opposite for the last 10 minutes or so 
and are observing the proceedings. I will be meeting with them 
at about 4:30 for pictures and refreshments, and we can discuss 
a little bit in further detail of what you are witnessing here. 
 
We’re presently engaged in a debate of privilege, and the 
member opposite is forcefully making her points and, of course, 
in due time we will make our points. So we hope you enjoy the 
proceedings for the time that you’re in here, and have a safe 
journey home. 
 
I ask all members to help me to welcome these students from 
Waldheim. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Point of Privilege — Criticism of the Provincial Auditor 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Simard: — As I was pointing out through this sequence of 
events that have occurred, the auditor prepared a report that 
indicated that he did not have access to information that he 
required to properly prepare his report. He then obviously, in 
accordance with the law, gave it to the audit committee. 
 
The executive arm of government somewhere in there received 
a copy of the report, and the Provincial Auditor was approached 
to determine whether or not there was any way that the 
accountability could be repaired. And this approach was made, 
as I understand, from the government’s lawyer. 
 
And on March 23 the issue of his retirement was raised by 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1361 
 

the government’s lawyer in conjunction with, you know, 
looking at some way of repairing the accountability, to 
abbreviate it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The fact of the matter is, 
they raised it. They stood to benefit from it, and they raised it in 
conjunction with other issues. 
 
So I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how can they possibly claim 
there has been anything improper here on the part of the 
Provincial Auditor? If it was improper for the Provincial 
Auditor to talk about a special warrant that protects the office of 
auditor after he leaves, then it would be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
improper for the government to raise the matter itself. 
 
They stood to gain from his retirement because obviously the 
Provincial Auditor had become a thorn in their side. 
 
Another thing I wish to comment on specifically, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is the fact that the Minister of Justice said that the 
Provincial Auditor would change his report. And I want to 
comment on those words. 
 
And the Minister of Justice may try to dance around that now 
and say that’s not really what he meant, and he intended 
something different, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but let’s just take a 
look at the exact words he used — and I’m looking at 1247 of 
Hansard, May 19: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if a Provincial Auditor says, I will change my 
report if you do this, if you do this, if I have a proper 
retirement package and if I can determine who my 
successor is going to be, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that is 
improper. 
 

Now he suggests that is improper. What does that mean? You 
know, if . . . the Provincial Auditor didn’t say he would change 
his report to begin with. What he said is that he would indicate 
a solution to his concerns had been resolved. He never said he 
would change his report. He didn’t negotiate a retirement 
package. They asked for his retirement, and he says that he’s 
entitled to the amount provided by law. He did not ask for 
something he was not entitled to by law. But . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I would just ask the hon. 
members to allow the member to make her remarks, and then, if 
they have any points to make, to enter into the debate later. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Simard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Minister 
of Justice had said, as I indicated earlier, that the Provincial 
Auditor says he will change his report. I pointed out he never 
did say he’d change his report. What he said is that he’d 
indicate that there had been a solution to the accountability 
problem, that’s what he’d indicate. 
 
They went on to say . . . The Minister of Justice went on to say, 
that if he has a proper retirement package . . . His retirement 
package wasn’t negotiable, it was established by law, and he 
was entitled to it regardless of what happened. If he resigned, 
he’d get his retirement package according to the law. That’s 
simple. That’s straightforward. There’s no deal. There’s no 
negotiations here. 
 
Now the Minister of Justice comes forward and says, well 

I wasn’t alleging any criminal intent or any fraudulent 
behaviour. I was just saying it was improper, that this wasn’t 
the right way to do things. Well I think if you examine the 
events very closely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will see that what 
the Minister of Justice was implying, through innuendo, was far 
more than merely a slight case of bad judgement on behalf of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what he was 
implying is that if the Provincial Auditor received favours, he’d 
change his report. And we know that that’s not true, and we 
know those are not the facts. And if they were the facts, then it 
would amount to something that the Justice department should 
be looking into. 
 
So the Minister of Justice says, my leader has alleged that the 
Provincial Auditor has committed a criminal offence. 
Hog-wash! We never said anything of the sort, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. What the Leader of the Opposition said was that what 
the Minister of Justice was alleging, if it was true, would 
amount most likely, to a criminal offence. And the Minister of 
Justice, being Minister of Justice and a lawyer, should know 
full well what the implication of his allegations mean. He 
should know that. 
 
And I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he should know better than 
to make those suggestions in this Legislative Assembly and 
then turn around a day or two later, or three days later, and 
trying to say, oh no, I was just saying it was improper. What a 
backtrack, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What a backtrack. And I say 
that’s unacceptable, and he should be apologizing to the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
What the Provincial Auditor did, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 
completely above-board. He was not asking for any favours to 
change his report. He was not. They raised his retirement and he 
obviously said, well I’ll need what I’m entitled to under The 
Provincial Auditor Act. And then he went on to say that if you 
provide me with the information I need, I will indicate in my 
report that the concerns of accountability have been repaired. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is that like changing your report? 
 
Ms. Simard: — No. The member from Weyburn says, is that 
like changing your report? No, it isn’t like changing your 
report. It isn’t like . . . It’s making an indication to the public 
that the concerns with respect to information have been dealt 
with. 
 
And everybody, I would say everybody in this province has 
read the newspapers, has looked through the events and come to 
the same conclusion that we have, that the Minister of Justice 
made a scurrilous attack on the Provincial Auditor in order to 
save the hide of the government, because of their waste and 
mismanagement and the fact that they were breaking the law. 
 
And the Minister of Justice, just the other day, instead of 
realizing the wrongness of what he did, chose to come back to 
this Assembly and talk about a special proposal and couch it in 
terms of secrecy and some sort of clandestine document and to 
try and raise further suspicion on the Provincial Auditor — 
trying to raise further suspicion on the Provincial Auditor. And 
I find that 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1362 
 

disgusting and appalling. 
 
And those were the terms: well, we can’t release it; there’s these 
trust conditions, and if they . . . we have to tear it up and burn it 
and they’ve all been destroyed. And he’s trying to suggest 
there’s some sort of secret proposal out there that’s going to 
somehow make the Provincial Auditor guilty. And I say that 
that is appalling. And this special proposal is anything but; there 
is absolutely no way that this Provincial Auditor . . . this special 
report implicates the Provincial Auditor in the manner that the 
Minister of Justice clearly tried to imply in his statements — 
clearly tried to imply. And an analysis of what he said, what 
was in the letter of Mr. Neill, lawyer for the Provincial Auditor, 
can lead you to no other conclusion — can lead no fair-minded 
and honest person to no other conclusion, no other conclusion. 
 
And so I guess what I’m saying is, asking the back-benchers of 
the PC government to once and for all stand up and do 
something that’s right — stand up and do something that’s 
right. Are you going to stand by and see a long-time civil 
servant, a man of integrity, be slandered and dragged through 
this Legislative Assembly? Stand up when it comes time to vote 
on this matter. Stand up and show some fairness for once in 
your life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And so I ask you why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
why is the Minister of Justice slandering the Provincial 
Auditor? Why? He’s doing it for cheap, political purposes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. He’s doing it to divert the attention from the 
scathing report the Provincial Auditor has filed against this 
government. He’s doing it to deflect the criticism that his 
government is receiving, not just in Saskatchewan, but right 
across this nation because of their waste and mismanagement, 
their incompetence, their frittering away of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
They’re refusing to account to the people of Saskatchewan, to 
the public of Saskatchewan, to the taxpayers, for what they’re 
doing with the money of the taxpayers. And that’s what this 
government’s trying to do — deflect criticism by attacking the 
credibility of the Provincial Auditor. That’s what this 
government’s doing. 
 
(1600) 
 
It’s trying to throw up a smoke-screen that is going to affect a 
long-time, honest civil servant in order to get the heat off of 
themselves, because of their incompetence, because of the fact 
they cannot account for money, or if they cannot account for it, 
they’re refusing to account for it to the taxpayers of this 
province. 
 
And I think it’s time that the member from Regina Wascana, 
who’s shouting from his seat, the member from Regina 
Wascana should stand up once and for all and he should stand 
up and he should support this motion of privilege because no 
honest and fair-minded person can come to any other 
conclusion then that it’s a breach of privilege of this House. 
 
There is absolutely no justification for the accusations levelled 
against the Provincial Auditor. No justification 

for the innuendoes made by the Minister of Justice in his 
statements that form the basis of this motion — no justification. 
The attack on the Provincial Auditor was cruel and highly 
improper — highly improper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I never thought I’d sit here in this Legislative Assembly and see 
a cabinet minister of this government stand up and attack a 
long-time, honest civil servant in that fashion. I was totally 
appalled, totally shocked. And I want to see the member from 
Regina Wascana and other members sitting on the back bench 
standing up for what’s right before this debate is over. I want to 
see them standing up for what’s right, and we’ll see what sort of 
stuff they’re made out of. 
 
Do they have the courage to stand up to their leaders on the 
front bench who are telling them how to hop and dance and 
jump? Do they have the courage, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I 
suggest that they don’t, but I’m hoping that they do have the 
courage to stand up for honesty, stand up for justice, and stand 
up for what’s right. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: — And so we asked the Minister of Justice to 
repeat his unfounded innuendoes outside of this House, and did 
he repeat them? No. He refused to repeat them. And do you 
know why he refused to repeat them, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
Because they’re unfounded and there’s no substance to them. 
 
So he hides behind the protection of this House, I might say, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my respectful opinion, abuses the 
privilege of protection that members are given with respect to 
things that are said in this House. We are protected from libel 
and slander by what we say in this House, but we hope that 
when members use that privilege, they use it with honesty and 
they use it with integrity. 
 
And if they’re not prepared . . . if they’re prepared to make such 
terrible accusations against an individual and not prepared to 
mention them outside of the House, then I suggest that they’re 
abusing that special privilege that’s given to members of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
So in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say once again, 
I want to say once again, that in the sequence of events, what 
happened is that the Provincial Auditor was not allowed to see 
all the books of the government to determine whether or not 
taxpayers’ dollars were being properly spent, to determine for 
example what happened to the $2.2 million worth of dental 
equipment that appears to be somewhere. Is it in the 
warehouse? Has it been sold? How much has been sold? I 
understand some has been sold. 
 
The Provincial Auditor indicates that the money from that 
dental sale is supposed to be put in the Consolidated Fund, in 
the general fund for general revenues of the government. But 
he’s unable to find anything in the Consolidated Fund, any 
payment to the Consolidated Fund. It was not paid over, or if it 
was, there’s no accounting of it. 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1363 
 

So here we have a government that privatized the school-based 
children’s dental plan and fired 400 dental workers in this 
province, put the dental equipment in a warehouse, and sold 
some of it, and is refusing to account to the public for how that 
dental equipment is being sold, for how much it is being sold, is 
refusing to allow the public to know where that money is going. 
 
This is an example, this is an example of what the Provincial 
Auditor referred to in his report, not to mention the fact that 
annual reports are not being tabled as required by law — not to 
mention that. 
 
And so what happens, what happens? Does this government 
say, okay, we’d better get this information to the Provincial 
Auditor; we’d better comply with his requests so that we do 
account to the public that trusted us, that elected us, and put 
their trust in us, because that’s what the public did. They put 
their trust in you? Do they try to remedy this, this breach of 
trust? Do they try to provide the information? 
 
No, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They decide after they approach the 
Provincial Auditor about retirement, after they raise it with him, 
they decide, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to attack the Provincial 
Auditor and to use innuendoes and insinuations that are totally 
unfounded. And not only do they make that attack on day one, 
they have the weekend to think about it. And it’s clear from 
how objective people are analysing the situation that the attack 
is unfounded. 
 
Oh no, oh no, they won’t come back to the Legislative 
Assembly and say, you know, I didn’t mean to say that; I’m 
sorry; it’s an unfounded attack. They say, oh there’s a special 
proposal out there and it’s a secret proposal and this is really 
going to get to the root of the information, or words to that 
effect, is what the Minister of Justice said, attempting to leave 
the impression that there was a document out there that would 
incriminate the Provincial Auditor and justify his slanderous 
comments that were made the Friday before. And did the 
special proposal do anything of the sort? Nothing of the sort, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing of the sort. 
 
And I say that there is nothing left to be done by this 
government other than to once and for all, just once in its 
history, admit it made a mistake. Stand up; apologize to the 
Provincial Auditor. And if the Minister of Justice refuses to do 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he should hand in his resignation. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I spoke on the original motion, but I want to address 
some remarks in respect to the amendment, in respect to the 
amendment that was . . . to my original motion that was 
submitted by the members opposite, the government members. 
 
I want to indicate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we stand before 
this legislature and have spent several days, and we are 
addressing a situation that is important. It’s 

important to the continuation of the existence of the very 
system of government called a democratic government. 
 
Our Legislative Assembly has certain rules and rights and 
privileges. And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as a former outstanding premier of this province, Tommy 
Douglas also had a case come before him in respect to civil 
liberties in respect to two civil servants. And he indicated at that 
time in this legislature that the rights, the privileges, and the 
liberties have to be protected. And in part of his speech he said 
this: but unless we are prepared to defend these liberties that 
belong to other people, we ourselves will not enjoy them very 
long. How true a statement that is. 
 
We stand in this legislature, and members opposite are not even 
taking it seriously. This is a grave indictment against one of 
their front-bench members, an experienced cabinet minister, the 
Minister of Justice who you would presume would know the 
bounds of how far he could go. And what a disappointment that 
he would come into this legislature and slam a public servant. 
The motive likely was to divert attention from the very scathing 
report in respect to the auditor’s report. 
 
No one believes that the Minister of Justice has made his case. I 
can guarantee you that the people of Saskatchewan that have 
watched this debate in the question periods know and feel that 
the Minister of Justice is wrong, that he did an injustice to a 
long-time career civil servant, a servant of this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan . . . I take a look at the editorial here in the 
Star-Phoenix. And they go through it and analyse all of the 
information, not just the scurrilous, gutless utterances the 
minister made when this was initiated, but they go through all 
the documentation that was put in subsequently by the auditor. 
 
And you know what the conclusion of the Star-Phoenix 
editorial, “Apologize or resign” . . . I want to read some of this 
so the people of Saskatchewan can understand what the 
editorial board of the Star-Phoenix has decided. It says: 
 

Justice Minister Bob Andrew has two options: apologize 
for his personal attacks on the Provincial Auditor or resign. 
 

That’s what the editorial says. 
 

And given his less than courageous performance in the 
legislature recently, the latter option might be the more 
suitable (the latter, that is, resign). 
 

And that is what we have done here in raising this point of 
privilege, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The only court that’s available 
for the auditor is this Legislative Assembly, and the rules which 
give him that protection from impediment to his carrying out 
his duties. 
 
I want to go on. It says here: 
 

After attacking Willard Lutz last Friday, charging that Lutz 
suggested changes to the auditing 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1364 
 

process in an attempt to fatten his retirement package, 
Andrew didn’t bother to try to soften his words this week. 
Instead he went on to imply impropriety on the auditor’s 
part, citing the existence of some secret document. 
 

And do you recall that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Even after he had 
erred miserably, and he had a scathing attack on the auditor 
Friday, then he came back into this legislature under 
questioning the following Monday, and again he said, oh I got 
this secret document but I can’t disclose it because I don’t have 
it; only the auditor has it. 
 
Do you know what the editorial goes on to say? 
 

Andrew’s claim that Lutz offered to soften his criticism of 
the government in his annual report in exchange for a 
better pension is preposterous. 
 

Preposterous, that’s the word they used. The auditor was simply 
offering a government a further chance to remedy the problems 
outlined in the report. That is the substance of what the auditor 
was doing. He was willing to add a note saying steps had been 
taken to resolve his concerns, which seems like a reasonable 
position. He said, let’s get over this dispute about auditing and 
subaudits. And he said, I’ll modify my report accordingly. The 
offer was made in the context of what could be done to improve 
relations with the government before Lutz’s successor took 
over. That’s what it says. 
 
(1615) 
 
And it goes on to say: 
 

It seems Lutz is genuinely concerned with preserving the 
integrity of his office. It’s a shame that Andrew feels that 
he has to undermine it. 
 

That’s the editorial. One of your colleagues, your Minister of 
Justice, who did this scathing attack . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Laugh; the member from — he thinks it’s funny — from 
Bengough. It’s really funny all right. 
 
Take another look at the Regina Leader-Post. One week into 
this debate all we have, it says one week into this debate on the 
privilege, in respect to the minister: 
 

One week into this debate, all we have is a sheaf of 
documents to show negotiations were under way earlier 
this year between lawyers for Provincial Auditor Willard 
Lutz and the government. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

The original proposal was improper, he says, and it would 
have been improper for the government to embrace. 
 

That’s Mr. Andrew’s . . . the Minister of Justice’s argument. 
 

His argument is a curious one and raises more questions 
than the government appears (to be) ready to answer. 

What, for instance, made Lutz’s initial proposal improper? 
No one seems to know. 
 

Nor will they go outside the House and indicate. It goes on in 
the concluding part of this, and this is by Ron Petrie in 
Leader-Post of May 25: 
 

The Tories adopted somebody’s ill-conceived strategy to 
launch an attack of innuendo against the man who has 
watched over government spending for the last 18 years. 
 
Andrew was summarily dispatched into the fray, armed 
with a half-baked plan of attack and no path to retreat. 
 

That’s exactly the position of the Minister of Justice. At least 
. . . 
 

Now it is his reputation, it is his reputation, not Willard 
Lutz’s, on trial in this legislature. 
 

And that is the fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And he concludes: 
 

At least that’s one theory. And unless the government has 
any more light to shed on the matter, it remains as valid as 
any. 
 

As I said, Mr. Speaker, this is certainly a very grave situation. 
And in the original motion, what we brought forward — and the 
Leader of the Opposition when this broke, called upon the 
Premier of this province, in light of the allegations of the 
Minister of Justice, to call before this House, this bar, 
witnesses, including Mr. Lutz, anyone else associated that this 
Legislative Assembly so desired in order to get at the root of the 
situation. And the government rejected that. They rejected it. 
Why would they reject it? If they’re on safe ground, why would 
they reject any legitimate method of disclosure? 
 
And you know very well it’s unfounded. And as the 
Star-Phoenix said, the Minister of Justice should either 
apologize or resign. And I say he should resign. 
 
I just want to indicate here to the members, as I said, this is 
indeed a very serious situation. For if a member of the 
government who doesn’t like a report and wants to skirt around 
it, get the pressure off in respect to the nature of that report . . . 
what they have done here is try to slander the writer of that 
report. That’s exactly what they have done. 
 
And I want to say that also in his speech . . . and I want to 
indicate to the members here, as Tommy Douglas said in his 
address to this House, he said: 
 

That great poet of Scotland, Robert Burns, was a civil 
servant who almost lost his job for speaking out in favour 
of universal franchise. Burns once said: 
 
Here’s freedom to them that would read, 

  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1365 
 

Here’s freedom to them that would write. 
There’s none ever feared that the truth should be heard, 
But they whom the truth would indict. 
 

Let’s just listen to that again. The last two lines you have to 
listen to, Mr. Speaker: 
 

There’s none ever feared that the truth should be heard, 
But they whom the truth (but they whom the truth) would 
indict. 
 

Shocking! That’s what we’re up against here. And I say that it’s 
incumbent upon this legislature and the members on both sides 
of the House to view this with the seriousness that it deserves. 
 
I think that the evidence before this Assembly today, there is no 
doubt, no doubt in my mind that action should be taken against 
the Minister of Justice for what he has done. He has breached 
the privilege of this House with his unscathing attack on the 
auditor. And as I say to you, why should we be afraid of the 
truth? Only those who the truth would indict are afraid of it. 
 
And why shouldn’t we have people brought before the bar, for 
once and for all clear the name of Mr. Lutz. Or if there is a 
wrongdoing, let it be exposed. But there is none. And that’s 
why this government will not support bringing anyone before 
the bar here in this House. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, further, that we have asked in the 
original motion for the apology and resignation of the minister 
as Minister of Justice. I think it’s a fair request in light of the 
seriousness of his remarks. And I say if it is allowed to go and 
pass, what really happens is that there’s an erosion, there’s an 
erosion of the democratic institution. If any minister is allowed 
to do that in this House, to attack without foundation a civil 
servant for his other political purpose, then this institution 
cannot go on functioning for many years. 
 
And so I ask all hon. members to look seriously at what we’re 
talking about. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there are 
options. We have asked, and the Leader of the Opposition has 
asked the Premier to co-operate and to bring witnesses here as 
we have done in a previous occasion when there was an 
allegation of dirty hospitals. And what we agreed is to bring in 
the administrator or the head of the hospital association, and 
questions were asked. The truth came out. The allegations were 
false. 
 
So one must ask, what is the government afraid of? And the 
government is afraid because they know their minister made a 
groundless attack, a slanderous attack, and they can’t justify it. 
 
We have also indicated that having debated it, now that all the 
evidence is in . . . After the first day, the minister made his 
comments in which you found the point of privilege. 
Subsequent to that, he said he had more information; then we 
got the special report from the auditor. All of the documentation 
is in, as the Star-Phoenix has indicated. All the evidence is in, 
and any fair-minded and reasonable member that have seen 

the sequence of events here and the documentation know full 
well, Mr. Speaker, know full well, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Minister of Finance was wrong. He can’t substantiate it, and he 
won’t say it outside the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s the Minister of Justice, not the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well the Minister of Justice, I mean. Mr. 
Speaker, so we could have gone that option. The second option 
that we could do is we could debate this. There’s nobody 
coming forward from over on that side to defend the actions of 
the minister and substantiate it, even with the new 
documentation. There’s nobody. 
 
And I think on the evidence that has been introduced here with 
the special report of the auditor and the letters that’s tabled by 
the Minister of Finance, there’s no other conclusion but that the 
Minister of Finance should be reprimanded for a breach of 
privilege of this House. There’s no doubt. 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Minister of Justice, right. And I say he should 
resign. But the government the other day, when we were 
debating this, the Deputy Premier got up and tried to make an 
amendment to move it to the public accounts. Well I’ll tell you, 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that we’re dealing with, as you ruled, is 
not the issue to be dealt with in public accounts. 
 
Then the minister of privatization, that brilliant minister that got 
privatization off to such a flying start, he took over, he took 
over. And he said, well I guess there is something to be looked 
into, and he moved another amendment. And you know what 
the minister of privatization did? He said, we will move it into 
the elections and privileges committee, and he had it seconded 
by one of his colleagues. 
 
And we thought, well, I think it should be dealt here before 
television where the people of Saskatchewan can watch the 
accusations of what the Minister of Justice has done. They 
should allow, I think, the people of Saskatchewan should see 
Mr. Lutz be able to defend himself. I think the exposure of what 
this government is up to should be seen by the people of 
Saskatchewan. And I think that would have been the forum that 
we should have had, because this affects all the people of 
Saskatchewan. Because when you start erosion of the institution 
itself, it’s going to affect the rights, as Tommy Douglas said, 
and the civil liberties of other people. 
 
But anyway what we have is then, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister 
of (Public) Participation saying in this House, yes, I think that 
what we should do is to move it to a committee. That’s a 
committee of 10 members of this legislature. That committee 
can, in fact, subpoena witnesses; that committee can 
cross-examine; that committee can bring down a finding and 
they can report to this House, having found certain facts — 
coming to a certain conclusion. 
 
And that was the minister of privatization. And that was earlier 
in the afternoon, you will remember, Mr. Speaker, 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1366 
 

earlier in the afternoon, prior to 5 o’clock on a particular day. 
And at 5 o’clock or thereabouts I remember, Mr. Speaker, that 
you rose in the House and you said, I have received from the 
auditor a special report from the Provincial Auditor to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
(1630) 
 
And this set out the facts; it exposed the secret document that 
they were alleging they had of wrongdoings. And do you know 
what happened then, Mr. Speaker? Another member of the 
Premier’s cabinet then got up in the House and he said, ho! 
we’ve got to run for cover; we can’t even go to elections and 
privileges. He said, the facts are out, the facts are out. He said, 
we can’t go there, we’ll be exposed. And he stood up and he 
said, we can’t go to that; I’m urging everybody not to support 
what that minister of privatization and his colleague moved. No, 
we’re caught; let’s change it again; let’s run and hide; let’s not 
go anywhere with this; let’s stand up like brave men and defend 
our Minister of Justice who has defamed a civil servant without 
any justification. That’s what they decided today, after the 
auditor brought down and exposed their little game that they 
were playing; stood up in this House and said they’d go to 
elections and privileges committee to review it. 
 
And then another front-bencher gets up and says, well the report 
is down, we can’t do it now. We’re going to get caught. We 
couldn’t possibly have an open forum where the press were 
there. We got to decide this in our caucus office and in the 
cabinet. And the Premier has called them together, I suppose, 
and he says, we’re going to protect that minister at any cost. 
 
And I’m going to challenge, I’m going to challenge you 
back-benchers; I’m going to challenge you for fairness. Your 
minister of privatization put into this House an amendment to 
what I had asked for, and that is the resignation . . . the apology 
and the resignation of the minister. He says we should have it 
go to the committee, go to a committee. Majority of members 
are your members, remember that. 
 
But I’ll tell you, I’m asking you for some fairness because your 
front bench put in a motion in respect to referring this to the 
elections and privileges committee. And I’m asking you, are 
you going to stand up and be fair, or are you going to hobble 
along and protect your minister who should not be protected? 
That’s the question that we’re going to be deciding here, and 
we’re going to be deciding that very, very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Those are the options that we have, legitimate 
options. I’m going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have the 
nerve on this one to take any of those options because, one, they 
have no justification. Their case got blown out of the water with 
the special report. 
 
All across Saskatchewan, “Apologize or resign.” You didn’t see 
this, Mr. Speaker, when you were out. “Apologize or resign,” it 
says — Leader-Post. Same thing in the Regina paper, Ron 
Petrie, same thing. No evidence  
_- none. 

And now what are they going to do? They’re going to want to 
vote on this in this House and defeat. They’re going to let him 
walk away, the Minister of Justice, who should be upholding 
the law. And today again the same minister — head of the 
Securities Commission acknowledged they were breaking the 
law. 
 
And what are these members, what are these back-benchers 
going to do? Well I think what they’re going to do is to say that 
they’re above the law. I think they’re going to vote and indicate 
that they have no respect for this Assembly. I think they’re 
going to say an honourable man that has served this province, a 
servant of this Legislative Assembly, he can be defamed, but 
we’ll protect our members, our Minister of Justice. 
 
And so I ask all members here, I ask all members to realize that 
this is a grave and serious matter. The remarks that have been 
made by the Minister of Justice no doubt impede the future 
functioning of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
I would want, Mr. Speaker, not to be debating this privilege 
motion, nor do I take a great deal of pleasure in asking for the 
resignation of a colleague that has been in this legislature, I 
guess, as long as I have. I have wanted to have respect for the 
Minister of Justice. But I want to say, his actions of the last few 
days in this House leaves no one to continue to have that 
respect, because he used the privilege of this House to malign a 
man that has served the people of this province with dignity and 
conscientiousness and good service. There’s no doubt about it. 
 
And that’s the situation — is this going to be allowed? Well I 
think, Mr. Speaker, what we have indicated in amending . . . 
putting in a subamendment to their amendment, that we’re 
prepared, if all the information is brought forward before a 
Committee on Privileges and Elections, that we would indeed 
deal with it in that manner. 
 
I don’t think this can be washed away. I really don’t think so, 
Mr. Speaker. Because take another example. What if members 
were to be critical outside the House or inside the House in 
respect to your office. This legislature would have to protect 
you, has to protect the dignity and the . . . of your office . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I appreciate the 
member’s comments, but I would rather not be drawn into the 
debate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sorry for drawing 
you in. I was just using as a normal analogy, if someone were 
Speaker of the House, not yourself, if someone were Speaker of 
this House, and if someone . . . if some of the members came 
into this House, came into this House and slandered, and 
slandered that person that was the Speaker, I say that what 
you’d have to have . . . that the House would have to deal with 
it. 
 
And I think that there should be a complete and full disclosure 
of all facts. And we have had full disclosure of all facts because 
the auditor has provided the sequence, through his solicitor, 
sequence of the events that have 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1367 
 

taken place. 
 
There is no doubt, there is no doubt that action should be taken 
and action must be taken. No member should have the right, as 
the Minister of Justice did, to come into this House with 
unsupported and unfounded allegations and to malign an 
individual who has served this House, this province, and is the 
watch-dog for the expenditures of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think what we should be debating is the scathing report that 
the auditor delivered in respect to this government. And that 
report is so scathing, I want the people of Saskatchewan to 
know, that we have also a privilege in respect to how bad the 
situation is in respect to the auditor being able to perform his 
task. 
 
What a condemnation for any government — two privileges 
within two days of the sitting of the House. Instead of 
addressing the damage and the issues that are raised by the 
auditor, they decided that they would malign and turn the issue 
onto the auditor himself and his integrity, if you could believe 
it. And cowardly would not go out of this . . . cowardly, he 
would not go . . . the Minister of Justice would not go out of 
this House and make his allegations. 
 
So I say in conclusion then, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, that 
there are options. And we wanted it dealt with here, fairly, by 
bringing witnesses before the bar. They’ve rejected that, and the 
Premier has rejected it. 
 
The members opposite, or the government members, now have 
indicated that they would be prepared to take it to the elections 
and privileges committee. That’s not our first option, but I want 
to say that it’s an option, and we would be prepared to go 
forward with that and have a complete and total exposure of the 
situation so that Mr. Lutz’s name can be cleared. He’ll have an 
opportunity to appear to clear his name. He’s done everything 
that he could by providing this legislature with a special report 
to counteract some of the allegations made by the Minister of 
Justice, which were unfounded. 
 
And we aren’t here defending any individual. It’s more than 
that, we’re defending the institution. Because if ministers can 
impede by threats and innuendoes the work and the 
performance of the duties of a senior civil servant, then you 
can’t have that individual, who has to have independence in 
order to operate. Certainly the auditor has to have 
independence, and he has to have funds, and he has to have 
staff, and he has to have independence of operation. And that’s 
why he’s a servant of this Assembly, and not appointed by . . . 
not an official of a government agency. 
 
And so I say in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as Tommy Douglas 
said here when he quoted Robert Burns. 
 

Here’s freedom to them that would read, 
Here’s freedom to them that would write. 
There is none ever feared that the truth should be heard, 
But they whom the truth would indict. 
 

That applies to the Minister of Justice. The truth would 

indict him. The truth has indicted him. He is indicted. 
 
But if they won’t take action on the basis of all of the evidence 
here, then we say, let’s go another step and let’s see whether or 
not the Minister of Justice will appear before that commission 
under oath and make his allegations. And let us bring forward 
Mr. Lutz, and let us bring forward the agencies that refused him 
the information. Let’s get to the truth, and let then only the truth 
indict those who are afraid of the truth. 
 
So I urge the Minister of Justice to urge his members to support 
his colleague, the minister of participation’s recommendation or 
amendment, that this matter, which he initiated, be referred to 
the special committee on elections and privileges. I would 
expect that the Minister of Justice would certainly show that 
much leadership. He started it; he’s in it; at least he could take 
the leadership of asking his colleagues to go along with that 
amendment to the original motion. And I’ll be looking forward 
to see exactly what the hon. member of Justice will be doing in 
the regard to this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1645) 
 
The division bells rang from 4:46 p.m. until 4:50 p.m. 
 
Subamendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Thompson Lautermilch 
Brockelbank Trew 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Simard Koenker 
Kowalsky  

 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Votes cannot proceed if there 
are interruptions, and I ask the hon. members to co-operate. The 
Clerk may proceed. 
 

Nays —28 
 

Devine Hepworth 
Muller Hardy 
Duncan Klein 
Andrew Meiklejohn 
Smith Martin 
Swan Toth 
Maxwell Johnson 
Schmidt McLaren 
Hodgins Petersen 
Gerich Swenson 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. Would the hon. 
member please respond to the request that we don’t 
  



 
May 25, 1989 

 

1368 
 

have interruptions, and allow the vote to proceed. 
 
Martens Gardner 
Baker Kopelchuk 
Wolfe Saxinger 
Neudorf Britton 

 
The division bells rang from 4:54 p.m. to 4:57 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 21 
 
Romanow Solomon 
Prebble Anguish 
Shillington Goulet 
Lingenfelter Hagel 
Tchorzewski Lyons 
Koskie Calvert 
Thompson Lautermilch 
Brockelbank Trew 
Upshall Van Mulligen 
Simard Koenker 
Kowalsky  

 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Muller Smith 
Duncan Swan 
Andrew  
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. The vote cannot 
proceed if there are interruptions. The Clerk, I’m sure, is not 
able to hear the responses properly, and neither can I. And it’s 
the tradition in this House that when votes, especially are taking 
place, there’s quiet. And whether people agree or disagree, 
that’s another matter, but let’s allow the vote to proceed. 
 
Maxwell McLaren 
Schmidt Petersen 
Hodgins Swenson 
Gerich Martens 
Hepworth Baker 
Hardy Wolfe 
Klein Neudorf 
Meiklejohn Gardner 
Martin Kopelchuk 
Toth Saxinger 
Johnson Britton 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker, what we have just witnessed was an 
unprecedented act in the history of this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It being past 5 o’clock, this House stands 
recessed till 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


