


















































April 6, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 6, 1989 
 

573 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to the House three guests in the Speaker’s Gallery. 
They are His Excellency Dr. Emilian Rodean, the ambassador of 
Romania; accompanying Mr. Rodean is Mr. Nicolae Dragiou and 
Mr. Alexandru. 
 
They are in Saskatchewan visiting with various people and 
government officials in the province of Saskatchewan. They are 
here to observe our daily question period. 
 
I understand that in your part of the world you are also looking 
at various new changes through perestroika and glasnost, and I 
would ask you to observe our forum and form your own opinions. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
opposition, I too would like to extend our welcome to the guests 
here from Romania and wish them a pleasant and a fruitful stay. 
Romania is one of those countries in the world which has 
contributed greatly to the multicultural nature of this country and 
this province of Saskatchewan. We are proud of that contribution 
and thankful for it, and I hope that the members who are here will 
enjoy the experience that they have in this proceeding of our 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce some 
guests in that gallery — and I’ve never known east from west in 
this House — so it’s that gallery, Mr. Speaker. And in that 
gallery, gazing down on the opposition to watch their behaviour, 
Mr. Speaker, are the mayor and some councillors and the 
administrator from the town of Carlyle, and I want to introduce 
them. They are His Worship Ted Brady, councillors Marilyn 
George, Wilma Lothian, Harold Smith and Edie Brady, and in 
addition is town administrator, Norman Riddell. 
 
Now these people are all distinguished public servants, Mr. 
Speaker. In the case of His Worship, he is not only the mayor of 
Carlyle, but he has been the president of SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), he has been the president of 
the Canadian Federation of Municipalities. He is currently the 
chairman of the New Careers Corporation and doing a fine job 
there, I might add, Mr. Speaker. And at the risk of causing them 
some harm to their reputations, Mr. Speaker, they are also 
personal friends of mine. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in a welcome to these 
people from Carlyle. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would draw your 
attention to your gallery where I have three friends of mine who 
are here today to observe the Assembly . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s all you’ve got. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — There’s more than three, but I only have three 
today. They are the Boyd family: Bob and Leslie, and their son 
Craig. They are from the State of Washington and are presently 
in the process of moving back to Saskatchewan, where Mr. Boyd 
is an employee with WESTBRIDGE, and young Craig plans to 
be playing with Notre Dame next year. I ask all members to 
welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal 
of pleasure today that I introduce to you and the other members 
of the Assembly, a group of 10 high school students and their 
teacher from Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw, from which I 
graduated some, I’m afraid to say, 20-odd years ago. They are 
the Government Club. And I think it’s a little bit unique; I know 
in the city of Moose Jaw that Central Collegiate has one. 
 
I think it is excellent that that group of students who usually meet 
in the off times to discuss government issues and how democracy 
works. They are under the tutelage of their teacher Mr. Brian 
Swanson, who is also himself a newly elected politician, a newly 
elected alderman in city of Moose Jaw. I know that he provides 
a lot of insight to the students in this group, and they’re going to 
be here today to watch part of the debate in the House and then 
meet with myself and the Minister of Education afterwards for a 
little discussion. 
 
So welcome Central Collegiate Government Club, and I would 
ask all members to give them a hand of applause. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the member 
from Thunder Creek in welcoming the participants and the leader 
of the government club at Central Collegiate to the Assembly 
here today. Both my colleague, the member for Moose Jaw 
South, and myself have had a number of very stimulating and 
interesting meetings with these young people, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m very pleased to see them here today. 
 
I would go so far, Mr. Speaker, as to predict that it would not 
surprise me that at least one of these young people some day may 
very well assume a chair in this Legislative Assembly. I simply 
wish to welcome the students as well as Councillor Swanson here 
with us, and I hope that their visit today will be very invigorating. 
Good to see you here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Privatization of Saskatchewan Minerals 
  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

574 
 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, and it concerns Saskatchewan 
Minerals and PC-style privatization. I have in front of me here 
the 1988 annual report of Saskatchewan Minerals, the year that 
you privatized it, sir. And this report confirms that your 
government sold this company, Sask Minerals, to Quebec and 
Ontario corporations at $5 million less than its book value. Once 
again it appears the people of the province of Saskatchewan have 
been — putting it bluntly — ripped off by PC style privatization. 
 
Mr. Premier, my question to you is this: how can you justify the 
selling price for this privatization? How do you explain this $5 
million benefit to the private corporations at our expense? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the hon. 
member fully understands what book value means. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, perhaps he admitted that he doesn’t, given the question. 
In the report that I have, and I’m sure the hon. member has the 
same one: “The proceeds from each (of these) sale(s) exceeded 
the appraised value of the respective divisions.” Now, Mr. . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order. I think I’d like to 
intervene early today to ask hon. member not to interrupt 
members from either side — from either side — who may be 
speaking today. Give them the opportunity to put the questions; 
give them the opportunity to answer the questions. I hope we will 
follow that convention today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just point out to 
the hon. member from Elphinstone, that was talking from his 
seat, that the divisions are publicly appraised, and people 
evaluate them so that they know what they’re worth. And if they 
are publicly appraised by accounting firms that say that the 
proceeds do exceed the appraised value, then either you question 
the — I suppose that’s fair enough — you question the 
accounting firms, or what appraised value means. 
 
That is different than book value. And the book value, I’m sure 
you realize, is what you may have totally involved in the 
particular asset at one particular time as you might have — and 
it was explained, I believe, in the newspaper — that you might 
have had a $5,000 investment in a car, and today the appraised 
value is $2,500, Mr. Speaker. And if you sell it for over that, it’s 
obviously worth . . . you’ve done well in terms of the investment. 
 
Now this is exactly the case with respect to book value and 
appraised value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Hon. Premier. First of all, I have to thank him for that lecture on 
the difference between book value and appraised value. But if the 
Hon. Premier doesn’t mind, perhaps he might hear a little bit of 
advice from me. And that is that when there’s a commercially 
viable and successful company, almost invariably the appraised 

value is higher than the book value. Now the book value in this 
company is $20 million — not always, but almost invariably — 
is $20 million, and you have lost $5 million for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And my question to you, sir, is this. You say the appraisal says 
we got a fair price for Sask Minerals. My question to you, sir, is: 
will you undertake to table the complete copy of that appraisal 
report today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to again, for the 
hon. member, and particularly in this case for the media, Mr. 
Speaker, go back to — and this is book value, an appraised value 
— this is the case. The 1982 share offerings from the opposition 
member, from 1982, says here, and he’s talking about Agra 
 

The likely market value would only be about 50 per cent of 
CIC (Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan) 
book value. 
 

And he’s offering shares in it. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So what? So what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now, I can go . . . So what, he says. Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I point out to the hon. member over and 
over again, and everybody in this House on this side of the 
legislature will remind the hon. members, they were going to 
offer shares to Canadians, to Saskatchewan people, in Crown 
corporations — in uranium, in potash, and in Agra — and they 
even go as far as to outline, which is passed by the Crown 
Management Board committee, that the market value would only 
be 50 per cent of the CIC book value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
hon. Premier, and I want to come back to Sask Minerals and the 
report of the 1988 PC-style privatization of Sask Minerals. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, on March 30, 1988, one year ago, your 
minister in charge of privatization on the question of the appraisal 
report — which is what you’re hanging your hat on, on this sale 
— said, and I quote: 
 

The appraisal report will be tabled in this House. I gave that 
commitment to the Leader of the Opposition the other day. 
 

That’s what your minister said one year ago. My question to you 
is this: if that’s the appraisal report, will you undertake to table 
that appraisal report today in the legislature of Saskatchewan to 
settle the argument as to whether or not you gave five million 
bucks away to your big business corporation friends in Ontario 
and Quebec? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well let’s make sure that the people of 
Saskatchewan understand where the hon. member is coming 
from with respect to his views on public participation and 
privatization. We already know that he acknowledges that the 
market value can be 50 per cent of   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

575 
 

the book value. He’s already said that. So if he’s offering shares 
in anything, he knows that you appraise it at today’s market 
value, and you offer public shares in it. 
 
The financial statements for the sodium sulphate division showed 
that it paid the government only $40 million over the last 40 
years, or an average of about $1 million per year, Mr. Speaker. 
The peat moss division has shown a loss in every year except the 
last year. Now that’s what dictates market value. It’s a capacity 
and it’s ability to produce profits for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that is carried well on into the future. 
 
And so when you’re having it appraised, Mr. Speaker, as he 
acknowledges himself, it could be only 50 per cent of book value. 
And he acknowledges as well that he is going to offer shares to 
people across Canada in something like Agra or something like 
potash or something like uranium at market value, Mr. Speaker, 
because you can’t offer shares at book value, and he knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the 
Premier. Now that the Premier’s got this PC-style privatization 
speech off his chest, answer the simple question. Why don’t you 
table that appraisal report? What are you hiding? Table the 
appraisal report for us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we table and we present 
to the public all of the documents. When we do all the public 
participation and all the privatization, the documents reach this 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. And they will and they do, as we’ve 
seen in Weyerhaeuser and we’ve seen in Saskoil when we offered 
shares, Mr. Speaker. We put them out there. The hon. member 
has got nothing to hang his hat on today, so he says, well book 
value is the same thing as market value. And he’s wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, and he’s already admitted he’s wrong, and now he said, 
well for Heaven’s sakes at least offer us an appraisal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is 
again a new question and a direct question. Your minister of 
privatization told this legislature — he made a commitment, a 
commitment that he would table that appraisal report. That is a 
commitment on behalf of the government and on behalf of you, 
sir. 
 
You say that you did not get ripped off $5 million worth or more, 
as far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned. I’m asking 
you to honour that commitment and table that appraisal report, or 
is that another PC-style broken promise in a major area? Or is it 
cover-up? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have tabled it in every 
case, Mr. Speaker. We have tabled them in every case, Mr. 
Speaker, so that the public knows. We have always done that, 
Mr. Speaker.

When the hon. member nationalized the potash industry, we 
didn’t see any appraisals. The people of Saskatchewan didn’t. 
When we offer shares to the public of Saskatchewan and the 
public of Canada, they all want to know what the appraised value 
is, or they wouldn’t be buying shares. 
 
Obviously this is the most public operation that you’ve seen in 
the history of Saskatchewan. Everybody can have the 
opportunity to purchase shares, and that member was for it, Mr. 
Speaker, until he ended up on that side of the House, and now 
he’s against it because he’s absolutely bankrupt when it comes to 
new ideas economically or socially, and that’s what’s wrong with 
the NDP in Canada today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier, and he’s not going to get off the hook that easily on this 
one. 
 
I accuse the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan and the PC 
government of giving away $5 million or more, or, putting it 
another way, being taken to the cleaners by the big business 
corporation friends of this government for Sask Minerals, and 
that your annual report proves that. I want you to table the 
appraisal report to show the difference and to show where I’m 
wrong in this regard. 
 
You’re not going to get off the hook. Table that appraisal report 
or you’re covering up — you’re covering up a bad deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Here’s the report. I’m showing it so you 
can see it on television, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. I’d like to remind the hon. 
member that exhibits are not permitted, and I believe that report 
is being used in that fashion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the report, Sask 
Minerals 1988 annual report that he quotes, it says, it’s 
documented that: 
 

The proceeds from each sale exceeded the appraised value 
of the respective divisions. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, every time we’ve offered them for sale to 
anybody else, we have tabled and provided the appraised values 
and we’ve shown how it was appraised. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
said he will do it in this case; he’ll do it in this case as we have 
in every single case. 
 
And the hon. member knows he doesn’t have a leg to stand on. 
The book value, as his own minutes support, don’t equal the 
market value or the appraised value. And he acknowledged that 
with Agra Industries, Mr. Speaker, and I acknowledge that here 
today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

576 
 

to the Premier. That answer is absolutely ludicrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Look, Mr. Premier, you have got an appraisal 
report which is either less than the book value, or you’ve got an 
appraisal report which is higher than the book value. You can 
prove this argument by tabling that appraisal report. The 
argument that I say is that it’s $5 million short. I know the annual 
report says they got more than the appraisal value, but if the 
appraisal value was $10 million and the book value is $20 
million, you’ve lost money. Table the appraisal report to show 
exactly what’s behind this sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, let me just say to the hon. 
member, I have said that we will table the document. I’ve said 
that. And I put this point out to the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 
that he’s not going to get off the hook by just asking to have 
something tabled. He is wrong in principle, and he is wrong in 
theory, and he’s been unfair to the Saskatchewan people because 
he acknowledges, Mr. Speaker, when he was going to offer 
shares to the public of Saskatchewan that the book value might 
have been nothing related to the market value, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m going to call him on that. He can’t have it both ways. 
 
We know that we’ve tabled all the documents, and that’s why it’s 
popular in the province of Saskatchewan. He didn’t when he 
nationalized potash, Mr. Speaker, but he certainly was going to 
when he planned to offer shares to the Saskatchewan public. And 
we’ll remind them every day in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the Premier 
reminding the province of Saskatchewan every day about what 
we did or didn’t do because we’re going to remind the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan of how you are selling off the 
heritage of our families right now by privatization every day. 
Yes, we’re going to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — I want to ask, and I want the Premier to listen 
to this question and not get his answer from the Minister of 
Finance. I want the Premier to listen to this question. I want the 
Premier to tell the people of the province of Saskatchewan how 
in the world he can justify the sale-off of a Crown corporation 
that produced a profit every year over 40 years except once; that 
never had any job loss as far as the families were concerned; that 
returned money to the public purse in order to finance schools 
and highways and hospitals and roads. 
 
The return that you got from this sale is less than $2 million. It’s 
less than two days of interest charges as a result of the profligacy 
and the waste and the mismanagement of your Finance minister. 
What’s the benefit to the people of the province of Saskatchewan 
for that kind of a sale-off? Give me that answer.

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, you notice, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Leader of the Opposition says he doesn’t want people to have 
a chance to buy shares in it if it’s profitable. He says they 
shouldn’t have an offer to buy shares in it if it loses money. He 
doesn’t want people to have shares in it if people move out of the 
province. He doesn’t want us to have public participation if they 
move into the province, Mr. Speaker. I just point out to the hon. 
member once more, once more, that the peat moss division could 
not be valued on an ongoing basis as an ongoing concern, Mr. 
Speaker. The analysis indicated that this division had never made 
a contribution to the company’s cash flow since its acquisition 
by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now if it had never made a profitable contribution and the NDP 
had it at a book value of whatever they thought it might be, if it 
was inflated, Mr. Speaker, and we wanted to offer shares to the 
people of Saskatchewan, then you have to have a true market 
value, and the NDP have acknowledged that in their own plans, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say again to the hon. member, we have tabled every market 
evaluation, and this one will be tabled and then we’ll remind the 
hon. member the games that he played with the public of 
Saskatchewan, nationalizing the potash industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have to ask the Premier a new 
question. The Premier said, in response to the last answer, that 
this style privatization was a share offering to the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And he is flashing around this Sask 
Mineral report, the very same report to which he refers me to. 
And we know that it was sold to Kam-Kotia Mines of Ontario; 
we know he sold to Premier Canadian Enterprises Ltd. of Quebec 
— two private corporations. 
 
Who holds the shares in those companies? How many shares do 
you hold in those companies? How many shares does anybody in 
the province of Saskatchewan hold in those companies? This was 
a straight sale-off of assets from the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan — not a sale-off, it was a give-away of assets to 
your big business corporations, and you should be ashamed of 
that. Where is the shares in this offer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan 
knows that the NDP are against business, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I remind the hon. members that always the 
NDP are against business, Mr. Speaker, and they’re against other 
Canadians investing in Saskatchewan. They’re against it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’m reminded, and I think it’s quite appropriate, that Mr. 
Broadbent, when he just finished stepping down as leader   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

577 
 

of the NDP, Mr. Speaker, he said, the serious debate about the 
future here in Canada and abroad is not about the desirability of 
a market economy. For most thoughtful people that now debate 
this, it is closed. Market economies have been responsible for the 
production of more goods and services since the second world 
war than were produced in all previous human history, Mr. 
Speaker. Ed Broadbent endorsing the market economy, saying 
that businesses and economies and investment from across 
Canada are good, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader of the Opposition 
and the NDP says, no part of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meeting in Estevan to Discuss Privatization 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of . . . if the Minister 
of Finance could be quiet and let me put my question, please, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister of 
piratization, I’ll direct my question to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have here an advertisement from The Estevan 
Mercury dated, I believe, March 22 for a meeting of the Estevan 
PC association. You may be familiar with them. It talks about a 
meeting where one Bruce Evans, an adviser to the minister of 
piratization, will be speaking on, and I quote: “ . . . the 
Advantages of Privatization IE: Liquor Board Stores, Potash 
Mines & more.” And it also says, and again I quote, Mr. Premier: 
“You Must Be A PC Member To Attend!” Now I ask you, I ask 
you, Mr. Premier, is that what it’s come to? Civil servants in the 
province of Saskatchewan, talking about your government’s 
plans for piratization to a private PC meeting for PCs only for 
fear of being booed off the stage by the people of Saskatchewan, 
is that where it’s at, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, most of people in Estevan 
were at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, and most of the people there 
have PC memberships. We have held, I believe, 40 to 50 public 
participation open seminars across the province of Saskatchewan 
inviting employees, Mr. Speaker, and an awful lot of people that 
go to them, Mr. Speaker, are from every political persuasion. 
After they leave the meeting they are interested in buying shares 
in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve held them with 
employees, Mr. Speaker. We’ve held them with people who had 
worked for the Meadow Lake saw mill and their employees, and 
now they buy the saw mill. They thought it was a good idea, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve held meetings all over. And from now on, Mr. Speaker, if 
any members of the opposition want to join us and learn about 
public participation at a public meeting, or a PC meeting, there’s 
a standing invitation at any time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, if you 
believe in open public meetings, you’d call the ultimate open 
public meeting and call an election and let the people of 
Saskatchewan decide.

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Premier, I quote to you from The Public 
Service Act of your government, section 50, political activities, 
and I quote: 
 

(1) No person in the public service shall: 
 
  (a) be in any manner compelled to take part in any 
political undertaking . . . 

 
And I ask you, Mr. Premier: at what point does it become 
acceptable for civil servants, paid for by the people of 
Saskatchewan, to present government plans to partisan crowds, 
to PC audiences only. I ask you that, Mr. Premier; what gives you 
the right to do that? 
 
And if it’s okay, Mr. Premier, if that’s okay for Bruce Evans to 
speak to your PC association, then would Mr. Evans as well be 
permitted to attend the New Democratic Party or Liberal meeting 
to talk about the piratization plans of your government, to answer 
the questions of those audiences, Mr. Premier? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I bring to the knowledge of 
the leader of the NDP across the way, is the resolution of the NDP 
— and this is from Estevan, as a matter of fact — PA 44. It says: 
 

Whereas it is necessary to have civil servants and board 
members of provincial bodies who are dedicated to 
promoting the New Democratic program of democratic 
socialism, be it resolved that when the New Democratic 
Party is elected, a careful screening take place to ensure that 
such people are in place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now this is an NDP resolution. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an NDP resolution that says that public servants 
must be screened so that they support democratic socialism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is Canada; this is not the Soviet Union. This is 
open, this is public, Mr. Speaker, and this is a democracy. And 
we are going to be . . . we’ll make very sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
this will be public and it will be open and democracy will be 
upheld, not as resolutions we see coming from the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Soliciting of Political Contributions 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a 
question to the Premier. And I want to apologize for his rudeness 
to our guests in attacking another country in this legislature, 
rather than asking a question. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is I have here a copy of a   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

578 
 

letter . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. We’re 
having difficulty hearing the hon. member. Order. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll start again, and I 
hope the members will settle down because this is an important 
question that I want to put to the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I have here a copy of the letter from a chap by the 
name of Alf Bentley, old Alf Bentley, and he sent out a 
confidential letter to people around Saskatchewan begging for 
contributions to the PC Party — begging, that’s what he’s doing. 
And I was wondering, Mr. Premier, if you could tell us if this 
here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. We’re 
all interested in hearing your question, but I’m having a little 
difficulty, I’m having a little difficulty. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — This is an important question, Mr. Speaker, and 
I was about to put the question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, this 
fellow by the name Alf Bentley, chairman of the finance 
committee of the PC Party, writing letters across Saskatchewan 
begging for contributions. What I want to ask you, Mr. Premier, 
can you identify and tell us whether or not this Alf Bentley is the 
same fellow that held the $95,000-a-year job with Cameco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we obviously raise a great 
deal of money from people across the province of Saskatchewan 
by soliciting their support and, Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the 
fact that we have the most memberships of any political party in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And, Mr. Speaker, we know that we have 
a great deal of political support among employees of the 
Government of Saskatchewan who want to buy shares in 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. And we know we have a great deal of 
political support from farmers, Mr. Speaker, from small business, 
from all of those, and every walk of life in the province of 
Saskatchewan — in education and in health care, in rural and in 
urban, Mr. Speaker. And the hon. member can pick on farmers, 
or he can pick on business, or he can pick on public employees, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’ll say to him, our party is open, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s fully democratic, and I’ll compare the democracy in this 
country with any other democracy in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 
the Committee of Finance, and the 

amendment thereto moved by Mr. Lautermilch. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was speaking in the 
House the other day on a private members’ motion concerning 
the economy of this province, and we were touching upon, at that 
time, the amount of interest that this province is now paying on 
the public debt. And while the House is sorting itself out after 
question period, I just might review the main points of that 
argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is that over the last seven years since the Conservative 
Party was elected as the government of this province, we have 
managed to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I have a report here that I would 
like to table, and I missed it. I would like to ask leave of the 
House to table this report. Thank you. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — The report I would like to table is the report of 
the Ombudsman. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself into 
the Committee of Finance, and the amendment thereto moved by 
Mr. Lautermilch. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll back up and start 
again. I was saying the other day, and I want to repeat that I was 
making the point that, as is well known, under the stewardship of 
this wonderful government opposite we have managed to 
accumulate a public debt of $4 billion in the consolidated revenue 
of this province, and that this results in an annual interest 
payment that we now have to make, which according to the 
budget documents is in the order of $380 million a year. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, is in excess of $1 million per day, every day of the 
week, every week of the year; 365 days of the year at a million a 
day wouldn’t even cover it. 
 
And I was making the point the other day that what a pity that is, 
because think of how much we could do in this province if we 
had an extra million dollars a day at our disposal, an extra $380 
million a year. Think of the programs that we could launch. 
Think of the hunger that we resolve. Think of the fact that we 
could make food banks an entirely unnecessary thing in our 
society. Think of all of the child care and day care and all of the 
support programs that we could provide for the people in this 
province who need support. Think of the support that we could 
give to the agricultural community who badly need support in 
this time of drought and low international prices. 
 
And I asked myself after I concluded those remarks the other day, 
Mr. Speaker, how it was that we got into this mess. I mean, 
everybody in the province knows the mess   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

579 
 

that we’re in. Everybody knows that since this government took 
office in 1982, we have every year accumulated a deficit; that 
that deficit has increased over the years to the point where it’s 
now 4 billion. And I asked myself, how could that be? What went 
wrong? 
 
And so I went back over the books. I went back over the books, 
Mr. Speaker, and I looked at the numbers. And it’s to that subject 
that I want to address myself in the early part of my remarks 
today. 
 
What I did was compare 1981, the last full year that the NDP 
were in power, with this budget, with this budget this year. And 
I want to just compare, or tell the House what those numbers 
reveal, Mr. Speaker. They reveal that the revenue being taken in 
by this government is a full 70 per cent higher today than it was 
in 1981. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister of Education . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Was there a drought that year? 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — There was no drought that year. It was a good 
year, and in a good year the New Democratic Party government 
of the day took in revenues, Mr. Speaker, of $2.4 billion — 
$2,400,000,000. This year, according to the government’s own 
estimates, a drought year, a year with all the other problems that 
my friend from Weyburn . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe we’ve had enough 
interruptions during question period, and I’d like to ask the hon. 
members to simply allow the member to speak — allow the 
member to speak. Allow the member to speak and the debate will 
go just fine. 
 
Order, order. Order, order. If the member from Saskatoon South 
has something to say . . . Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The 
member from Saskatoon was giving his speech. One member, the 
member from Weyburn, was ranting and raving from his seat. I 
think it’s totally unfair that the Speaker would get up and refer to 
members when only one person was making a sound in the 
House. If it was happening from this side of the House, I’m sure 
you would have taken the opportunity to name the member, and 
I would just ask you to be fair in terms of who you name and who 
you don’t. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has raised an issue which is not a 
point of order. It is not well taken. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, thank you. I was 
making the point, Mr. Speaker, that 1981 was not a drought year; 
1981 didn’t have any of the problems that the member from 
Weyburn was speaking of while he was making his intervention 
from that side of the House. But 1989 is the year where we have 
all these problems, where our agricultural industry is in the dire 
straits that it’s in, where we have the highest unemployment 
levels that we’ve had in this province since I can remember, and 
I’ve been in this province for a long time. And in spite of that we 
find that this current budget, this current budget provides for 
government revenues which are 70 per cent higher than they were 
in 1981 — 70 per cent higher. Over 

$4 billion is being taken in in the year 1989-1990. 
 
And I looked at how that was broken down, Mr. Speaker, and 
these numbers are really worth considering. In 1981, the revenue 
coming into the government by way of provincial taxes was 
about $976 million. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, it is $1.993 
billion, an increase of over 100 per cent, more than double the 
amount being taken by the government on account of taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that tax load did not fall evenly among the people 
of this province. That tax load fell unevenly. That increase in tax 
load, for example, in individual income tax paid — the tax that 
you and I and all of our friends and neighbours pay — has 
increased this year, compared to 1981, by 121 per cent, more than 
double. 
 
(1445) 
 
Well more than double the amount is now being paid to the 
government by way of income tax than was paid in 1981. That’s 
us individuals. 
 
How, on the other hand, do our friends the corporations make out 
under that same measure? We find that their increase, that the 
increase in taxes, in income taxes paid by corporations has 
increased by 15 per cent — 15.7 per cent. Just to say those again, 
our individual income tax, we, as individuals, our taxes . . . total 
taxes paid have increased by 121 per cent; the taxes paid by 
corporations have increased by 15.7 per cent. 
 
And I go on, Mr. Speaker, to notice that the sales tax take, which 
is a direct pull from the government, from the consumers of this 
province, has increased by 67 per cent. In 1981 that total was 
$300 million. In 1989 that total will be over $500 million. And 
everywhere you look in these numbers which are included in the 
estimates for this year, you find that the tax take by the 
government has increased, and increased dramatically. 
 
And I was surprised to find that, Mr. Speaker, because whenever 
government members are questioned about how come it is that 
they’re not able to balance the books of this province, how come 
it is that we annually run a deficit, their answer is, well times are 
tough. You know, the farmers are having a tough time or the oil 
prices are down or the potash prices are down. Always there’s 
some excuse which would lead us to believe, which are designed 
to lead us to believe that it’s a problem in revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not a problem in revenue. In the last seven years 
this government has increased its revenue by a full 70 per cent 
— by a full 70 per cent. And in those circumstances there’s 
absolutely no excuse for running a deficit. 
 
Now I look through the other items. I note that in every category 
the revenue to this government is higher than it was in 1981. In 
receipts from government enterprises, we find a substantial 
increase — from $522 million to $760 million. 
 
We find an increase in receipts from other governments have 
increased very dramatically, Mr. Speaker. As our   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

580 
 

Finance critic, the member from Regina Centre, said the other 
day, this province is on welfare to the extent of $400 million. So 
that 400 million is included in the revenue increase that this 
government is taking, but it accounts for 400 million out of the 
total revenue increase of almost $2 billion. 
 
Now I look further, Mr. Speaker, at the question of who’s paying 
this extra revenue, and I look particularly at the oil industry. We 
on this side of the House believe — and the numbers certainly 
confirm — that the oil industry in this province has been granted 
large, large financial favours by this government. They have not 
been paying their share of the taxes that are needed to run this 
province. 
 
And the numbers that are in the budgetary documents point that 
out and point it out very clearly. We find in 1981 that the actual 
revenue coming into this province from the oil industry, on 
account of oil, was about $483 million. This year, Mr. Speaker, 
the estimate is $173 million. There’s $300 million less coming in 
this year than came in the year 1981. Now how can that be? 
 
Well, I say to myself, the price of oil is down, so is that an 
answer? I go to the numbers and I look more deeply, Mr. 
Speaker, and I find this: the value of oil sales in 1981 according, 
again, to government documents, the value of oil sales in the 
province was $821 million; in 1987, the value of oil sales is 
almost double that, 1.5 billion — from a little over 800 million 
to 1.5 billion. 
 
Now the price of oil certainly can’t explain those numbers. We 
find an almost doubling in the value of sales, and we find the 
volume of sales have increased. Here I have 1982 numbers of 80 
million cubic metres compared to 1987 figures of 120 million 
cubic metres, so it indicates that there has been about a 50 per 
cent increase in the volume of products sold, namely the volume 
of oil sold. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the weight of this increase, this 
massive increase in government revenue has not fallen equally 
upon all of the actors in Saskatchewan. It’s fallen very much 
heavily, very much more heavily, on some people than it has on 
others. 
 
At the same time, I look then at the question of expenditures, on 
what the government is doing with this money. And here, Mr. 
Speaker, lies the answer, here lies the reason why we have the 
deficit we have. In spite of the fact that government revenues 
have increased by more than 70 per cent, we still run these 
deficits because our expenditures are simply out of control. The 
expenditure for the 1981-82 year was about $2.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. This year it is expected to be $4.3 billion, an increase of 
over $2 billion, an increase, Mr. Speaker, of more than 88 per 
cent. Now if your revenues are going to increase by 70 per cent 
and your expenditures are going to increase by 88 per cent, 
you’re going to have a deficit. And that’s the long and the short 
of it. 
 
I ask myself: now how come we’re spending so much money? 
Where is it that we’re spending it? I mean, I go around my 
community of Saskatoon and I talk to a lot of people there. The 
people in the hospitals, they don’t think that they’re getting the 
benefit of all those increases in 

expenditures. They can’t see it there. I talk to the school teachers 
and they’re not aware of the fact that they’re getting any massive 
increase in money. I talk to the working people and they’re 
certainly not getting it. As I’ve said on previous occasions in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a lot of social welfare recipients in 
my constituency, and they’re certainly not getting the benefit of 
those increased expenditures. Where is the money going? 
 
Well I don’t have the answer to it. We on this side of the House 
just simply can’t imagine how any government could be so 
incompetent and so wasteful as to have got us into the position 
where we now have a $4 billion deficit in times when 
government revenues have increased by 70 per cent. 
 
Now I want to turn for the second part of my speech, Mr. 
Speaker, to the free trade agreement which is part of the critic 
responsibilities that I bear in this House. And I don’t want to 
rehash the arguments about the agreement because those were 
fully dealt with last year, during the whole year, and particularly 
during the election campaign. And the people of this province 
spoke very clearly and very eloquently on how they feel about 
the free trade agreement. They did that in the federal election and 
they did it in unmistakable terms. They mopped the floor, so to 
speak, with the Conservative candidates in 10 of the 14 seats. 
 
As I say, I don’t want to rehash the pros and cons of that 
agreement because, whether we like it or not, the agreement is 
signed and it’s in effect. What I want to focus on today is, what’s 
happening now? The fact of the signing of the agreement was just 
the beginning of, and locked us into, a process which is extremely 
important from the point of view of Canada, and extremely 
important from the point of view of Saskatchewan. 
 
What’s happening now under that agreement is vital to the 
interests of many producer groups in this province, as well as the 
future of us and our children and our province for generations. 
 
The Conservative government in Ottawa, with the full support of 
members opposite, got us into this agreement, and that agreement 
contains within it a lot of problems as we tried to enunciate to the 
members opposite, and as the people of this province recognized 
during the free trade discussions last year, including the election 
campaign. Everybody, perhaps with the exception of members 
opposite, sees the dangers and recognizes that you can’t just turn 
your back on the subject now and say, well, that’s all done; I 
don’t have to worry about trade any more; that’s all in place and 
I can now turn my attention to other issues. 
 
Fact is, there’s a lot of work remaining to be done under that 
agreement, and depending upon how well that work is done, 
depending upon how well our interests are protected, something 
may be salvaged from it. At least we can minimize the damage 
that the agreement will produce. And in the rare cases when the 
agreement can actually return advantages to Saskatchewan, we 
can maximize those advantages.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

581 
 

Mostly though, it’s a question of not being hurt, Mr. Speaker, or 
not being hurt any more badly than you can help. And that 
requires a lot of effort from both the federal government and the 
provincial governments, and especially the members of this 
government, when we come to Saskatchewan. 
 
The question is: who is looking out for the interests of 
Saskatchewan? You would expect . . . and the answer would 
normally be that it would be the government of the day. That is 
the government that should be looking out for the interests of 
Saskatchewan. And there are a lot of interests in Saskatchewan 
which I will demonstrate which need careful, careful attention, 
and a lot of help, and a lot of vigorous action on the part of this 
government. And we on this side of the House, and the people of 
Saskatchewan, look at the way in which this government is 
responding in the aftermath of the signing of the free trade 
agreement, and we don’t see any such vigorous action by this 
government. We don’t see any steps being taken or any 
statements being made or any public debate to try and ensure that 
our interests are protected. 
 
We see, on the other hand, a government that seems to be 
prepared to just let the chips fall where they may. They seem to 
be saying, there is the free trade agreement; it’s all signed, sealed, 
and delivered, and whatever happens after that is just going to 
happen. There’s a market out there. That market is always 
speaking, and that market will determine what events will be, and 
we’ll just simply go along with whatever happens. 
 
I think the situation in the brewing industry is an example of a 
situation where the government just simply is prepared to accept 
events, just accept events. You want American beer . . . the 
Americans want to import beer into Saskatchewan. Well, okay, 
bring in your American beer. You want to close down our 
breweries here. Okay, go ahead; close down our breweries. You 
want to bring in beer from other provinces. Go ahead; bring in 
beer from other provinces. You want to change to cans from 
bottles. Well go ahead and change from cans to bottles. 
 
We can’t do anything about that, says the government. We just 
sort of go along and ride the surf-board, ride the surf-board with 
no control over the waves and no control over the ocean, but 
simply go along with whatever happens. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong. If we do that in Saskatchewan, 
if we continue with this attitude of silent surrender, this attitude 
of: there’s nothing we can do about it; the forces are too great for 
us to contend with, too great for us to cope with, then we’re in 
for a lot of trouble under this free trade agreement, a lot of 
trouble. 
 
Now let me just refer to parts of the free trade agreement where 
things are happening and where we in Saskatchewan must be 
involved. 
 
The first are the working groups that are to be established 
pursuant to the chapter on agriculture, and that was chapter 7 of 
the free trade agreement. And under that chapter, Canada and the 
United States agreed to establish eight working groups. And they 
were concerned with the 

following, Mr. Speaker: animal health; plant health; seeds and 
fertilizers; meat and poultry inspection; dairy, fruit, vegetable 
and egg inspection; veterinary drugs and feeds; food, beverage 
and colour additives; pesticides; and packaging and labelling. 
 
And there are therefore eight working groups that are going to be 
constituted under this agreement, and the mandate of these 
working groups will be to address the question of technical, 
regulatory requirements and inspection procedures, these 
standards, the standards that apply to agricultural products. And 
the object is, Mr. Speaker, to harmonize, to harmonize the 
technical, regulatory requirements and procedures for the two 
countries. And harmonize doesn’t just mean to sort of bring them 
more or less in line with each other; harmonize is defined 
specifically by the free trade agreement as making identical. 
 
(1500) 
 
Now we in Canada have been very successful in a wide range of 
agricultural products. We’ve been very successful in exporting 
those products to the other countries of the world. One of the 
reasons why we’ve been so successful, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
have established and maintained the highest standards for those 
products in the world. We’re producing in this country and 
exporting to the consumers of this world, agricultural products of 
the very highest order. And the consumer nations know that, and 
they’re glad to purchase from Canada because they know when 
they do they have that guarantee of quality that goes with those 
legislated standards and those legislated requirements. 
 
The United States does not enjoy that position, Mr. Speaker. 
Almost entirely across the board on agricultural products, the 
American standards are lower, they are less stringent. And the 
countries of the world know that. The countries of the world 
know that as between American products and Canadian products, 
the Canadian products are a better buy in the long haul because 
the standards are higher and the requirements are higher. 
 
Now if we’re going to harmonize these two sets of standards — 
I’ve made this argument before in this House — who’s going to 
move towards whom? That’s been the danger with the 
harmonization provisions from my point of view, because it 
seemed to me that a nation one-tenth the size of the other 
contracting party is going to be under a lot of pressure to move 
its standards in the direction of the larger party. It’s hard to 
imagine the whole American agricultural industry tossing out its 
standards and adopting the Canadian standards. So they’re going 
to be working on us to bring our standards down to theirs. And 
those working groups are the groups that are concerned with that 
question. 
 
Now that was a long-winded explanation to make this point, Mr. 
Speaker, this point. Those working groups are vital to the future 
of the agricultural industry in this province, and those working 
groups are being set up now. And, Mr. Speaker, so far as I am 
aware, Saskatchewan is not being represented on any of those 
working groups. 
 
Furthermore, I believe it to be the case that Saskatchewan   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

582 
 

isn’t even being consulted about negotiating positions for the 
Canadian members of those working groups. So far as I am 
aware, the producer groups in this province are not being asked 
for their position on the positions to be taken by our 
representatives on these working groups. 
 
So the situation, Mr. Speaker, is that somewhere in Ottawa — 
somewhere in Ottawa, someone is appointing members to these 
working groups who will be meeting with their American 
counterparts and will be negotiating the question of technical 
standards and regulatory requirements as it relates to agricultural 
matters — and all this being done without Saskatchewan, one of 
the prime producers, having anything to say — not being 
consulted, not being represented. Silent Saskatchewan, silent 
surrender. You guys do whatever you like, whatever the market 
wants, that’s what we’ll go along with, and in the end we’ll all be 
happy and salute the flag and live happily ever after. 
 
Well that’s not how it works, Mr. Speaker, that’s not how it 
works. There’s a bunch of people down in the United States of 
America who are preparing for these negotiations, who are 
preparing their positions, who are consulting on a very broad 
basis, and who are going to go into those negotiations with very 
concrete, very difficult positions. And they’re going to be 
pressing us for everything that we can get. And I for one am not 
happy to send three or four bureaucrats from Ottawa into a room 
with a bunch of well prepared people like that and hope that 
they’re going to come out with anything that we in Saskatchewan 
can live with. I’m not confident at all. 
 
Now fortunately, or I hope fortunately, there are people around 
the country who recognize this. I’m looking now, Mr. Speaker, 
at a clipping from the Globe and Mail for December 12, 1988, 
and quoted in this article is Robert Thompson, who is the 
president of the Canadian Sugar Institute and the member of the 
team advising Ottawa on trade matters, and Mr. Thompson said: 
 

We could lose everything we have gained unless we get 
down to some hard bargaining. 
 

And when he said that he is talking about phase two of the 
negotiations, the matter of the downstream negotiations. 
 
Farlis Shammas of the Society of the Plastics Industry of Canada 
put it this way: 
 

We are concerned because the U.S. is gearing up its trade 
negotiating team, while in Ottawa, they are gearing down. 
 

Mr. Shammas said, and further said: 
 

The U.S. Department of Commerce sees this as the big part 
of the negotiations, while we have lost some of our top 
negotiators. 
 

And the article goes on to observe that Simon Reisman and 
Gordon Ritchie and several other key officials have moved on to 
other jobs, leaving junior negotiators to handle these free trade 
questions, and I and my party are not satisfied with that, and we 
urge this government to take immediate steps to ensure that 
Saskatchewan’s voice 

will be heard, and will be vigorously heard, in connection with 
the negotiation of these questions under chapter 7 of the free 
trade agreement. 
 
Further, quoting the article, the article says, and I quote: 
 

. . . industry officials say these are the details that could 
make or break the Canadian economy under free trade. 
 

Even though members opposite may not listen to the trade critic 
of the New Democratic Party, at least you could listen to the 
voices of industry who are blowing the same whistle, sounding 
the same alarm as we’re trying to raise in this House. 
 
There’s a second area of negotiations where we have at least as 
much at stake as we have under chapter 7, and that is the 
negotiations that are to take place over the next five to seven 
years on the subject of subsidies. Now members will remember 
the background for the enactment of article 1907, which deals 
with the question of further negotiations on subsidies. But I just 
want to review that in case anyone missed it while the free trade 
agreement was being negotiated. 
 
We went into these negotiations in the first place with the clear 
objective in mind that we were going to deal with the problem of 
countervailing duties. We were just tired, and we were more than 
a bit frightened by the way in which the Americans were using 
their power to levy countervailing duties against exports from 
Canada to the United States. And that was a big part of the 
impetus that led us to decide, that led our government, our federal 
government, to decide to go into the free trade negotiations. 
 
And our Prime Minister is on record again and again as saying 
that Canada needs an exemption from the American trade laws; 
that this is a bottom-line position, and without an exemption 
we’re not going to have an agreement. Well everybody knows 
we didn’t get an exemption. 
 
But not only didn’t we get an exemption, we didn’t even get an 
improvement in the American trade laws. And at the end of the 
day when the free trade agreement was all put to bed and signed, 
what we got was not an exemption, not an improvement, but a 
bland statement that the American trade laws continue to apply; 
the trade laws of both countries continue to apply. In other words, 
abject and total failure to realize our prime objective in going into 
those negotiations in the first place. And what we settled for in 
the end was article 1907. 
 
And article 1907 is the establishment of a working group. And 
the mandate of that working group, Mr. Speaker, is in the 
previous article, article 1906, which talks about the development 
of a substitute system of rules in both countries for anti-dumping 
and countervailing duties as applied to their bilateral trade. So 
that was the end result. We agreed to continue talking, to 
continue talking about subsidies, and to talk about them over five 
years. And if we couldn’t do it in five years, then we would get 
an extension of two years automatically. So we have seven years 
in which to negotiate this important question. And   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

583 
 

what’s going to be negotiated, Mr. Speaker, is what subsidies will 
be allowed and what subsidies will not be allowed. 
 
Now we in Canada, with this country of ours, this great huge 
country — small population, vast distances, small centres of 
population of which Regina is one, Saskatoon another, and 
smaller centres in Saskatchewan, widely spaced, huge 
transportation costs, difficulties in climate, and all of the other 
things that you’re aware of — we have had to, from the very 
beginning, establish a system of subsidies in order to help 
ourselves produce, develop, and make a living in this country. 
And this web of subsidies that is so much a part of the national 
character of this country is brought into question by this free 
trade agreement. 
 
We were not able to get anywhere on the subject during 
negotiations. That’s obvious. We couldn’t make the Americans 
budge one inch, so we finally concluded an agreement which 
said, with respect to subsidies, we’ll just continue to talk about 
this for the next seven years. 
 
In the meantime, we’ve dealt away all of our bargaining chips. 
We have given the Americans exactly what they wanted on 
energy; we’ve given them exactly what they wanted on foreign 
investment in the buy-up of Canadian businesses by American 
entrepreneurs; we’ve given them precisely what they wanted 
with respect to their rights in the service industries. We gave 
them provisions with respect to the service industry that every 
developed country in the world had rejected — every developed 
country in the world, and some that aren’t so developed. 
 
They took that package to Israel and said to Israel, will you accept 
these service provisions, and Israel said, no way. They took it to 
Mexico and said, will you enter into an agreement with us with 
respect to free trade and services, and Mexico said, no. And there 
are very cogent, valid reasons why any country in the world 
would say no to absurd provisions such as appears in the service 
chapter — except Canada. Canada said, sure, no problem, no 
problem. 
 
Anyway, my point is simply this, Mr. Speaker. We gave the 
Americans practically everything that they asked for, and we 
gave it to them to get an agreement which for us presents precious 
little if any advantage, and a lot of disadvantages, and we leave 
ourself for the next seven years having to negotiate the vital 
question of subsidies without any bargaining chips left to play. 
 
We don’t have anything more to offer the Americans. We’ve 
already given them everything they asked for, and we have 
nothing more to give them. And so, when we go to them and say, 
look, we’ve got problems developing industries in some of the 
less populated provinces in Canada, we have trouble establishing 
industries in Prince Edward Island, and we have trouble 
establishing industries in Manitoba and Saskatchewan, so we 
have to pay a . . . we want to be able to pay grants and pay 
incentives to those industries to locate out there — that’s a 
familiar subject, isn’t it, Mr. Speaker? That’s something that 
we’ve been calling regional development grants or regional 
development incentives of one kind or another, and they’ve been 
in existence for Canada for as long as I 

can remember. 
 
Well those subsidies will be called directly into question under 
this article 1906. That’s what article 1906 is about — what 
subsidies will be allowed and what won’t be allowed. So all of 
which is to say Canada is establishing, with the United States, a 
working group to develop more effective rules and disciplines 
concerning the use of government subsidies. Vital question. 
 
But do we in Saskatchewan get consulted about that subject? Do 
we get representation on a working group? And we are, for the 
most part, Mr. Speaker, for the most part of our history, a 
disadvantaged province. Subsidies like this are extremely 
important to us. 
 
But we’re not represented on that working group. We’re not 
being consulted about the composition of that group. So far as I 
or anybody else outside government is aware, Saskatchewan isn’t 
even being consulted about what position should be taken. In 
fact, according to the article that I just referred you to in the 
Globe and Mail, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s not even gearing up for 
these negotiations. The Americans are busy down there, working 
and preparing and developing their positions and their arguments 
and consulting with their industry and their producer groups, and 
Canada’s not even gearing up for it. 
 
Well this, Mr. Speaker, is not acceptable to any person who 
thinks about it at all. This is something that we just have to get 
off our butts about and get with. These are important questions 
that will not only be important this year and next year, but will 
continue to be important for this country for ever. This agreement 
is going to be in place for a very long time — I suspect, a very, 
very long time. Bad as it is, it’s almost impossible to get out of. 
 
(1515) 
 
So the agreements we make with respect to subsidies under this 
working group are agreements that we’re going to have to live 
with for ever, so we better get it right. And in order to get it right 
we better get working on it. And in order to get working on it we 
better have structured a working group that fairly represents the 
vital interests of this country and that will fairly represent the 
vital interests of this province, and make sure that those 
representatives are at least as well prepared as their American 
counterparts, and will go in there and make the best possible deal 
they can. 
 
I’m worried, Mr. Speaker, as I say, because our people have no 
bargaining chips left as far as I’m aware. So I don’t know what 
they’ve got to trade with. But if they don’t come back to us with 
a good deal with respect to the question of subsidies, then this 
agreement is really going to hurt, and it’s going to hurt 
Saskatchewan as much as it hurts any part of this country. 
 
Now during the free trade debate, during the long arguments that 
took place about that agreement throughout the whole of last year 
and especially during the election campaign, there was a great 
deal said about how the free trade agreement would impact upon 
the social programs of this country. And my party made the   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

584 
 

point, and made it over and over again, that this agreement 
constituted a threat to our social programs. And there are many 
social programs offered in this country, not the least of which is 
our medical care plan, our hospital insurance, and on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. And we tried to make the point that this free trade 
agreement constituted a threat to those social programs. 
 
Now we all heard the negative advertising that came from the 
federal Progressive Conservative Party when those accusations 
were made. They called people who said those sort of things, 
liars. They suggested that anybody who would say that social 
programs were threatened under this agreement, lied. Well that’s 
just not so, Mr. Speaker. We now know for certain that that is not 
so. 
 
The Canadian Manufacturers Association, for one, has made that 
perfectly plain. The president of the Canadian Manufacturers 
Association is a man by the name of Laurent Thibault. And 
Laurent Thibault was quoted by our federal leader, Mr. 
Broadbent, during the election campaign as having warned that 
Canadian social programs would have to be cut to match U.S. 
social programs. And Mr. Thibault came back and said, that’s not 
fair; I said that eight years ago; you shouldn’t be using something 
I said eight years ago against me now as far as this free trade 
agreement is concerned. 
 
Well here we are just after the ink on the free trade agreement is 
dry, or barely dry, we have Mr. Thibault, presenting on behalf of 
the Canadian Manufacturers Association, a brief to Michael 
Wilson, the federal Finance minister. And Mr. Thibault says in 
his brief the following. He says: 
 

Because 60 per cent of program spending is tied up in 
statutory programs, with most of this on social programs, 
this is the spending area that must be reduced. 
 

Now that’s what Mr. Thibault said — not eight years ago, not in 
1981, but now, in 1989. That’s what he says to the federal 
government, and that’s precisely what we were trying to warn the 
people of Canada about. Put this free trade agreement into effect 
and you’ll have industry just hammering at your door; 
hammering at your door, insisting that they’ve got to play on a 
level playing field; hammering at your door, saying, we in 
Saskatchewan or we in Canada can’t afford the cost of these high 
social programs because our competitor in the United States 
doesn’t have to pay those kind of costs. So you have to make us 
competitive by reducing our costs here, and that has to put 
pressure on our social programs. And Mr. Thibault has confirmed 
that that’s exactly what it does; that that’s exactly what it does. 
 
I raise that point now because this government as well as all 
governments in Canada are going to be subject to that same kind 
of pressure. And when these groups come to you asking that their 
costs be cut, that their costs be cut, they will have a copy of this 
free trade agreement in their hand. And if you’re loyal to your 
statements during the federal election campaign — that is, if the 
federal government is loyal, and if the members opposite agree 
with the position taken by the federal Conservative Party, they 
will say to those industry groups: get out of here; 

don’t talk to us about reducing the costs of social programs as a 
result of this free trade agreement; don’t talk to us about 
decreasing those costs so we can compete with the United States. 
You said you wouldn’t. We said you wouldn’t. Now don’t do it. 
 
We on this side of the House are not naive on these questions. 
We know that this position of the Canadian Manufacturers’ 
Association is not a unique position taken by one organization. 
It’s a position taken by a lot of large business organizations in 
this country, and we know that those large business organizations 
have a lot of clout with the Conservative Party in Ottawa, as it 
has with the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan. And we watch 
in fear as those meetings take place for what it may mean to the 
people of this province and the people of this country and the 
effect that it will almost inevitably have upon our social 
programs. But we’ll be watching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, as far as I am aware, this government has assigned no 
one the responsibility of keeping track of what’s happening as a 
result of that agreement. As far as I am aware, there is no one on 
the government side who is monitoring what is taking place. And 
because of that, the Leader of the Opposition has set up the free 
trade monitoring committee, Mr. Speaker — a free trade 
monitoring committee — which reports to him and to me on 
behalf of the caucus on this side of the House on these 
developments. 
 
And we will continue to watch, and we will continue to 
encourage this committee to continue to work to keep track of 
just what’s happening in this province and how the people of this 
province are being impacted by this agreement. We’ll continue 
to raise the warning flags; we’ll continue to bring to the attention 
of the government and the public what’s happening and what has 
to change. 
 
Not only are social programs threatened, Mr. Speaker, but we all 
know now, even members opposite must know, the threat that 
this agreement poses to our marketing boards. We’ve seen 
countless statements coming up from the United States 
complaining about the Canadian Wheat Board and complaining 
about other marketing agencies in the climate of the free trade 
agreement, in the context of the free trade agreement. And those 
complaints won’t go away. 
 
And the Americans are going to be coming at us under the 
subsidies question, and every other way they can, for us to 
dismantle these programs. And, Mr. Speaker, we are not 
reassured by what we have seen today. We don’t see the members 
opposite or their counterparts in Ottawa standing up firmly for 
the marketing boards of this country. 
 
What we see is exactly to the contrary. We see the federal wheat 
board minister taking oats away from the Canadian Wheat Board. 
And that’s alarming, not only to us but to all the farmers in 
western Canada. Everybody cares a lot. And the votes that have 
been taken, that all members in this House know about, clearly 
demonstrate that farmers do not want the Canadian Wheat Board 
weakened. And the federal government and our friends opposite 
are going to have to take that into account and go to bat for the 
farmers of this province, or else they’re going to be   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

585 
 

answering for it, and answering for it in spades. 
 
There’s a lot of things happened with respect to the industry in 
this country as a result of the agreement. I’ve got a long list of 
them here which I’m going to be referring to in a subsequent 
speech on a subsequent subject. But Gillette closes its plants in 
Canada at a cost of 590 jobs; Pittsburgh Paint and Glass closed 
its plant in Ontario at a loss of 139 jobs; and Agnew group closes 
a footwear plant in Quebec with 50 jobs; and Northern Telecom 
closes two plants in Canada, phasing out 875 jobs while it is 
going to expand its plant in North Carolina. And on and on it 
goes, Mr. Speaker. These things are happening. 
 
And the federal government sets up a committee on adjustment 
to consider that and to consider what’s going to be done to help 
these workers who are displaced as a direct result of this free 
trade agreement. And the committee comes back to the federal 
government and says nothing, and the federal government is 
pleased to receive the report. The press reports describe them as 
happy and smiling broadly. 
 
Well we’re not smiling, Mr. Speaker, and the workers of this 
country are not smiling, and the people of this country are not 
smiling, because the whole thrust of the federal government’s 
statements on these subjects during the election campaign, and 
before the election campaign, was that these people who were 
displaced as a result of the free trade agreement were going to be 
taken care of, and that this adjustment committee would be 
reporting to the government on just how they should be helped. 
 
And this committee now comes back and says to the government, 
you don’t have to do anything; you don’t have to do a thing; the 
situation doesn’t require anything further. Now that is shocking 
and dismaying. Instead we find this committee moving entirely 
outside its mandate and saying things like: with respect to the 
sale of domestic wheat no longer controlled by the wheat board, 
that price should be set on the basis of the opening prices on the 
grain exchange in Minneapolis or Chicago or some place like 
that. That’s what de Grandpré and this commission concerned 
itself with. 
 
And that domestic price program deserves a mention before I sit 
down, Mr. Speaker, and it is simply this, that we have maintained 
for some time in this country a two-price system where we said 
that no matter what the international price was, the domestic 
price for our wheat — and other, but our wheat is what I want to 
talk about — is going to be at a higher level. Canadian millers 
are going to have to pay a higher price for the wheat that they use 
in their flour mills. 
 
And that price returned a large amount . . . an extra amount of 
money to the producers of this country. It was $280 million 
during the last full year in which the plant was in operation . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . My friend across the way says 
Ontario, and I want to mention that. Ontario did get a benefit 
from that, and that benefit was increasing. And during that last 
full year, that benefit was 15 per cent. It was approximately 15 
per cent. The benefit to western Canada was 85 per cent.

And I mention that again because the Premier, when he was 
answering the question the other day, implied that 65 per cent of 
the benefit had gone to Ontario, and that’s not correct. And I 
would urge the member opposite to just look up that number and 
satisfy himself that I am correct when I say that 85 per cent of 
that benefit came to western Canada, and that benefit was $280 
million. 
 
And the answer we got at the time was, well we’ll take care of 
that in the adjustments; we’ll take care of that after the free trade 
agreement is in effect by providing for an adjustment period. And 
indeed, the first year . . . or there was a provision made for that 
$280 million, as I understand things. But now, according to the 
de Grandpré report on adjustments, there is to be no such 
payment being made. 
 
And we raised that question. We asked the Premier of this 
province whether that payment would continue year after year, 
and he ducked the question — he ducked the question. But now 
it’s perfectly clear what the answer was, and he may well have 
known it at the time that that payment would not be continued, 
that that benefit of $280 million which disappears under the free 
trade agreement is gone, and it’s gone for ever. And the farmers 
of this country and this province are that much poorer as a result, 
and that is inexcusable, a betrayal indeed. That is totally 
inexcusable. 
 
And so I want to conclude with this question, Mr. Speaker, that 
I’ve asked before and that I want to repeat: who is it who is 
standing up for Saskatchewan? Who is standing up for 
Saskatchewan? Who is standing up for the producers of this 
province? 
 
In agriculture and in industry, who is going to make sure that this 
free trade agreement, as it is being implemented, is going to come 
out in a way that will be favourable to Saskatchewan producers? 
Who’s doing that? It is certainly not the members opposite. 
They’ve just turned their back on the agreement and said, well 
that’s done now; that’s done, we don’t have to worry about that 
any more, and they’ll just take whatever comes down the pike. 
Well that’s not good enough. 
 
There are vital interests here that have to be protected and 
advanced and advocated. If we’re going to salvage anything from 
the wreckage of this agreement, it is only going to be because of 
our vigilance, because of our efforts, because of our strength, and 
because we take this seriously as an obligation to protect these 
people in this generation and for generations afterwards. 
 
(1530) 
 
We find instead that the government is not represented on these 
working groups. They’re not even consulted about the 
representation on these working groups, and as far as I can tell 
they are taking no interest in the work of these groups. We find 
at the same time, report after report of standards being modified, 
standards being adjusted, inspections being reduced, inspections 
being changed — all kinds of things happening to our regulatory 
system and not a word from this government, and not a word 
from the Canadian government.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

586 
 

We have the feeling, Mr. Speaker, that in the political 
environment of this country, it is our party, and our party alone, 
who is standing up for the interests of the people of this country, 
and in this province for the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan so far as this agreement is concerned. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I once again rise to speak in this House, and I join 
with my members in endorsing this great budget. 
 
As an MLA for Arm River I have now, Mr. Speaker, been here 
. . . This is my 11th budget, my 11th year as representing Arm 
River as their MLA. I have debated in four budgets when I was 
in opposition, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, this budget is one 
of the best budgets and the most well put together budget I’ve 
ever seen. 
 
And I know the members across agree with me because, Mr. 
Speaker, I have noticed and watched very carefully these last few 
days that the members opposite say very little about the budget. 
They talk about everything else except the budget, Mr. Speaker, 
so that means that they’re frightened to hit it face on. 
 
The member just opposite just spoke just now talked about 
almost everything except the budget. He got on about almost 
every topic except what I heard in the budget. But I assure you, 
Mr. Speaker, that I will be talking mostly about the budget. 
 
As the member for Arm River, I wish to commend the Premier 
and the Minister of Finance for bringing this budget down. As 
one who has faith and confidence in the future of Saskatchewan, 
I am convinced that the ’89 budget put into place fiscal and 
economic policy that will enhance the very future of 
Saskatchewan as we head into the 1990s and beyond. 
 
This is a free enterprise budget, Mr. Speaker, a budget that says 
we can build Saskatchewan through economic diversification, 
investment, small business, farming, and community 
co-operation. Over 10 years ago I entered public life on being 
elected an MLA for Arm River. At that time I did so because of 
my personal belief that Saskatchewan was not living up to its 
potential under the NDP. 
 
The pioneer families that homesteaded Saskatchewan in years 
gone by came here with a vision to build a great province on the 
Prairies. In the earlier years, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan thrived 
because of our pioneers, because our pioneers were builders. 
 
Then in 1944, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan elected the first 
socialist government in North America. A great deal of that 
socialist victory in 1984 was because of the personal popularity 
of Tommy Douglas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, right from day one, the total objective of the 
CCF was socialism. They wanted to turn Saskatchewan into a 
model socialist state. As a result, 

they set up a whole lot of government-owned companies. Let me 
give you some examples, Mr. Speaker: a shoe factory, a tannery, 
a wooden mill, a paint-spraying company, a box factory, a brick 
plant, a fish filleting operation. And all of these 
government-owned, government-operated companies, they all 
had one common fate. 
 
First of all, which is very important, Mr. Speaker, first of all, 
none of them made any profit. Secondly, all of them cost the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan hundreds and hundreds of thousands 
of dollars. And finally, Mr. Speaker, they all went under and no 
longer exist. 
 
All of this that I’ve just said can be found in Robert Tyre’s book, 
Douglas in Saskatchewan. The members opposite wouldn’t even 
want me to . . . don’t want to hear the word, Douglas in 
Saskatchewan. That was a legacy of the first socialist government 
in North America — state-run companies that did not work and 
cost the taxpayers a lot of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of this relates to the budget currently before the 
legislature, because I wish to draw a comparison between the 
economic policy of the current PC government and the economic 
failures of the socialist NDP. As far back as the 1940s, the 
socialist thinkers wanted state-owned operations in 
Saskatchewan. And even when they failed, they set up new ones 
to take their place. 
 
Then on the night of May 20, 1957 at Mossbank, Saskatchewan, 
at Mossbank, Saskatchewan, Tommy Douglas had a public 
debate with Ross Thatcher. It was one of the most historic 
debates in Canadian political history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that great debate in Mossbank on the subject of 
Crown corporations, Ross Thatcher clearly defeated Tommy 
Douglas, and that was the end, Mr. Speaker, of Tommy Douglas 
as an MLA and of premier in this province. He would not, Mr. 
Speaker, after he was defeated by Ross Thatcher on debating 
what Saskatchewan people wanted, and they didn’t want the 
eight Crown corporations that he put together, he didn’t even run 
again, Mr. Speaker, as an MLA or a premier. He stepped down, 
and the only premier that I’ve ever known to have the position of 
premier was Woodrow Lloyd, and he accepted and then was 
defeated in 1964. 
 
The people heard Ross Thatcher very clearly, Mr. Speaker, when 
he spoke about the Crown corporations. Exactly the same as 
what’s happening today. The people are listening to our 
government talking about their Crown corporations, their family 
of Crown corporations that was put together so they had state 
ownership and control. Mr. Speaker, this day has come to an end. 
 
In that debate, Mr. Speaker, Ross Thatcher pointed out that from 
day one in 1944 the socialists wanted to drive private enterprise 
out of the province. Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what they want 
to do today. They still want to own and control. They never forget 
forget, Mr. Speaker, about their manifesto, their Regina 
Manifesto in 1935. They’ll never get away from that; they’ll 
never learn.  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

587 
 

The CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) figured that 
through Crown corporations and government-owned business 
they could raise the revenue to develop the provincial economy. 
That was their philosophy, Mr. Speaker, but it didn’t work. 
 
From 1944 to 1957 they set up over 19 Crown corporations with 
over $175 million in public money invested. 
 
The members opposite are a little worried that I’m not talking 
about the budget. If privatization is not in this budget and Crown 
corporations isn’t a debate, I don’t know what is, Mr. Speaker. 
They are afraid to debate this — stand up and debate this on a 
proper manner. They just come in the back door and talk. So they 
can heckle me all they want and be noisy, as they have been for 
the whole year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have been in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been here for 11 
years and I’m a person that does not heckle from my seat. I have 
never done it, and I don’t intend to do it, so I ask respect from the 
members opposite to let me read my speech and say what I have 
to say . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re not supposed to read it. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — You bet I’m going to read my speech, 
because I’ve got some very important . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These corporations did not operate efficiently. They cost the 
taxpayers money and the net result was failure. The only Crowns 
that were of a benefit to the Saskatchewan people were the 
service utilities like the power corporation and SaskTel. 
 
The result of the Mossbank debate was that Saskatchewan people 
came to realize that state control, state ownership, was not the 
way to build the Saskatchewan economy. After having been . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You said you were going to talk about the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t let them bother me, 
because it doesn’t, but it just makes me feel . . . it makes me feel 
good when they heckle over there, because I watch many people 
speak, and when I come to speak it seems to bother them, so that 
really makes me feel good. I must be hitting the heart and soul of 
what they don’t want to hear. 
 
After having been defeated . . . after the NDP and the CCF were 
defeated in 1964, the NDP did not learn from the Mossbank 
debate, nor from the defeat at the polls. From 1971 to 1982, the 
NDP built the family of Crown corporations — state ownership 
of farms. The family of Crown corporations was the modern day 
socialist answer to the failed ventures of the past, like the box 
factory and the shoe factory and the other doomed ventures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the final months of the Allan Blakeney 

NDP government, the cabinet approved a plan to change the 
whole direction of Crown corporations in Saskatchewan. 
 
I wish to draw the attention of this Assembly to the minutes of 
the Crown investments corporation meeting of January, 1982. 
This has been mentioned before in this House, but I’m going to 
— every time I get a chance, I’m going to remind whoever’s 
listening, the members, the television audience, that these people 
are hypocrites, Mr. Speaker. They were going to do in 1982 as 
what we are doing today, and they stand up and go against it. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they will suffer for this here hypocritical 
turnaround. 
 
The NDP was in power. Members like the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone, the member for Regina North East, the member for 
Saskatoon South — they were all cabinet ministers in the NDP 
government at that time. So they had their plan. Many of them 
are back here today, and against what we were doing, what they 
wanted to do then. The NDP secretly drew up a plan to allow 
Saskatchewan people to participate in the ownership of the 
Crowns. The cabinet of Premier Allan Blakeney approved it. 
 
Now today, some seven years later, the NDP has done an about 
face and they oppose the public participation programs of this 
government. In the NDP plan, they had put together a program 
as a means of selling Crown corporation shares to individuals and 
private companies. Now members like the member for Regina 
Rosemont and other NDP opposition MLAs speak loudly against 
such measures. 
 
I wish to point out, Mr. Speaker, that public participation is 
something that is happening around the world. Socialist 
governments in New Zealand, Australia, Sweden, and France are 
all working hard to loosen government control. All of these 
governments have public participation. 
 
I have told constituents in Arm River, and I will repeat it in this 
legislature, the Progressive Conservative government is not 
against Crown corporations. What we are against is state control 
and ownership. Utility corporations that serve the public are vital 
to our province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Regina Elphinstone is thinking we’re privatizing SaskPower. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You are. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — The member from Elphinstone doesn’t even 
know what he’s talking about, because if he can tell me and show 
me and show the public that we’re privatizing SaskPower, forget 
it. He’s in dream land. 
 
The history books will show that it was a Conservative 
government that set up the first Crown corporation utility in 
Canadian history when Ontario Hydro was established. They 
think that only them like Crown corporations. We like Crown 
corporations if they’re in their proper perspective and are of a 
value to the people of the province. Not state ownership. It was a 
national . . .  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

588 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a national 
Conservative government that first established the Canadian 
Wheat Board. Now I’ve sit here, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve watched 
very carefully question period here this last . . . since we brought 
the House in, and they stand up here, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and condemning this government that we’re not 
listening to farmers about taking oats out of the wheat board. 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, if anyone knows what farmers 
are thinking out there any better than the member from Arm 
River, just tell me who it is, because I’ll challenge any one of 
them. I have yet — yet — to have one individual even contact 
me — not one. These people over here, the only members that 
. . . the only people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that are 
contacting the NDP, the members opposite, are the socialists 
from Regina that doesn’t know oats from wheat. 
 
Public participation is by means by which we can build and 
diversify our province so that all Saskatchewan people can 
benefit directly. Mr. Speaker, long before the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) or NDP ever thought of Crown 
corporations, it was the Conservative governments in this nation 
who were advancing positive economic ideas like Crown 
corporations as a part to build a society. 
 
(1545) 
 
The NDP, on the other hand, saw land bank, the uranium mines, 
potash mines as a way of state ownership and a control of the 
economy. That is not what the people of Arm River nor the 
people of Saskatchewan, that is not what they want. They told 
these people, they told exactly . . . The people spoke in 1982 and 
1986, and they will once again speak in 1990, and they will tell 
them the same thing as we’re saying today. 
 
In 1982, and again in ’86, the voters rejected you people and you 
know they’re going to reject you again. In electing a new 
government in 1982, Saskatchewan voters said they wanted a 
change in economic conditions and that is exactly what we gave 
them, Mr. Speaker. That is what we gave them, and that’s why 
they elected us again. And that is also why, Mr. Speaker, that 
they elected the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. I spent 
three weeks down there working with the members opposite, 
watching them day by day telling their story about the medicare 
. . . mediscare programs, about all the farm programs, but they 
never once heard any policy from the members opposite. 
 
Well I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, when people like myself and 
my colleagues around me here went door to door and told the 
truth and talked about honesty and what the future of this 
province is going to be, they supported and brought in . . . they 
sent a message in all right, Mr. Speaker. They sent in the new 
member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and he’s going to make a 
good member, and I’m glad to have him here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Legislative Secretary for SaskTel, I wish to 
point out the success of SaskTel bonds. Over one 

hundred million has been invested by the Saskatchewan people 
in TeleBonds. Public participation is working. It is creating 
employee ownership of previously government-owned 
corporations. It has meant that over 600 people and new 
investments has been generated into the Saskatchewan economy; 
nearly 3,000 new jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Naturally, they’re trying to make a noise from 
their seats over there because they don’t like me telling them the 
facts. And yet the NDP oppose what we’re doing here. They have 
not learned from their failures from the 1940s. They haven’t 
learnt. You haven’t learned from your socialist thinking from the 
1940s, the lessons of the Mossbank debate. You haven’t learnt, 
the defeats of 1982, the defeats of the 1982 election and the 1986 
election and the by-election. You haven’t learnt, and so help me, 
I don’t think you ever will. And we’ll be here for a long, long 
time if you keep on the kind of thinking and the kind of actions 
that I hear and watch here every day. 
 
Public participation is good for the future of Saskatchewan, and 
reasonable, clear-thinking voters know it. Mr. Speaker, in my 
remarks I have made reference to the recent by-election of 
Assiniboia. The Leader of the Opposition in the NDP told the 
voters in speeches, radio ads, newspapers ads, and their literature: 
send the Tories a message, send them a message. The good voters 
of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg did, and it’s mostly — and why am I 
repeating this, Mr. Speaker — because it was mostly because of 
the mediscare tactics that they tried to use there, absolute . . . 
false words at the door. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I use the 
words false, false statements at the door. 
 
The Leader of the NDP, when he sent that letter out, when he sent 
that letter out to Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, I never 
had such smooth sailing at the doors when I was campaigning in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg after that. People would show me this 
and they said, I can’t believe that the Leader of the Opposition, 
who we thought we had respect in, would do such a thing as this, 
put absolutely falsehoods in a pamphlet, and sign it, and send it 
out door to door. 
 
I can go anywhere in the constituency of Arm River, in any home, 
in any farmyard, in any cafe, any place I want to go, Mr. Speaker, 
and be proud to talk about the health care budget. So I want to 
say a few words about the health care in the budget. We all know 
the health care failures of the NDP. The fact that Justice Emmett 
Hall wrote a medicare report when the NDP were in office that 
showed them Saskatchewan health care was the third worst in 
Canada — the third worst, Mr. Speaker, in all Canada. 
 
What the NDP have done, Mr. Speaker . . . I’ve watched it very 
carefully since 1978 — we almost won that election in ’78 — 
until the medicare scare come out, that if you vote Progressive 
Conservative you will lose your health care. That’s what I’ve 
watched, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then by 1982 the people found out that maybe we   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

589 
 

better not believe these NDP and try a Progressive Conservative 
government, which they did. And they found out, Mr. Speaker, 
they found out what the problem really is. They found out that 
they were so busy spending money on Crown corporations and 
control that they were not spending money on health care . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member from Saskatoon South is 
the one that says we don’t need any more. We put a moratorium 
on them. 
 
I’ve told the people from Arm River now, since 1981, since the 
member said that, I’ve told them, and they believe me, that he’s 
the one that put the moratorium on nursing homes, and they 
believe me. If he wants to go in and try to prove otherwise, I 
challenge him, Mr. Speaker. And then the people . . . the member 
for Saskatoon Riversdale, who told the national conference that 
he is against the new hospital construction . . . now that’s quite a 
statement for the Leader of the Opposition to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the people in my 
constituency of Arm River, should also know the facts about the 
PC health care record so they can compare it. 
 
Health care spending in the 1989 budget is over $1.4 billion. 
Since the PC government came into office, health care spending 
is at its highest levels of any time in the entire history of 
Saskatchewan since 1905 — higher than the CCF, the Liberals, 
or the NDP. Health care is the number one priority of this 
government. With a budget of over 1.4 billion for health care, 
that works out to nearly $1,400 a person in Saskatchewan, 
162,000 per hour or 3.69 million per day. Under the NDP it was 
84,500 per day in 1981-82, or 2 million per day. In actual fact, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a 91 per cent increase in health care spending 
by the PC government over the NDP administration. 
 
I would like to put on the record some of the health care 
achievements in the riding of Arm River, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud of some of the achievements we’ve had there. Since 1982 
I see an addition to the Outlook Hospital — renovations and 
additions. There was a 12-bed addition to the nursing care facility 
in Outlook. There was a 12-bed nursing care facility addition to 
the Davidson nursing home. There was a renovation to the 
hospital. There was an enriched housing built in the town of 
Craik, and there’s going to be an integrated facility, a health 
facility I see in the budget this year, for a $3.2 million health 
facility in Craik this year. 
 
Mr.Speaker, I’m proud to be able to help bring this to the people 
of Arm River. Also I see in the budget, Mr. Speaker, where 
Imperial is in for 1989-90, for an integrated facility. So I think 
the people from Arm River when talking about health care will 
take a look at their member, that I have done the best that I could 
do to bring them results, to show them that we care and want to 
improve health care. Facts are facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — One of the most important priorities of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, is agriculture. Let’s just talk 

about agriculture for a minute. We’ll even get to the drought 
payment that the member from Elphinstone is so worried about; 
I’ll maybe even explain to him how it might work. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Might work is right. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Well I use the word might, Mr. Speaker, 
because he might not understand it. 
 
I happen to be a farmer who was raised on a farm, and I love to 
be with farmers. I know what it takes, Mr. Speaker, to run a farm. 
I know what it’s all about. I know what the costs are, and farmers 
know that I understand, and that’s why I relate well to farmers 
and they relate to me. 
 
There isn’t a day goes by, there isn’t a day goes by, Mr. Speaker, 
where I do not have a farmer talking to me — not a day, including 
Saturday or Sunday or perhaps maybe even Christmas Day. 
 
Arm River is the heartland of Saskatchewan, and we know 
agriculture is the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the problems caused by the drought, by 
the international grain wars, by economic forces beyond our 
control. That is why the voters of Arm River have trust and 
confidence in a government that knows and understands rural 
Saskatchewan. I am proud of our record. I am proud, Mr. 
Speaker, in our record in protecting farmers. As a rural PC MLA 
I have worked closely with our Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, in bringing about programs for farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been at the forefront in backing farmers 
and protecting farm families. Previous budgets of this PC 
government have protected farmers, and this budget does exactly 
the same. Let’s just name some of them, Mr. Speaker. The 
livestock cash advance, interest free. They’re the ones that sit 
here and say, what are you going to do about the escalating 
interest. Well they did nothing in nineteen . . . I watched them. I 
sat here from ’78 to ’82 and watched farmers go like this with 20 
and 21 per cent interest. But our government didn’t do it that way, 
Mr. Speaker. We said we would protect you against the high 
inflation and interest rates, and we did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another one is the agriculture development fund, the agriculture 
development fund of $200 million. The production loan program 
put $1.2 billion out in Saskatchewan to help the economy. 
Business men got this money; it moves throughout this here 
province and helped save the whole province in the year of 
1985-86. The feeder association loan guarantee, Mr. Speaker; 
The Farm Land Security Act to help protect farmers in trouble; 
the farmers oil royalty refund; special grains program; 
counselling assistance for farmers; rural service centre program 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think the farmer from Quill Lake 
needs some counselling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Also The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act also protecting farmers, the 
1988 drought assistance programs. 
 
I hear many people, especially the opposition members, 
condemning the drought program, the federal drought   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

590 
 

program. They stand up in the House here and they go after our 
Premier and said it’s a broken promise. They said, Mr. Speaker, 
to the Premier, you as Premier of this province stood up and said 
that there will be $45 an acre and all they’re getting is a measly 
$12 an acre and a seven, or nothing. This is what the members 
over there are saying. 
 
Well I want to inform you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when July 
comes along these people that have said that are going to look 
very foolish, very, very foolish. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you going to resign, Gerry? 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — The member from Regina Elphinstone, 
maybe I should inform him, maybe a little bit of facts about the 
drought program. There has been no broken promises. I will take 
you back to the press release of November 8, 1988. I will take 
him back to the press release pertaining to the drought payment, 
that there would be $450-some million to Saskatchewan, plus 
close to a billion dollars for the five provinces, but almost a half 
a billion dollars for Saskatchewan. They said there would be an 
interim payment in the hands of the farmers prior to seeding, and 
then the remainder would be in the 1988-89 crop year which is 
the 31st of July. 
 
I think that the members opposite should kind of go to the post 
office and take a look at their cheques in July, plus the members 
can also go out and watch their farmers pick up the promised 
interim payment of seven and $12 an acre for some cash input to 
help get their crop in. 
 
If I was in an area, Mr. Speaker, where I would get $7 . . . because 
I’m going to tell the members opposite and anybody that’s 
interested in listening, how this program works. 
 
There’s a formula put together, how to pay out the drought 
program. And it’s a good formula. And I will say that every 
organization, including the farmers’ union, the Sask Wheat Pool, 
the stock growers, the flax growers, and other groups . . . even 
political parties were involved in this. And when this here 
formula was adopted, every last one of them, including the 
Liberals, the NDP, the Reform Party, said it’s a good formula, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we like it, but it’s not enough money. 
Of course that’s what they had to say. 
 
(1600) 
 
But there’s no broken promise, because how the formula works, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll just take a moment and say very clearly 
so the listeners, the farming people out there that want to know, 
because I’ll tell them the facts, that what the formula is, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is you take the crop insurance figures for the 
last 15 years and that’s your average. The average in this 
province is J land, pertaining to crop insurance, which is 25.6 
bushels to the acre. You take 15 per cent of that figure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and you times it by $4.35 a bushel, which gives 
the average land in this province of Saskatchewan, of which is J 
land, 92 to $97 per acre. Now between the 92 and the $97 an acre 
is what each farmer is going to receive, including what crop he 
harvested, what crop insurance he received, and the balance of 
the payment.

Now it’s such a simple formula, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they 
couldn’t figure it out . . . you see, as soon as I got into stating the 
facts about the formula, I see that the farmer from Elphinstone, I 
don’t see him over there listening, but he must be here, because 
I couldn’t say that he had left the House, because he must be there 
hiding some place. 
 
In July, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in July, when this money comes to 
the farmers, the remaining between the interim payment, there’s 
going to be a lot of faces over there that are not going to be 
smiling too much. And one of them is going to be the NDP 
member from . . . the MP from my constituency of Moose Jaw, 
that has been writing articles in the paper saying, that’s a broken 
promise; this is all you’re going to get, and that they are 
absolutely . . . let you down. 
 
Well I can tell you that I will stand here and I will defend, defend 
this here program, and that farmers will wonder what happened 
to this Mr. Laporte’s great statement when along comes July. 
 
I’d just like to add a little bit more about the present budget. Mr. 
Speaker, in this budget, one of the greatest pieces of legislation 
to protect farmers is in this budget. There is none other that I 
know of in any province or state in North America — some 
federals might be putting this together — but not any province or 
state. When this . . . and I can read this, Mr. Speaker, to remind 
them what was in the budget: 
 

The mandate expansion is designed . . . (this is agricultural 
credit corporation’s mandate to expand its lending) The 
mandate expansion is designed to have loan programs 
available from ACS to meet the needs of farmers that are 
not being serviced by their other lenders. 
 

Three, three points that I want to put on the record: 
 

Provide financing for the purchase of a home quarter. 
 

So that people in this province of Saskatchewan can live in 
dignity and live in their home, and not be like they were under 
the NDP back in the 20 per cent interest years where they were 
facing to lose their homes, and that’s why they’re in that position 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are protecting the people so they 
can protect their home quarters. And also: 
 

The financing, the purchase, construction, and renovation of 
the buildings and improvements on these home quarters. 
 

To improve their hog farms or their chicken houses or whatever 
the need to get it producing again. 
 
Number three, this is the most important one that was in the 
budget, but they didn’t want to talk about this. I never once, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, heard this sentence that I am going to give now, 
one word for it or against it, because they didn’t dare want to talk 
about it because it’s never happened before. We are doing . . . 
This government is going to do what they can to keep the farmers 
on the land,   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

591 
 

and here it is: 
 

Provide loans for farmers to finance debt settlement or 
agreements with their lenders. 
 

Now they don’t want to talk about that. When this here Bill 
comes to the House, we’ll just see if they’ll try to hold it up. Or 
will they just not talk about it like now and let it go through in 
three days? No. They’ll sit and grandstand and keep the farmers 
on edge for weeks and weeks. I can just see it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, sit down. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know . . . somebody said 
I should sit down, but I’m not through. Do I have to sit down, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? My colleagues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, said 
I should hang in there till I’m finished because they said I’m 
doing a good job. So at least I’m glad that my colleagues don’t 
agree with the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our Premier who says no institution is more 
important than the family — all of my life I’ve believed that God 
and the family are important to my life, and I believe in a Premier 
that says that God and the family is important to life. This 
government has put family values into protecting families. 
Health spending, more funds for education, the protection for our 
environment, support for agriculture and farm families — in all 
of these budget measures we see a strong belief in helping 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in less than 12 years we’ll be into a new 
century. That is why it is very important that Saskatchewan be 
on solid economic footing as we head into the new era. Growth 
and building take economic leadership. The leadership of our 
Premier and the PC government to build a first-class economy, 
to create new jobs, to create new investment, it is all a part of 
building for the future, just as our pioneers did in the years gone 
by that I’ve talked about earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one more thing I want to touch upon. The members 
opposite, they’ve been asking questions to our Minister of 
Environment, the member from Rosetown. They’re trying to say 
that he’s hiding something and not being honest. Well, I’d like to 
remind the members opposite about what hiding is all about. 
Hiding is when they had a PCB (polychlorinated byphenyl) spill 
at Pioneer Electric in 1976 and the whole mess could have been 
hauled to New York and burned for $250,000, but instead they 
didn’t want to let anybody know. They put pavement over it, 
covered it up, and left it there until it cost the taxpayers of this 
province utterly millions and multimillions of dollars. 
 
Now I’m going to remind the people every time they get up and 
go after our good, honest member from Rosetown, who has 
integrity . . . I see last night in the news, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
the Minister of Environment had said that there’s a problem out 
there, and he’s told the public — he didn’t hide it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — and is going to do something about it. They didn’t do 
like the members opposite who had hid it under the ground, put 
pavement over it. And that is why the member for Moose 

Jaw, Mr. Snyder, is never going to get back into this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — And also I noticed that they’ve been very 
quiet when I talk about PCBs. Their heads go down. But they 
seem to forget, when they jump on our Minister of Environment, 
that he’s maybe doing something wrong. I never seen Mr. 
Bowerman when he was in here, even close . . . you couldn’t 
even have a closeness of integrity to that man. He stood here and 
misrepresented this here whole province on the PCB spill of 
1976. And I know all about the PCBs because I was the critic for 
Environment in those days, and if they want to debate me on 
PCBs and hiding behind pavement holes, I will debate them at 
any time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s been a pleasure for me to express my 
views in this House, and it is a pleasure for me to support this 
budget. And I thank you for the time to speak, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I notice the mouth from Weyburn is in here again. The Speaker 
drove him out before, but his mouth is still going. Nothing much 
coming out that’s worth anything, but we can tolerate that. 
 
But I want to speak to the people of Saskatchewan, and I want to 
speak in respect to the lack of integrity of this government. The 
people of Saskatchewan, as I go around, are now saying they had 
great hope when the Premier and the Tory Party formed the 
government. There was some hope. But at the present time the 
people of Saskatchewan are saying this: they’re saying they have 
gone too far. They’re saying that, you know what?, if they’re 
allowed another term of office, there’ll be nothing left in this 
province. That’s what the people of Saskatchewan are saying. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are saying, they just cannot manage 
the affairs of this province. The people of Saskatchewan are 
saying, we cannot believe what they say. We cannot trust the 
Premier, what he says. 
 
I want to say that the people are right. They can’t trust this 
Premier, what he says, nor can they trust what the cabinet is 
doing. This is a Premier who indicated to the people of 
Saskatchewan that he could in fact manage this economy. Yes, 
he said, you know, things are so good in Saskatchewan, he said, 
that you could afford to mismanage and still break even. 
 
Well let’s take a look at this great business man, those business 
men on the other side that were going to bring their business 
operation to the Government of Saskatchewan. And let’s take a 
look at where they’ve led this province. 
 
Today the debt in the Consolidated Fund is over $3.8 billion. The 
total debt in this province is exceeding $12 billion. Do you realize 
that if you take a look at the province’s net debt, that is, the assets 
of this province, Mr.   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

592 
 

Deputy Speaker, take all the total assets of this province when 
the New Democratic Party was in office, the assets — take away 
all the liabilities, and we were $1 billion to the good. Less than 
eight years under this administration, and you know what has 
happened? The total assets, take away the liabilities, and we’re 
over $3 billion in the hole. That’s their book; $3 billion from a 
plus $1 billion to the good. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are aware of 
the mismanagement and the lack of credibility of this 
government. And today what we have is not only, as has been 
mentioned, not only this massive deficit, but now we are paying 
over $381 million annually just to service debt. I say that that’s 
in excess of a million dollars a day just to pay the interest that is 
created by that government in seven and a half years. 
 
But that’s not all. Not only do we have massive debts for our 
children and their children to pay off, we have one of the highest 
tax regimes in all of Canada. Do you realize that in this budget 
alone there’s increases in taxes to the tune of $117 million — 
$117 million increase in taxes. That means, on average, every 
single person in this province, as a result of this budget, is paying 
$117 additional taxes. That’s what they’re paying. 
 
And do you recall that they went to the people of the province 
and they said, oh well, we’re going to get rid of the fuel tax. Well 
I’ll tell you, they got rid of the fuel tax back in 1983-84, and they 
took it down; they reduced it to 13.5 from the previous year. In 
’81-82 it was 120 million, and they cut it back to ’83-84, to only 
$13.5 million. 
 
And they said, and the Premier said in this House, as long as 
there’s a Tory government the fuel tax will not be reinstated. 
That’s here. Do you know what the revenue is from fuel tax in 
this budget: $204 million, $204 million. This is the outfit that 
came to office pledging to the people of Saskatchewan that there 
would be no more fuel tax. And they have taken it to a grand total 
here of $204.1 million. 
 
(1615) 
 
Now how can the people of Saskatchewan believe a party that in 
1982 said to them that we’re going to remove the fuel tax, and 
what they have done now is increased it from ’81-82, where it 
was 120.7 million, to 204 million. A broken promise. That’s what 
it is. And the people of Saskatchewan no longer believe this 
party, no longer can believe the Premier of this province. 
 
And I want to say, in addition, that we have the highest rate of 
personal income tax at $35,000 of anywhere in Canada; high 
debt, massive debt, $3.8 billion in the Consolidated Fund; almost 
$12 billion resting on the heads of the next generations. But also 
the people here have a brutal attack on any of their income as a 
result of imposition of high taxes, taxes on the E&H tax. 
 
I just want to remind the members that in their election — it’s 
time for a change and a PC government will, it says, reduce 
gasoline prices 40 cents a gallon. You know what it is today to 
the business man and to the trucker and so 

on? They reduced it all right; it’s 45 cents on a gallon. That’s 
what the business man is paying. 
 
In my constituency there is a number of truckers and they’ve 
done very well and they’ve been very competitive, and I’ll tell 
you Tories came to them and promised to remove that gas tax 
across the board to the business community and they voted for 
them. They voted for them in 1982. But I’ll tell you, those same 
business men today, that trusted them in ’82, will never trust 
them again. 
 
And I say to you on the other side, there’s a credibility gap, and 
once you lose the bond of trust with the people, I’ll tell you, 
you’re finished, and that’s what’s happening. You have told too 
many half-truths; misrepresented the facts too often; the people 
can no longer believe you. 
 
Look at the broken promises in respect to this government. The 
gasoline, they said they would remove it . . . the tax, and never 
be back on; and today they have more than almost doubled the 
tax of ’81-82 to $204 million. They gave a commitment to the 
people of Saskatchewan to eliminate the E&H tax. In the first 
term of office the Premier of this province was on radio and 
television and indicated: in the first term of office, we’ll 
eliminate the E&H tax. But he didn’t keep that promise either, 
because what they’ve done is increase, increase the tax on the 
E&H to 7 per cent from 5 per cent. 
 
As I indicated, they also promised the people of Saskatchewan to 
reduce personal income tax. And what have they done? Given us 
the highest personal income tax in all of Canada. And I just want 
to say, we have here in Saskatchewan a situation of massive debt 
placed on the backs of future generations. Our people are paying 
high, high rates of taxes, but worse than that, there are less and 
less services. 
 
Nowhere in their brochures, or did they have decency to tell the 
people of the province that they were going to wipe out the best 
school-based dental program in all of North America. In fact they 
said they would improve it. And as soon as they got elected, 
disregarding the wishes of rural parents, particularly, and the 
children, they wiped out the dental program. 
 
How can you say that you are improving health care when 
without even consultation you destroyed one of the best dental 
programs in all of North America. And there’s no doubt about it, 
it was the best dental program, school-based, in all of North 
America, and they wiped it out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And they ask, should the people of 
Saskatchewan believe them. 
 
Drug program, the Minister of Finance as he is now, when he was 
in opposition, sent out a guarantee. He was going to improve the 
drug program. Guaranteed to do away with even the prescription 
fee. Well they certainly improved it all right. They put a deterrent 
fee on of $125 to most people and have made drugs inaccessible 
to many of our senior people. So they can’t be trusted, either   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

593 
 

in looking after health care or keeping their promises. 
 
But I want to raise one other area, and that is in respect to 
agriculture. And the thing that I want to raise is that we all know 
that there is a very serious problem in agriculture, a major 
problem. 
 
They sent a group of MLAs and cabinet ministers around this 
province; came back with a report. That’s a year ago, more than 
a year ago. And not one single step was taken to help the farmers, 
despite the fact that in the report itself it said that 11 per cent of 
the farmers were insolvent, 28 per cent of the farmers were in 
severe financial crisis. And ever since that time they haven’t 
taken one step to rectify the situation which they identified. 
 
And the regrettable fact is that here we come, we have a budget. 
The government has all the facilities and the expertise, and we 
come into this House, and we’ve been sitting for how many days 
now? Seventeen days? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Nineteen. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Nineteen days we’ve been sitting. And the 
situation is absolutely desperate in rural Saskatchewan. Farmers 
who are not going to be able to sow their crops because they can’t 
get an operating loan from the financial institutions — that’s the 
crisis. Interest rates are climbing, and this government has 
refused to join with us together and send a resolution to the 
federal government to indicate how desperate the situation is and 
how badly it affects the farmers and the small-business men here 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is the desperate situation out there. And here you have 
a federal government which has broken its promise to the 
farmers. During that federal election, let it be clearly known — 
and I’ll bet you ask any farmer their full interpretation of the 
federal government’s promise was that that money would be sent 
to them early in the new year. They did not say they were going 
to split it and give them 12, seven and nothing for the first 
payment and then wait, without even knowing the formula as to 
what they were going to get. 
 
But as I was saying, we’re in our 19th day here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. There’s a crisis in agriculture. He indicates that they 
have some programs which he is going to bring in, and I ask you, 
where is the legislation? Why wouldn’t we have right before us 
today, ready to go tomorrow, debate on legislation to help the 
agricultural community? 
 
But you know what they’re frittering around with? They’re 
talking about a privatization Bill; that’s important for them. 
Selling off our assets is important, more important than 
legislation to help the farmers. That’s the priority. 
 
Why didn’t the member from Arm River stand up here and say, 
I’ve looked at the legislation; we’re bringing it in right away. 
We’re going to delay this privatization; we’re going to put into 
place legislation to protect the farmers who are losing their farms. 
Why didn’t he stand up in this legislature and read some of the 
headlines that address the economic conditions of this province?

Headline: “Farmers expect sheriff with eviction any time”; 
“Public auction of farm land over at Weyburn — the first ever in 
this province”; “One hundred lay-offs at Rabbit Lake Uranium 
Mine.” Boy! have we got a booming economy under you birds. 
 
“Alberta, the most popular destination for migrants.” A total of 
16,150 people out-migrated over in migration last year — a net 
loss. I mean, this province’s economy is really booming. 
 
Perhaps you might have also taken an opportunity to read, “The 
province’s fastest growing export — its people”. That’s from a 
newspaper. Or maybe you might have looked at another one, 
“Hoteliers going broke in rural Saskatchewan.” Or maybe you 
could look at a headline which said, “Small firms want gas tax 
rebate.” Small-business men struggling, and you increased the 
tax. Of maybe you could take a look at another headline which 
says, “Home owners face $34 hike in taxes.” 
 
And what do we get in agriculture? The Minister of Agriculture 
has not even made mention of the bills that are necessary to 
introduce any of the programs which he has outlined in the 
budget speech. 
 
I’ll tell you, there’s a desperateness out there, and if we have any 
concern whatsoever, if we have any concern whatsoever for the 
farmers in Saskatchewan, then what you should be doing is 
bringing in the Bills as soon as we have finished with the debate 
on the budget, and it should be tabled tomorrow. Those notices 
of those Bills should have been in here and we should have been 
debating them tomorrow. That’s what we should be debating and 
getting the legislation through. 
 
But is there any notice of any Bills on agriculture? No, there isn’t 
any. Are we ready to debate tomorrow on agriculture? No, of 
course we aren’t, because they are more concerned about 
privatization — sell off, give away the assets to their friends. 
That’s their real agenda. 
 
I want to conclude my remarks and say that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan need assistance, and I would welcome the 
opportunity to join with the members opposite because of the 
desperateness out there, to encourage, to join in resolutions to the 
federal government to cut back on the interest rate. I would put 
all the politics aside to deal with this — not totally caused by the 
actions of the government, but mostly caused because we were 
promised a long-term agricultural program in 1985, and not one 
thing was done. 
 
But I listened to the debates here today and throughout the budget 
and the throne speech, and I never heard many people talk about 
the plight of the farmers in rural Saskatchewan today and the 
crisis that is going on in the families as they’re losing their 
homes, all of their work. 
 
I have talked to people that have formed a committee of the 
bishops. The bishops, the Catholic bishops out in my community 
got together, and there was some . . . I think the hall was 
completely filled, 5 or 600 people assembled there. And the 
Catholic bishops said that we have to preserve the family farm. 
And there’s a committee that is set up as a result of that, and 
they’re asking this   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

594 
 

government to give them a breathing spell, to give them a 
moratorium for one year, because there was no crop and the 
prices were bad. And they can’t get anywhere with this 
government. 
 
You know what the solution is? He couldn’t get it in with the 
consent of the people, but he’s going ahead with it anyway, the 
Premier — and that is equity financing. And all of the farms are 
going to be, down the line, are going to be outside Hong Kong 
money coming — cheap labour, cheap land. He promised it to 
them when he was over in the Orient, and it’s coming true. 
 
Equity financing is not preservation of the family farm. Don’t 
ever kid yourself. Because it’s big investors, and big investors 
don’t go buy land to help set up families and give them a good 
livelihood. Big investors, they invest to make money. Lots of it. 
That’s why they invest. So don’t anybody over there tell me that 
equity financing is going to solve the problem. 
 
What we want is the pride of family farm ownership continued. 
And I say that we can get together and we should be immediately 
dealing with any proposals, and we will be bringing forward 
proposals, and we’re prepared to work with the government to 
solve that. 
 
(1630) 
 
But you know what this session has been set up for? Not to deal 
with this crisis of small-business men and the farmers. It’s to get 
rid of assets, to their friends. That’s why they set this session up. 
That’s what the members of the front benches are saying. This is 
going to be the Waterloo or the Alamo or something, and 
socialism is going to be wiped out because we’re going to get a 
scorched earth policy. We’re going to rid of everything that they 
built. Yes, we’ll never recognize Saskatchewan again. That’s 
their goal. 
 
It’s not looking after the small-business men or looking after the 
farmer in the crisis that is on today, or the working person. 
They’re committed to one thing, and that is filling the pockets of 
a few of their friends at the expense of the people of this province. 
 
I could go on. There is so much that one could say about this 
operation, but every indication I can tell you is that the people of 
Saskatchewan are sick and tired of being deceived, of half-truths, 
of broken promises, of incompetence, of deceit in the operation, 
and waste — the people are. 
 
And it showed up well in the last federal election. You know, 
they were going to wipe us out. Once they said — not in the last 
election, but the previous federal election — we were down to 9 
per cent and socialists were going to be completely wiped out. 
 
And they said in Saskatchewan, the Tories are the friends of the 
farmers. Well they were for two or three or four years. But what 
happened in the federal election? Ten out of 14, 10 out of 14 seats 
— NDP members. And that’s as a direct result of being deceived 
provincially by Tories and federally by Tories. That’s right. But 
particularly here because of the government opposite, that is the 
provincial 

government. 
 
There is a backlash against you birds to such an extent that I think 
in the next election you’ll get wiped out. I’m telling you you’re 
going to get wiped out. The polls indicated you’re in desperate 
shape, and the thing is you have no direction left. 
 
And what we want to do here, and I say to you again, what we 
want to do is — and we are demanding — we are asking you 
today to come tomorrow with the introduction of agricultural 
Bills so that we can deal with them, and your massive 
privatization can take the back seat. Let’s deal with the crisis that 
we have in Saskatchewan — by the way, created by your 
mismanagement, your waste, and your corruption. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan fortunately will have an opportunity 
to wipe this nightmare from their recollections. And certainly I 
want to say to the good constituents of Quill Lakes that it won’t 
be long, and again a fresh, new breeze will blow across this 
province and hope will be restored to those who have lost faith 
in government and the decency and honesty of government, 
because never before did politics take such a beating as in the last 
six or seven years. 
 
I’m ashamed to be associated with the conduct that goes on and 
the disrespect of this House at the level of debate in here. The 
administration of the House Leader opposite is a disgrace to this 
House in comparison to when I first came here — a total 
disrespect for government. And that’s intentional because they 
want people to think that government is bad. But government is 
as good as the people it’s elected. 
 
And unfortunately the Tories have a horrible record, because if 
you want to find any form of corruption or deceit or . . . take the 
list. I’ll tell you, all you have to do is go either federally into the 
Tory party or provincially into this party, and of course the 
impression of politicians has gone down. It has to go down when 
you have that type of conduct within the front benches of a 
government — never heard of before, and federally. 
 
And so I say to you that I cherish this institution and I cherish 
democracy. And I really fear that the direction that we’re heading 
with you birds, that you have no respect for the parliamentary 
system, you have no respect for the people of this province who 
built it. And I think the member from Wilkie is the one that most 
of all, I think, demeans this place with his lack of any 
contribution whatsoever. 
 
I have a tremendous . . . a lot more to say, Mr. Speaker, but my 
friend across the way wants to endorse my policy of calling on 
the government to immediately get on with the agricultural Bills, 
because I know he’s from an agricultural community dependent 
on agriculture. I hope he will take up the challenge that tomorrow 
we start dealing with agricultural crises in this House and 
implementing programs to help the farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

595 
 

the opportunity to participate in this budget debate. Despite all 
the gloom and doom that we’ve heard from the other side, I 
would like to take the high road and accent the positive parts of 
our budget, and there are many, Mr. Speaker. I think that in due 
time when we are ready, we will show the opposition that we do 
care for the farmer and that our proof will be in the Bills that will 
be presented to this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly proud as a member of a rural 
constituency, representing rural Saskatchewan, and I find a great 
deal in this budget to be optimistic about. I think of things like 
the municipal capital program, the development of the new 
Department of Agriculture and Food, increased public 
participation opportunities, and of course increased spending in 
health and education. 
 
But before I begin to talk about those other programs, which I 
will do more extensively in a few minutes, I would like first of 
all to focus on education. As the Legislative Secretary for the 
Minister of Education, I believe I am quite justified in saying that 
this government has made significant progress in the field of 
education, progress that has put Saskatchewan people at the 
leading edge of our country, and progress that will continue to 
keep it up there. 
 
And I might also add, Mr. Speaker, that education is the key to 
this province’s future. In this complex and rapidly changing 
world, the knowledge and skills of Saskatchewan people will 
determine our success in meeting the challenges of tomorrow. 
The quality of education that we provide our children with is the 
best security that they have in whatever they choose to do 
throughout the rest of their lives. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to further 
improvements in our educational system to ensure that all 
students get a solid foundation to prepare them for their lifetime. 
We will build on the strengths of our educational system so that 
Saskatchewan people will have even greater access to the 
opportunities to learn. 
 
And I want to review, Mr. Speaker, what has happened since 
1982. Since 1982, this government has increased annual 
provincial funding to the kindergarten through grade 12 system 
by over $160 million, or 60 per cent. We have allocated . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we have allocated over $360 
million to the upgrading and building of new schools, and we 
have increased annual provincial funding on post-secondary 
education by over $150 million, or 90 per cent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have provided $130 million for student 
financial assistance, with the number of students receiving 
assistance increasing from 5,600 people to over 13,000. And 
these are significant numbers, Mr. Speaker. They become even 
more significant when you can apply them to the living, 
breathing, real people in Saskatchewan who have benefitted from 
our programs. Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has an excellent 
educational system.

The people of this province can be proud of our teachers and 
institutions, and their efforts to ensure that Saskatchewan 
remains a leader in education. But, Mr. Speaker, technological 
change is creating new challenges and opportunities for our 
educational system, and we as government intend to see that our 
educational system remains responsive to the changing demands 
of our society. And our 1989-1990 budget is proof of that. 
 
In 1989-90, over $841 million will be provided to support our 
educational system in this province. This represents a $52 million 
increase over last year’s budget. This is also nearly $370 million, 
or almost 80 higher than that provided at the beginning of this 
decade. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this year alone, nearly $14 million will be 
targeted for new initiatives to improve access to higher and 
quality education. Over $84 million is allocated for the 
construction and renovation of educational facilities for both the 
kindergarten to grade 12, and also the post-secondary systems. 
Mr. Speaker, these measures will ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
high quality educational system will prepare our students for the 
year 2000 and beyond. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government recognizes the importance of a 
solid foundation for lifelong learning. Our schools and teachers 
are critical elements in this learning process. This budget 
provides over $500 million for the support of the kindergarten to 
grade 12 educational system. Some of these expenditures, Mr. 
Speaker, are increases in operating grants, teacher pensions and 
benefits, money from the education development fund, new 
initiatives to implement educational reform, and includes the 
expansion of the core curriculum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the new core curriculum into our 
schools, which began last year, will help our students prepare for 
the challenges of the future with the necessary knowledge and 
skills to succeed. The introduction of the core curriculum is one 
of the most important changes to ever take place in 
Saskatchewan’s public educational system. To realize its full 
potential, it will take careful implementation over several years 
and a high level of commitment from the government, school 
boards, teachers, parents, and the public at large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new curriculum will place more emphasis on 
the fundamentals of education which are reading, writing, and 
arithmetic. Students will also continue to study science, social 
studies, health education, physical education, and the arts. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the teaching of essential skills such as independent 
learning, creative thinking, problem solving, communications, 
and the understanding of our society and technology, will 
complement the compulsory subject areas. 
 
And these, Mr. Speaker, are the skills that will enable our 
children to adapt to a rapidly changing world. In this budget, $4.3 
million has been allocated to develop the curriculum for use in 
class-rooms and to continue teacher training. This represents 
nearly 140 per cent increase in the last two years and is a clear 
demonstration of this government’s commitment to quality 
education for our   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

596 
 

children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government also realizes the importance of 
keeping our children in school, which will certainly assure their 
future successes, and that is why we have committed the time and 
money into seeing this accomplished. 
 
Because drop-out rates for northern students are far higher than 
the provincial average, their educational needs are of particular 
concern. Last year, this government commissioned the northern 
education task force to examine the special challenge of 
education in the north. And this year, Mr. Speaker, we have 
allocated new funding to improve student success in completing 
school and to address the recommendations of that task force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, programs for students of native ancestry are a major 
priority. We recognize that our schools must respect the unique 
cultural heritage of native students. In 1984, we initiated a 
five-year plan to address the special needs of native students 
through funding for native curriculum and language 
development. Continuing in that vein, Mr. Speaker, in 1989-90 
over $6 million will be devoted to educational services and 
programs for native children. 
 
(1645) 
 
But ensuring the continuation of our children’s education cannot 
be only the concern of the government, it has to be a 
province-wide effort. The government, educators, parents, and 
the community must work together to help all children succeed 
in completing school. Mr. Speaker, this government’s new $1 
million drug and alcohol awareness program and prevention 
strategy will be part of this effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has also attacked illiteracy in this 
province. The ability of individuals to read and write has 
significant impact on their capacity to participate fully in our 
changing society. By stressing the value of literacy skills with 
our children we can prevent illiteracy in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through the co-operation of school boards, teachers, 
regional libraries, the “Read — Use Your Imagination” 
campaign emphasizes the enjoyment and benefits of reading to 
children and parents. This campaign that was established by this 
government will be expanded in the following year. Mr. Speaker, 
government and businesses are co-operating to help make 
illiteracy a thing of the past. 
 
Last year this government entered into a three-year, $2.5 million 
agreement with IBM Canada Limited to introduce the Principle 
of the Alphabet Literacy System commonly called PALS. IBM 
is providing computer hardware, software, and support services 
for 96 computer stations at eight locations throughout the 
province, and four mobile units will also be established. Mr. 
Speaker, this project will allow thousands of Saskatchewan 
residents to improve their reading and writing skills. And it is the 
first major application of computer-assisted literacy training in 
all of Canada.

As well, this government established the Saskatchewan Literacy 
Council in 1987 to launch a major campaign against adult 
illiteracy. In this budget, over $1 million has been allocated to 
continue this campaign. In recognition of the global significance 
of this problem, 1990 has been designated as international 
literacy year. Saskatchewan is at the forefront of the fight for 
literacy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kopelchuk: — Saskatchewan people from all walks of life 
and regions of the province want ready access to high quality 
post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. Today more 
Saskatchewan people are placing increasing demands on our 
post-secondary education institutions. In total, 20 per cent of the 
working-age population in this province in 1989-90 was enrolled 
in educational programs. This year the government will continue 
to meet their demands. 
 
We are providing almost $150 million in operating grants to our 
two universities; almost $709 million to SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology); over $53 million 
for capital improvements and facilities at all post-secondary 
institutions, including the College of Agriculture building in 
Saskatoon; and up to $10 million for a new university institute 
enhancement fund. 
 
In addition to this, Mr. Speaker, $24 million will be allocated 
towards skills training and distance education programs 
delivered through our regional college system and SIAST. 
 
In order to prepare for the future, our post-secondary education 
system must respond to the needs of the people of this province. 
Mr. Speaker, this government has demonstrated its leadership by 
taking steps to ensure that Saskatchewan students are ready for 
the future. SIAST was created to ensure high quality skills 
training at each of the four campuses. The regional colleges were 
created with a new mandate to offer university and skills training 
programs, as well as adult basic education and literacy training. 
 
The Northlands Career College was established specifically to 
emphasize access to employment-directed training for 
Northerners. The Distant Education Council was established to 
develop and co-ordinate the delivery of university skill training 
and other educational programs in smaller centres through the 
use of telecommunications. The International Language Institute 
was established at the University of Regina to provide training in 
a diverse range of languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, access to quality education is vital to the continued 
success of this province, and I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government is committed to ensuring the educational programs 
are in place for the people of Saskatchewan so that they can meet 
the challenges and opportunities that the future is just sure to 
bring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area where we are leading the country is in 
our health care initiatives. I will only touch briefly on this 
subject, since I know my colleague from Regina Wascana, the 
very able Legislative Secretary to   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

597 
 

the Minister of Education, will be dealing more extensively with 
the subject later this evening. But I would like to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that regardless of what the members across the way 
would have the public believe, this government truly is the 
protector of the health care needs of our people. 
 
With this budget bringing our per capita spending up to almost 
$1,400 in this province we are — per capita — we are only 
second to Alberta on the amount of money that goes into the 
health care needs of every man, woman, and child in this 
province. Mr.Speaker, when the New Democrats held 
government in this province, Saskatchewan ranked eighth — 
eighth, Mr. Speaker — and they like to carry this pretence that 
they are the real protectors of health care to the people of this 
province. 
 
Since coming to office in 1982, this government has been firmly 
committed to maintaining a quality health care system for our 
people. We have raised health care spending in this province by 
91 per cent in just seven short years, Mr. Speaker. And the health 
care system of the 1990s must be prepared to respond to the 
challenges so that our people can continue to have access to the 
high quality health care system we now enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is completely capable of doing 
this. And, Mr. Speaker, what is more, the confidence of the 
residents of Saskatchewan is firmly behind this government as it 
pursues that commitment. In order to ensure this success though, 
Mr. Speaker, we need the prosperity that economic development 
will generate. 
 
One of the key ways to build a climate for economic 
development, Mr. Speaker, will be through increased public 
participation initiatives. Mr. Speaker, our public participation 
program builds on the strength of Saskatchewan, its resources, 
and the skills of its people. Public participation benefits 
Saskatchewan people through the creation of new investment, 
jobs, economic growth, and diversification. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government created the Department of 
Public Participation, its purpose was to provide a greater focus 
on the program by encouraging Saskatchewan people to play a 
larger role in the growth and development of their province. 
Through the development of some government assets and the 
formation of the new Saskatchewan companies, public 
participation has created new jobs and attracted new investment 
and revenue dollars into this province. 
 
I’d like to reflect for a moment on what the sale of the 
money-losing Crown corporation PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 
Company) to Weyerhaeuser Canada has meant to the people of 
this province. A company that once cost the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan more than $90,000 a day to operate, is now 
responsible for approximately 1,000 jobs in this province. 
 
Run by private industry, this country has seen continued growth 
and expansion. They constructed a $250 million world-class 
paper mill in Prince Albert, where over 700 jobs were created in 
the construction stage, and 169 permanent jobs in the Prince 
Albert pulp mill. This initiative will create 34 permanent 
positions and about 

100 man-years of employment during construction. Mr. Speaker, 
the monthly incomes of the paper mill employees represent 
approximately $500,000 that is injected directly into the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
And another thing, Mr. Speaker, in April of 1988, Weyerhaeuser 
presented a cheque to the Government of Saskatchewan for $30.5 
million as a first instalment on total profits of $63.5 million. The 
sale of PAPCO to Weyerhaeuser was argued about for countless 
hours in the legislature as the New Democrats opposed it. They 
called it a sweetheart deal. Well, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
Prince Albert and for the people of this province who no longer 
have to . . . you see, $90,000 a day financing this debt, you bet it 
was a sweetheart deal. 
 
WESTBRIDGE computer company is an excellent example of 
what public participation means for our province. Since forming, 
WESTBRIDGE has earned $6 million in out-of-province 
contracts, and the company’s quick rate of growth has already 
created 50 new jobs. Mr. Speaker, continued expansion promises 
another 200. 
 
And I’d also like to talk about Saskoil, Mr. Speaker. The planned 
gas development activities resulting from the purchase of 
unutilized SaskPower natural gas reserves will create new 
economic activity to the tune of 100 new wells to be drilled, the 
potential for 600, and, Mr. Speaker, 1,000 jobs projected to be 
created. Now that, Mr. Speaker, is working for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this government offers bond and share issues 
in our Crown corporations, we are providing the people of 
Saskatchewan with a direct stake in the economic development 
and diversification of this province. Over 42,000 Saskatchewan 
residents invested in the last SaskPower savings bond, and over 
33,000 participated in the recent SaskTel TeleBond issue. 
Almost 11,000 Saskatchewan residents and employees 
participated directly in the development of Saskoil and 
WESTBRIDGE through share ownership. 
 
The revitalization and expansion of companies, formerly owned 
by the government, has brought new technology, new 
investments, new jobs, and value-added diversification to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In dealing with our public participation initiatives, Mr. Speaker, 
employees’ expertise is a very important consideration. 
Employee expertise has contributed a great deal to the province’s 
economic development. As a province works with public and 
private sector employees to strengthen the province’s economic 
base, this commitment has resulted in employees’ equity 
investments in enterprises formerly owned by the government. 
Some of these, Mr. Speaker, include the Meadow Lake Sawmill 
and the Saskatchewan Government Printing Company, 
WESTBRIDGE, Saskoil, DirectWEST, NorSask, and Printco 
Graphics. Mr. Speaker, more than 1,000 employees have a direct 
stake in the growth and productivity of these companies. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to reaffirm that our government will 
continue to assist the province’s people and businesses and their 
developmental efforts because the progress of public 
participation provides a stronger and   



 
April 6, 1989 

 

598 
 

more diversified provincial economy. Mr. Speaker, the initiatives 
I’ve already spoken of benefit my constituency as they will every 
man, woman and child in this province. 
 
But right now I’d like to move over to some of the initiatives that 
are really going to make a difference to the people at home in 
Canora. This government has really facilitated the diversification 
of the rural economy through the implementation of new and 
innovative economic development policies. 
 
The community economic development program that we 
initiated in 1985 assists small urban municipalities to diversify 
their economic base. This program provides financial assistance 
for market surveys and studies, promotional activities, and 
specific project development plans. Mr. Speaker, if there’s one 
program that this government came up with that has been 
appreciated in Canora, it’s this program. It is vital. It is 
benefitting the community, and I cannot walk into the town 
where the mayor and the council don’t bring this to my attention. 
 
To date, Mr. Speaker, 55 of Saskatchewan’s smaller urban 
municipalities have established these said committees. And by 
working with the people in their communities, these committees 
helped develop over 400 projects, with a total value of $51 
million, resulting in 2,100 new jobs. 
 
The rural development program, the corporation program, Mr. 
Speaker, was initiated to diversify the economic base of our rural 
communities. We established this program in 1986 in response 
to the recommendations of the task force on rural development. 
These rural-based corporations are supported by the Rural 
Development Corporation program through matching 
government funding over a five-year period. They are established 
by local people to co-ordinate the efforts of rural municipalities, 
towns, and villages; to create jobs and improve local services; to 
diversify the local economy; and to provide new opportunities 
for young people in their local communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date, nine Rural Development Corporations, 
involving two in my constituency, more than 60 rural and urban 
communities have been established, and discussions are under 
way to establish 15 more. And to help enhance this initiative, 
changes have been made to the venture capital program, which 
will allow Rural Development Corporations to qualify for the 30 
per cent provincial tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget builds upon these innovations and 
strengthens the local economies. They’re providing new 
opportunities for communities. 
 
The Saskatchewan growth fund will make available up to $100 
million in investment funds for economic development 
opportunities in rural and urban Saskatchewan, with $36 million 
available the first year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see that I’m not going to finish, and I have more 
to say. I’ll call it 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
  



 
April 6, 1989 

 

599 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 

Please note the following in the Hansard No. 18B Tuesday, April 
4, 1989, 7 p.m.: Page 524, second paragraph, right-hand column 
— for “$5,000,” please read “$1,000.” 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 
 
 


