


















































April 3, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 April 3, 1989 
 

443 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you, and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, some guests seated in your gallery. We 
have a number of guests, but a couple of special guests from my 
constituency that I would like to introduce to you. 
 
First, I would like to introduce Mr. Rod Boll — and I would ask 
him to stand — who is a distinguished athlete from Fillmore, in 
an area that a lot of people aren’t all that familiar with, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s trap-shooting. He’s been in trap-shooting 
since 1970. During that time and since that time, he has won 
numerous provincial and Canadian titles, and last August, Mr. 
Speaker, in Ohio, Rod defeated over 5,500 other competitors 
from all over the world by hitting an unbelievable 400 out of 
400 targets. For this achievement Rod was named “Champion 
of champions.” He has also been recognized in Saskatchewan 
here as being named as runner-up athlete of the year for 
Saskatchewan, and indeed some several months ago the entire 
community of Fillmore and surrounding areas hosted a banquet 
in his honour. 
 
Secondly, I would like to ask Yvonne Wenaus to rise and be 
recognized by the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. She too is from 
Fillmore and was a nominee for the Rural Woman of the Year 
in recognition of the tremendous amount of volunteer work she 
has given to her community over the years in the area of sport 
and recreation. It doesn’t really matter what project is under 
way in Fillmore and area, indeed in southern Saskatchewan, 
whether it be curling or baseball or helping with the children in 
the area, Yvonne Wenaus is a dynamo of energy and 
enthusiasm in this area, Mr. Speaker. And as well, the Minister 
of Parks and Recreation presented Yvonne with a volunteer 
recognition award to that end. 
 
I would like for all members of the Assembly to welcome these 
special guests, and I would ask the rest of the people from 
Fillmore and area who have joined us here today to stand up 
and be acknowledged as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koenker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you, and through you today to members of the Assembly, 
guests from Saskatoon — Mr. Jake Bergen, who is seated in 
your gallery, who is a long-term resident of the Sutherland 
constituency; and Al and Ollie Miller, who are part of the 
pastoral team at Good Shepherd Lutheran Church in Saskatoon. 
And I’d ask all members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation Programs 

Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Deputy Premier, in the absence of the 
Premier. It concerns the statistics of his own government which 
indicate that in February of this year, just a few months ago, 
approximately 6,200 people left the province of Saskatchewan 
in what can only be described as a very startling and shocking 
situation. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: why was it that in the face of 
this statistic, this alarming development, that the budget of last 
week had no specific game plan for job creation for the people 
of this province? Where are the jobs in order to keep the people 
here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment, I am pleased to 
answer that question. 
 
First of all, there was a lot in the budget for employment and 
diversification. The only fact is that the Leader of the 
Opposition didn’t recognize it, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first 
problem. 
 
The second explanation is this: the fact that we are losing 
people from Saskatchewan is all the more reason for this 
government to proceed with full haste in public participation 
and diversification, to do away with the old policies of Crown 
corporations, and allow the people to do business and employ 
each other. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I guess 
it’s to the minister in charge of labour and manpower. My 
question to the minister is this: your answer is proof positive of 
the total failure of privatization, the fact that 16,000 people have 
left this province last year alone . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — . . . 16,000 people, Mr. Minister, have left 
Saskatchewan. That’s the equivalent size of the city of Swift 
Current. Your colleague ought to be concerned about that — 
gone, just like that. 
 
My question to you specifically is this: why wasn’t there a job 
creation game plan in the Minister of Finance’s budget? We 
desperately need it; we need jobs for our young people and for 
the people of this province. Why did you ignore it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition was against Cameco moving their head office to 
Saskatchewan and being a public corporation; he was against 
that. They were against the mining of uranium and the increase 
and the size of the uranium company in Saskatoon. They’re 
against the new jobs at Weyerhaeuser. They’re against 
WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation, which has now got 
public participation, as 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

444 
 

the fastest growing computer company in Canada. They’re 
against all those things. 
 
They don’t know that Dominion Bridge is reopening its plant 
here as a result of the policies of this government. We know 
what the members opposite are against. What are they for? Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the question. What are they for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the 
Minister of Labour. He asks the question, what it is that the 
opposition is for? Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell the minister, as a preface 
to this question, the opposition is for jobs, for young people, for 
the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And my question to the minister is very 
simple. My question to him is this: how is it, Mr. Minister, in 
the light of this great big description of job creation that you’ve 
just given us, how is it that we had 16,000 people leave the 
province last year alone? Why is it, in the face of your recitation 
of facts, that we had 6,200 leave in February alone? That 
doesn’t square with your statistics. How do you explain that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, manufacturing jobs 
are up by 4,000. Maybe the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t 
realize that those are jobs, jobs for young people, people of all 
ages. 
 
Yes, jobs in agriculture are down. Maybe he doesn’t know in 
his theory of economics why they might be down. Maybe he 
doesn’t understand you need rain. Maybe he doesn’t understand 
that there is a grain war on between Europe and the United 
States. Maybe that’s why he’s in opposition, because when I 
told him years and years ago how to diversify Saskatchewan, he 
insisted on buying holes in the ground, and now, Mr. Speaker, 
he says he doesn’t recall me telling him that. That only proves 
that he wasn’t listening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
minister. I don’t recall not having listened to the minister a 
number of years ago, but if I didn’t, his answer today confirms 
why I didn’t then also. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — My new question to the minister is this, Mr. 
Speaker. In the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix in a story which is 
headlined: “The province’s fastest growing export; its people”, 
the following is said: 
 

“Sagging confidence in Saskatchewan’s economy is what’s 
driving residents out of the province in such large 
numbers,” says Regina economics trend watcher, Doug 
Elliott. “There’s a perception that, relative to other 
provinces, Saskatchewan doesn’t hold a lot of opportunity 
for people,” Mr. 

Elliott said, the editor and publisher of Sask-Trends 
Monitor. 
 

Now those aren’t the words of the Leader of the Opposition, 
Mr. Minister. Those are the words of an economist and a trends 
watcher who says that the people in this country and in this 
province have lost confidence in this government to create jobs. 
 
My question to you, sir, is this: why haven’t you taken some 
initiative; why haven’t you urged your Minister of Finance 
colleague to start doing the things which the people of this 
province want us to do, namely to create jobs here at home 
rather than piratization and privatization? Let’s get on with that 
job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition quotes somebody, an economist somebody-or-other. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Leader of the 
Opposition look at what the Conference of Board of Canada has 
to say about Saskatchewan. I’m sure he’s heard of the 
Conference Board of Canada. This is not some economist who 
we’ve never heard of. The Conference Board of Canada says 
Saskatchewan, with a little rain, will have a growth rate of 8.8 
per cent next year. That is quite impressive. 
 
He’s never heard of the companies that are diversifying in 
Saskatchewan through Buy Saskatchewan and public 
participation. He’s never heard of Northern Reel of Moose Jaw 
supplying reels to Phillips Cable, which is another 
diversification in Moose Jaw. He’s never heard of Hydro-Mech 
Services of North Battleford, supplying treated water for the 
Shand project. He’s never heard of Vicwest Steel of Saskatoon 
— roof decking for the Shand power project. He’s never heard 
of Metal-Masters of Regina — metal cabinets. The list goes on 
and on. He doesn’t think these are jobs because they’re not in 
his Crown corporation. This is a Conservative family here, not 
the NDP family, and this family will deal in business and jobs 
and not in buying holes in the ground. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I address my question to the same 
minister. Mr. Minister, the people of Saskatchewan recognize 
very clearly that your government’s piratization plans have 
failed and are failing the people of this province. Never before 
have I heard a government state that its official policy for job 
creation is rain. And I ask you — I ask you, Mr. Minister — 
will you recognize reality? Will you recognize that over the past 
two years the province of Saskatchewan has seen a steady 
decline in our population — a steady decline — and we have 
now fallen, we have now fallen below the one million figure for 
the population of Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you recognize that the situation is 
grim? When will you recognize that the situation today under 
your government is as bad as it ever was under the 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

445 
 

Dirty Thirties — in the Dirty Thirties in the province of 
Saskatchewan? And I ask you, sir: when will you and your 
government cut the rhetoric and start cutting the mustard for the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, how can you answer a 
question like that? Was that a question? The member from 
Moose Jaw North . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The member for Moose Jaw North is 
against rain. Maybe he doesn’t need rain on his lawn, but we 
need rain on the fields of this province. I drove into Regina 
today and I saw no run-off. I saw no water in the sloughs. I 
don’t know where the ducks . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I believe the minister is 
being interrupted just a bit too frequently, and he has the right 
to be heard, and I wish to hear him and all members wish to 
hear him. Let’s give him that opportunity. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of this 
government is quite clear: we will provide jobs through greater 
economic growth, and that growth will come through public 
participation; that’s the people owning this province, and 
therefore we will have diversification. We acknowledge that we 
still need the help of God and that we still need rain. The NDP 
are against everything, including jobs and uranium, including 
jobs at a power plant, including jobs in all parts of 
Saskatchewan. The members opposite are critical of everything, 
including a request for rain, but they have no policy whatsoever 
— none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — New question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. 
When the government’s new plans, new initiatives for jobs are 
rain, Mr. Minister, I think the people of Saskatchewan would be 
extremely interested in just what your government has budgeted 
to create that most valuable substance. 
 
But let me share with you, sir, let me share with you some facts, 
some undeniable facts, the source of which is your government, 
Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, fact — over 6,200 people net loss in 
population in February alone; fact — 43,000 unemployed in 
this province and looking for work in February; fact — 21,000 
net loss in population over the past 14 months; fact — had those 
21,000 stayed home and looked for work in their home province 
of Saskatchewan, we would have an unemployment rate in this 
province of 14 per cent, one in seven looking for work in this 
province. 
 
And I ask you sir: in light of those facts — and don’t give me 
your piratization hog-wash; it’s obviously not working — what 
new initiatives, besides praying for rain, does your government 
have in mind to create jobs for the young people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say that 
praying for rain will be more effective than going back to 
socialism which the entire world is denouncing. 
 
Mikhail Gorbachev announced last week that he was going to 
abolish the Soviet land bank built on the deaths of 13 million 
Ukrainian farmers in the 1930s. He’s going to abolish the last 
land bank in the world. And I would submit that praying for 
rain will go a lot further than going back to socialism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opportunities ’89 Program 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to ask the minister in charge of rain 
— I guess it would be as appropriate a description as any. 
 
I want to narrow the focus if I could, Mr. Minister, for a 
moment. The group of people who are perhaps most hardest hit 
by your failure to act, is young people. I remind you, Mr. 
Minister, that the unemployment rate for young people in the 
province is seventeen and a half per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of those figures which ought to embarrass 
you, why is it that you’ve cut a million dollars or about a 
thousand jobs from the Opportunities ’89 program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
don’t want to hear about the 200 jobs-plus, 200 jobs at Gainers. 
They don’t want to hear about the manufacturing jobs at 
Hunter’s. They don’t want to hear about any of the 
diversification that is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, 
either in corporations or individually. They don’t want to listen 
to this, nor do they want to add and subtract. I will give them an 
opportunity to do their basic mathematics. 
 
With respect to the Opportunities ’89 program, we have 
budgeted the exact amount that was spent last year. It is only a 
matter of honesty to budget what you need. Last year showed 
we needed $3.1 million, and we’ve budgeted that amount. 
That’s the actual expenditure from last year. If there is a greater 
uptake, we could reconsider it. But we’re going on the basis of 
last year’s figures. 
 
So if they want to deal in paper transactions, we are talking 
about actual jobs, and last year was a good year for jobs for 
students in this province. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I want to 
thank the minister for the lesson in grade 3 math. 
 
Let me give you some assistance with the program. Mr. 
Minister, the reason why nobody took it up was because you cut 
from the program, you restricted it and made it not available to 
local governments or NGOs (non-governmental organizations). 
That’s why nobody took it up, Mr. Minister. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

446 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So the obvious question is, Mr. Minister, 
will you re-establish the effectiveness of the program and make 
it available to local governments and NGOs and put some more 
money in it so the program will work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s the NDP 
solution to everything. When the province already has a deficit 
and we don’t want to raise taxes, they want us to go and spend 
money that’s not needed. The municipalities have operated with 
their usual budget. The non-governmental organizations are 
contracting agencies, most of them, 200 of them with my 
Department of Social Services. We provide them a contract fee. 
 
The solution to economic growth is not pouring public money 
onto projects. The solution is to build sustainable economic 
growth through business and agriculture. That is the solution. 
 
And the members opposite say, ah, we have a deficit, taxes are 
too high, and their solution is, let’s just throw money on the 
problem and it’ll go away. That is not the solution. The solution 
is long-term and we are dealing with it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I gather, Mr. Speaker, the members don’t 
want to applaud any more than that. I want to commiserate with 
the member. You said you didn’t want to raise taxes. Well last 
week must have been an absolutely tragic week for you, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to remind you of the 
results of your diversification — 43,000 people unemployed, 
6,000 a month fleeing from your economic success. I wonder, 
Mr. Minister, if you’d take some of the facts into account and if 
you’d agree to provide some effective programs to create jobs 
for young people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are that while 
some people are leaving Saskatchewan, the number of jobs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — The number of jobs in manufacturing in 
the last year is up 4,000 jobs in a time when agriculture has 
suffered a lot. We have lost jobs in agriculture. The members 
opposite don’t acknowledge that rain has anything to do with 
agriculture. That tells me they have no agriculture policy 
because they don’t understand agriculture. They don’t 
understand manufacturing because they don’t understand the 
significance of 4,000 new jobs. They’re opposed to Cameco 
(Canadian Mining Energy Corporation) in uranium. They’re 
opposed to Weyerhaeuser in paper. They’re opposed to 
everything that makes money in this 

province. It’s all they’re in favour of is spending money, and 
then they wonder why there’s a deficit. Our policy is not 
throwing away money that you don’t have. Our policy is, this 
province has to earn money and then we’ll spend the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget for Education 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — My question is to the Minister of Education. 
And we’ve just heard the minister in charge of out-migration 
tell us that this government doesn’t have money for young 
people’s employment. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to talk about a place where you 
could find the money. You will know that on the weekend, the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation overwhelmingly voted to 
urge your government to cancel your $9 million birthday party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Saskatchewan taxpayers, along with teachers 
and rural municipal councillors, are opposed to $9 million of 
our money going to your political birthday party. Have you 
taken the advice of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation to 
heart, and will you take their urgings to your cabinet ministers 
and ask them to cancel the birthday party? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — No, Mr. Speaker, and the reason why 
I would not is this. The $9 million expenditure in the Future 
Corporation, a lot of that, Mr. Speaker, is going to be spent on 
the students of this province and on their education. Now the 
fact that the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) has the 
resolution or the story comes forward, it tells me what we have 
to do as a government is explain to the teachers and others 
across the province what we are doing there. 
 
The very first project that was announced under the Future 
Corporation that they may not be aware of, Mr. Speaker, was 
one indeed for our school children. Many more projects will be 
announced in the future. I think that’s not well understood, 
because one of our major focuses there, Mr. Speaker, is our 
children, and them taking their place in the world of the future, 
its technological world of the future, projects that will appeal to 
their inquiring minds. Mr. Speaker, that’s why. 
 
Because we consider our children’s futures important, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be funding projects in education through that 
corporation. And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly that’s why this 
government has doubled the amount of money we spent on our 
children’s education since the turn of this decade, Mr. Speaker. 
We consider them important. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 
of Education. Mr. Minister, your government only increased 
school board operating grants by less than 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

447 
 

4 per cent. Now for literally dozens of school boards across 
Saskatchewan that, in fact, means a cut; they have had their 
school grants cut. In particular, the Saskatoon public school 
board has had, in the last two years, an $800,000 cut in grants 
from your government, and in this year alone it’s a $400,000 
cut. That means that Saskatoon local taxpayers will have to pick 
up the shortfall. 
 
Now I think any reasonable person, Mr. Minister, would say 
that your government should cut the $9 million for the political 
birthday party and put that money into schools. Now, Mr. 
Minister, I’m asking you again: do you share that rational and 
reasonable conclusion that the $9 million should not go into a 
birthday party and should go into operating grants for our 
Saskatchewan young people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the 
hon. member that I too do not want money spent on a birthday 
party, and that’s why there is not going to be money spent on a 
birthday party; it’s going to be spent for our children. 
 
Then to answer the question about any reasonable, thinking 
person in terms of the view that they would take on a budget, 
well I want to put the case forward to the funding realities for 
Saskatoon public so that the thinking, reasoned person can have 
all the facts. 
 
There are two major things that determine how we divide up 
this pie, Mr. Speaker. Point number one: the pie increased this 
year by 4 per cent, roughly, for the . . . probably run slightly 
ahead of inflation. There’s a formula to divide that pie up. Now 
what would that formula divide it up on, Mr. Speaker? Well it 
would make sense that it be based on per student for the most 
part — spend the money per student. But because we want to be 
fair in this province, and some . . . For example, in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, they don’t have an opportunity to 
raise a lot of taxes from a local tax base because there isn’t the 
accessible tax base that there is, for example, in downtown 
Saskatoon. We also have the formula reflect an ability to pay, to 
be fair, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what the hon. member didn’t mention when she talked 
about Saskatoon public is that is has seen its enrolments go 
down by 323 students. Now, Mr. Speaker, if you’re making 
your payments based on per student and you have less students, 
wouldn’t it make sense then that maybe they wouldn’t get as 
much money, for example, compared to a board that saw its 
enrolments go up by 508, which is what Saskatoon, at St. 
Paul’s, the enrolment has grown by, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So let’s put all the facts on the table. Is she really calling for a 
change in the formula? And I sense I may have hit a nerve, Mr. 
Speaker, because she must come clear and tell us if she wants a 
change in the formula. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. The member from 
Regina Rosemont is sitting in his desk and hollering at the 
Chair. I do not appreciate that. If the member from Regina 
Rosemont has anything to say, he says it from his seat. 
Otherwise the courtesy of this House is not to holler 

at the Chair. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — In response to the minister’s response to my 
question, Mr. Minister, the reason why there are declining 
enrolments in this province is because people are fleeing 
Saskatchewan in droves. School boards still have schools to 
operate; they still have the utility increases; they still have all of 
the costs associated with education. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, new question. You will know that the 
University of Saskatchewan has stated it needs $11 million in 
increased funding this year in order to maintain the status quo. 
Your budget only provides for a $3 million increase for the two 
universities, plus a 10 million universities institutes 
enhancement fund. 
 
Could you tell this House how that $10 million pie will be 
divided up — what portion will be going to the University of 
Saskatchewan to help it deal with its enrolment quotas and 
underfunding; how much will be used by our institutes to 
replace the 600 instructors that you people fired, and the 
thousands of student spaces that you people eliminated; and 
what goes to upgrade the facilities at the University of Regina. 
Can you tell us how this $10 million is going to be spent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — In response to the member’s first 
observation about that enrolments are declining because people, 
I think, to use her words — a typical overstatement from that 
member, Mr. Speaker — that the people are fleeing the 
province. Well in this case, in Saskatoon, the 323 pupils from 
Saskatoon public must have fled to St. Paul’s because there the 
enrolment went up by 508. Now you can’t have it both ways, 
Mr. Speaker. The reality is in some places the enrolments are 
going down; in some places they are going up. Generally 
speaking, we’re at $200,000. 
 
The other point she raised about funding our universities and 
our institutes, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of this last budget. I’m 
proud of this last budget because it speaks directly to the 
importance that we attach to making sure that our young people 
have an opportunity to get a post-secondary education. And 
that’s why we put that $10 million fund in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and the people will be well served by it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 15 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Queen’s Bench Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

448 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
and an honour for me, as a member of the legislature from the 
city of Regina, to participate in the debate in another new 
provincial budget. 
 
I want to begin by congratulating my colleague, the member for 
Qu’Appelle-Lumsden, for an excellent financial statement 
which will provide sound management of our provincial 
finances into the 1990s. This budget will help build and develop 
our high level of people services in health care, in education, in 
family programs, that all of us have grown up with and want to 
maintain and improve for our kids, and indeed for our 
children’s children. 
 
On behalf of the constituents, my constituents of Regina South, 
which I have the honour of representing in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of Finance for his wise 
leadership of provincial finances to carry us forward into the 
trying years of the 1990s. 
 
Under the leadership of this minister, our government has 
worked long and hard to provide for the efficient management 
of our province’s financial resources in these past few difficult 
years. As a responsible government, we simply had to come to 
grips with the reality of declining provincial revenues. This 
resulted in sharp declines in world prices for our key resource 
and agricultural products, prices well beyond the control of the 
people of this province, and unpredictable as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who could have predicted back in the 1970s, even the former 
leader of the opposition indicated this, that back in the ’70s, 
when Saskatchewan’s economy was thriving, that world prices 
for our key resource and agricultural products would suffer such 
a severe drop, and more particularly, all at the same time. That 
was totally unpredictable. 
 
And added to these problems, what hit us last year but the worst 
drought since the 1930s. Mr. Speaker, it was a time for difficult, 
tough but fair decisions, just like any business or industry or 
organizations or family, for that matter. Governments have to 
bring expenditures in line with revenues. As business men and 
women, as family managers, as citizens, we all realize that you 
cannot spend more than you take in. 
 
Everybody, of course, realizes this except the member from 
Regina North, who laughs in his chair. It seems that not only he, 
but several others in the NDP opposition don’t realize that as 
well, Mr. Speaker, and it’s most unfortunate. You know with 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And the member from Regina 
North still keeps giggling at this. One day he will understand 
that you can’t spend more money than you take in, son. I mean, 
it’s simple, 

you can’t do that. So don’t laugh about it. There’s nothing to 
laugh about. It’s a serious proposition. And they shouldn’t elect 
a joke like you to serve in this Assembly if you think it’s 
humorous. So, Mr. Speaker, you know, with their total lack of 
business sense, they would have us add substantially to the cost 
of government. 
 
I mean, you know, they seem . . . I suppose they think that 
government is some strange, independent third party that has a 
money tree. Well, you’ll never be in the position of government 
to find out again that it isn’t some strange, independent third 
party organization with a money tree. 
 
Government, Mr. Speaker, is us, all of us, all of us in this 
Assembly, all of the people watching this debate this afternoon, 
that we’re taxpayers, we’re consumers. The people, the 
gentlemen in the gallery, you’re part of government; you both 
pay taxes and assume certain costs, and that’s how this all 
functions. But the NDP seem to think that, no, they can do this 
and that and add to the cost of government and everything 
comes out in the wash. Well that’s not so. You have to act 
responsibly. We have to maintain a high level of government 
service even during times of declining revenues. That’s 
difficult. 
 
The NDP have attempted, Mr. Speaker, at every opportunity to 
stir up many segments of our society with horror tales of 
reduced services. They’ve organized letter writing campaigns, 
protest marches, along with all other types of fear mongering. 
Wherever there’s been a rally or a picket line or a protest of any 
sort, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that you can be sure 
that the NDP has undoubtedly had a hand in it. And you can be 
sure that the Leader of the Opposition will have one of his 
back-benchers there, wherever, to speak or to lead the protests 
as he hides back in the wilderness somehow and freely admits 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from Moose Jaw . . . 
there he goes spouting off. Maybe he’s one of the ones. 
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition freely 
admitted in public that there was disunity in his caucus. Well 
when the leader says that publicly, the leader of a party publicly 
indicates that he has disunity in his caucus, it’s not something to 
be proud of and speak about in public. I think, rather, he should 
take his caucus aside and, you know, have a few words with 
them to show that maybe they can get some unity, maybe they 
can think together, maybe they can behave in this Assembly, 
but it’s apparent day after day after day that they either don’t 
care — they have no respect for this Assembly, for the chair, 
Mr. Speaker, as was shown again today and you had to point 
out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. I don’t think 
we . . . I would just like to ask the hon. member to refrain from 
that topic — I think it’s been settled — and continue with his 
other remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Well, I’m getting to a point, Mr. Speaker, 
that since he has assumed the duties of the Leader of the 
Opposition, the NDP have been using the sick, the elderly, the 
less fortunate in our society in order to exploit their own 
political purposes. In the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg by-election 
last December they used the politics of fear by telling the 
people that our 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

449 
 

government was going to close all hospitals in that 
constituency. And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because it relates to 
the budget. The budget doesn’t indicate that that indeed is 
occurring. 
 
What shameful behaviour by the Leader of the Opposition and 
by the opposition members that went along with that to take that 
kind of a stance. The voters of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg were 
not taken in by that kind of fear mongering shown by the 
Leader of the Opposition, and it’s no wonder that the NDP 
opposition is quickly losing any credibility that they may have 
had with the people of this province. No wonder there’s so 
much second-guessing going on within the NDP party itself 
about their strategies, about their tactics. 
 
I recently read in one of their own publications: 
 

People, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, have no reason 
to vote for the NDP. (I mean that’s written in their own 
publication by one of their own.) All we do is talk about 
how we will restore this, or defend that, or fight to 
maintain something else. 
 

Article goes on: 
 

If this is all that the people in Saskatchewan wanted, then 
they wouldn’t have voted against us in 1982. 
 

I mean, these are all written by their own folks in their own 
publications, and it’s no wonder. They have no policies, they 
have no programs, they have nothing left over there. 
 
They are a political party in total disarray — only scare tactics, 
only protest marches — and I should add to those NDP 
statements, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan not 
only didn’t vote for them in 1982, they didn’t vote for them in 
1986. I seriously doubt that when the time comes in the ’90 or 
’91 election that I doubt they will vote for them then either. So 
it’s no wonder that the current Leader of the Opposition is 
looking at the vacant leadership of their national party. 
 
No one apparently wants the job there either. It’s particularly, I 
think, a union-leader-dominated party federally. And I suppose 
that would be some type of an escape for the opposition leader, 
a chance for him to get out of Saskatchewan and maybe save 
face, but . . . particularly, you know, if his caucus goes on the 
way they do. But none the less I can tell him this, their current 
fear mongering, their current scare tactics are not going over 
with the people of Saskatchewan. He knows it, and members of 
his party know it as well. 
 
In these difficult economic times of the past few years, the 
Minister of Finance has given us sound financial management 
to strengthen the fiscal position of our province. Good progress 
has been made in controlling the provincial debt, while at the 
same time providing increased support to health care, for 
education, for families, and for our staple industry of 
agriculture. 
 
And the member from Saskatoon Centre, I hope that 

when she enters this debate, rather than from her chair but on 
the floor, has something meaningful to say. So far, you know, 
everything that’s come from that end of it, from her chair, 
hasn’t made much sense. I will touch on that later in my 
remarks, where she is confused about the housing programs in 
this province. 
 
She sits there as the critic for housing and doesn’t even 
understand the program. I have some papers that I will probably 
send her way and ask her to read, so that if she’s going to be the 
critic of housing for the seniors, she’ll understand what those 
programs are all about. She can’t say one thing in this 
Assembly and then take out an ad in the local paper in 
Saskatoon saying something totally different and congratulating 
people for it. I mean, you can’t be hypocritical and get away 
with it. 
 
The actions that this government took, Mr. Speaker, to protect 
the Saskatchewan institutions so dear to all of us, indeed to 
protect the well-being of all of us, are earning us the respect of 
all of the people in Saskatchewan. In the budget now before us, 
we will continue to protect and enhance the essential programs 
of health care, education, family, family farm. We will also 
continue the process to develop, to diversify our economy, to 
protect our homes against the threat of high interest, to provide 
more jobs for our citizens, more business opportunities. That 
entire range of protection, Mr. Speaker, is in this budget. And 
we will accomplish all of this at the same time while we are 
reducing the deficit for the third consecutive year. 
 
(1445) 
 
Health care for the people of Saskatchewan remains our number 
one priority, as it has been since the government of our current 
Premier came into office. This year, funding will be increased 
by over $130 million for health care, and that’s an increase of 
11 per cent over last year. 
 
And I am very pleased, Mr. Speaker, as I travel throughout my 
constituency of Regina South, to point that out to all of my 
constituents, all of my voters, that we are indeed spending more 
money than ever before in the history of this province on health 
care. Total expenditures probably will amount to nearly $1.4 
billion, the largest expenditure on health, as I mentioned, in our 
history, and obviously much more support for health care than 
the NDP ever gave, despite all the noise that they may be 
making about it. 
 
That amounts, Mr. Speaker, to almost $1,400 for every person 
— every man, woman, and child that lives in our province. No 
wonder our health care system continues to be the envy of most 
parts of the world. 
 
The NDP continues their old party refrain about cut-backs in 
health. The people of Saskatchewan hardly regard an increase 
of $130 million in health support expenditures as a cut-back. I 
mean, how can they. A hundred and thirty million dollars in an 
increase is more than perhaps a dozen total department budgets 
in government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a massive increase — an 11 
per cent increase. And there is no person that will argue in any 
meaningful way that that indeed represents a cut-back. It’s 
impossible. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

450 
 

But as usual, the NDP is out of step with the people of 
Saskatchewan. They seem to be out of step with them most of 
the time and continue on in that same trend. 
 
For education, an increase of $52 million in our current budget, 
bringing expenditures in education this year to a total of $841 
million, an increase, as I mentioned, of $52 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these very substantial increases in the essential 
programs of health care and education are being achieved, as I 
mentioned earlier, while we are still further reducing and 
attacking the deficit. For the third consecutive year, as I 
mentioned, we have attacked the deficit, and this year we will 
reduce it to $226 million. It represents a drop of $102 million or 
31 per cent from last year’s deficit. 
 
And I think, under the circumstances, it’s very good news that 
has been issued by our Minister of Finance. We are very, very 
pleased, as is the business community and the chamber of 
commerce, with the good progress that we are making in 
reducing the annual deficit. And while clearly we would like to 
be at a balanced budget as quickly as possible, everyone 
recognizes that we have to do the best we can under very 
difficult circumstances and get the fine balance of providing 
services in various programs and providing what the people 
need for protection, and at the same time address that deficit. 
 
We outlined a plan a few years ago on how we were going to 
manage our deficit and get it under control, and we are well on 
target and on track to get there. And I believe that the thinking 
people of this province are pleased that we are in a position to 
say that we are on track and that we will get there. 
 
All this goes on while at the same time we provide the 
increased care for health care and education and programs . . . 
additional programs for supporting our families and the family 
farm. And with a good crop this summer and continued sound 
management of the province’s finance by the government, we 
hope to be able to forecast that balanced budget, or very close to 
it, within the next year or two. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, will be an accomplishment that all of the 
people in this province can take pride in. It will make us the 
envy of many provinces across Canada, provinces left with 
deficits much, much larger than ours. The NDP government in 
Manitoba that were defeated by the Tories a couple of years ago 
— massive accumulated deficit that they left for the incoming 
Conservative government — just a massive debt load for all of 
the people in Manitoba. A tremendous struggle, and that’s why 
I believe that when we as if . . . if or when we reach our 
balanced budget and how we are managing our deficit now will 
truly be a credit to all of the people of this province. 
 
As the Minister of Urban Affairs, I’m pleased to say that it’s a 
tremendous budget for municipalities throughout our entire 
province. The budget provides $30 million — $30 million new 
dollars for new programs for our municipalities. No wonder I 
don’t get any questions in question period. There’s not much 
that they can ask. And 

I will take some time to review some of these new initiatives, 
Mr. Speaker, and what their impact will be on communities 
throughout the province. 
 
I look forward to my SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) regional conferences this spring 
which, rather than being attended by my critic in the past, was 
attended by the Leader of the Opposition. I would suspect, Mr. 
Speaker, that these spring conferences will see a return by the 
opposition sending their critic rather than the Leader of the 
Opposition because there’s not much for them to complain 
about to the municipalities. And the municipalities are very 
pleased with how our government has dealt with their problems 
over the last few years. 
 
And it’s fair to say that over the last few years SUMA, 
understanding the position of our government, have not been 
critical with the government but rather have worked with this 
government as we have attacked our problems throughout the 
province. It’s fair to say that because of the nearness of my seat 
in Regina and the Regina city council that yes, every now and 
then I seem to get into a little bit of a foofraw with that council, 
and I don’t want to. But it’s interesting that while I can have an 
argument with my local city council, it doesn’t spread beyond 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. It seems that the other 511 communities 
of our province are satisfied with this government. It’s unique 
how it appears that only the city of Regina attacks us, but . . . 
 
In late January I attended again the annual convention of the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, as I do every 
year. And it’s a great opportunity for me to meet with municipal 
officials to discuss with them their concerns, their problems, 
and perhaps more importantly to get their feedback and input 
into our programs. Mr. Speaker, our government is widely 
known throughout the province as always consulting with the 
people on various matters, and it’s most unusual if we just 
simply barge ahead and install something new without 
discussions and consultations with the various interest groups. 
 
And I’m really pleased that this is how our government 
functions and does indeed consult, because it’s through these 
consultative processes that programs are designed that are very, 
very effective. They are effective from the point of view of cost 
because there is very little dollar waste, and they are effective 
from the point of service and delivery because they attack the 
problem head-on, because they are indeed designed by the 
people that will be using those programs. 
 
So our government has always been guided by a belief in a 
consultative approach on developing legislation and programs. 
And it’s an approach that my department and I, for example, 
have followed in a lot of instances — the recent legislation on 
dog control and the business assistance tax program. And 
they’ll probably start laughing over there again about dog 
control. They seem to laugh about it every time I mention it, 
and it’s really unfortunate. But that dog control legislation was 
brought about as consultation between our government and 
SUMA, and there was nothing funny about it. It was a serious 
piece of legislation, but the NDP seemed to think that it was 
kind of humorous. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

451 
 

The business tax assistance program that we were trying to 
come up . . . I’d always told SUMA that if the government 
could be a part of the solution . . . it was indeed a local problem, 
but if the government could be a part of the solution, we would 
like to be. And we were trying to be a part of this solution 
within a year on a problem that has existed for maybe 40 years, 
but certainly has expanded or compressed itself into a major 
problem with the business community in the last year or two. 
And in consultation with various interest groups, chambers, 
independent Canadian small business, SUMA — by consulting 
with those people we came up with the business tax assistance 
program that indeed will meet their needs and will satisfy the 
business community of this province. 
 
A year ago, Mr. Speaker, if you recall, headlines continually in 
the media about business tax problems, about the business 
community rebelling in various municipalities throughout the 
province, on and on and on. Now? No. Seems that that 
particular issue has faded and faded dramatically. 
 
Now having said that, we all recognize that this business tax 
assistance program is only a bridge. It’s only a three-year 
program, but it does indeed, Mr. Speaker, give us three years. I 
say us — government, the local governments, and the business 
community — three years in which to permanently address the 
business tax problem. 
 
I can tell you that from my discussions with officials from 
SUMA and from municipalities throughout this province, that 
this part of our budget is responding to the needs of our 
municipalities, and that certainly the budget overall has 
responded to the needs of the municipalities. 
 
Yes, there are some parts of the budget that understandably they 
will have some comments and observations on, and dislikes — 
that’s normal. That’s not unusual. You can’t satisfy everybody 
about everything all of the time, and they know that. 
 
But by and large, they are extremely satisfied with the budget. 
They see it as being very fair. They recognize the emphasis that 
our government has put on health and education and protecting 
people. And they can see that with the additional help that we 
have now given the municipalities, we are carrying that even 
again forward, protecting people, because indeed we are 
protecting the taxpayer at the local level by providing more 
badly needed dollars in the budget. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, I attended the annual SUMA convention 
recently, and there were several resolutions passed at that 
convention that called for renewed capital funding. Well we’re 
all pleased to see that this budget responds to those resolutions 
with funding for a new six-year, $100 million program — six 
years, Mr. Speaker, $100 million — a program providing 
capital assistance to urban and rural municipalities. First time 
ever that any government in the history of this province has 
provided capital funding to rural municipalities, and in this 
fiscal year we have budgeted almost $17 million. 

I will soon be in contact with the executive of the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association in each of the cities, the 12 
cities, to talk about how they would like these funds distributed 
over the next six years and how they would like to indeed see 
these funds being used. Again, a very important part of the 
consultative process. They are the recipients of those dollars. 
How will they be shared? How will they be spent? And 
consultation always works far, far better than confrontation, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will develop programs that will be successful 
and pleasing to everybody. 
 
I am confident that the program will go a long, long way in 
assisting our municipalities in repairing and replacing the 
deteriorating infrastructure in our communities, and thereby 
ensuring that future generations have the infrastructure to 
provide the capacity to take full advantage of the economic 
development opportunities and challenges ahead. Economic 
development and diversification, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely 
vital to our province, absolutely vital to our rural communities, 
absolutely vital to northern Saskatchewan. And as a result, we 
have to look at economic development opportunities that could 
be enhanced with the proper spending of these capital dollars 
relating to infrastructure renewal, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
I note as well that additional capital funding for recreational and 
cultural products will also be provided through another line in 
the budget through Saskatchewan Parks, Recreation and 
Culture, and it will be funded by lottery revenues. An additional 
$33 million — additional $33 million — will be provided over 
the next six years through that department. And I note that this 
initiative also responds to resolutions from the SUMA 
convention calling for assistance for deteriorating rinks and 
arenas. Funds from this program will go a long way to repairing 
and replacing the deteriorating rinks and arenas in many 
communities, which has been a real problem recently in many 
of our communities where the local rink is a gathering place in 
the winter-time. 
 
And I know that the Saskatchewan Water Corporation will have 
an additional $2 million for sewage lagoons to our rural 
communities. 
 
And by the time that we look at various capital projects, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, throughout the province that are contained 
within the budget and will be contained in future budgets, as we 
negotiate agreements with our cities throughout the province 
and other projects are announced as time goes by, that probably 
the truth of the matter is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this budget 
will be leaning towards $200 million in capital financing over 
the next six years, although the line 
_by-line at this point in time only refers to about $135 million. 
 
In addition to the capital program that I just mentioned for 
recreational facilities, I also note that the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation has announced that it will be reducing its electrical 
rates for community-owned rinks and urban and rural 
municipalities by 50 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The power 
rates will be cut in half and thereby meeting another 
long-standing concern of SUMA 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

452 
 

and our small urban communities in the country. 
 
Many of our members who come from a small community 
know that the local rink or arena is the life-blood of their 
community. But operating costs and primarily the high 
electrical cost can cause a hardship for many of these smaller 
communities. And I don’t need to tell you that a cut of 50 per 
cent in electrical rates will be quite a boost for those small rural 
communities, and it will ensure the continuation of those badly 
needed facilities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another program of major significance to 
our urban municipalities is the municipal revenue-sharing 
program which provides 15 per cent of the operating revenues 
for our municipalities, and this year I’m pleased that the 
revenue-sharing pool will amount to $67 million. And while 
some may argue that the pool was not increased, I say to them, 
look at all of the other new initiatives that have been undertaken 
by this government. 
 
The urban municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have done a 
terrific job in addressing their local budgets, and as our 
revenues have dropped, we have not dropped our revenue 
sharing but, rather, contained it. And the municipalities 
recognize that. 
 
So they did what we did, and they’re having a look at their 
expenditure side, and they are managing their expenses very, 
very well. We have not seen significant property tax increases, 
nor should we expect to see that, as the elected officials in our 
local municipalities go about doing their task of containing their 
expenditures and living within their means. And for that they 
should be congratulated, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And now with the welcome addition of capital funding, it 
removes the pressure of the revenue-sharing side from them, 
and they can go about the task of setting their budgets without 
too much interruption of any service, or without any major tax 
increases. 
 
One hundred million dollar capital grant program for urban and 
rural municipalities, over 32 million in new grants for 
recreational and cultural facilities for municipal governments. A 
new $10 million business tax assistance program to help 
municipalities resolve the business tax issue — all of that 
representing $30 million in new additional moneys in the 
Department of Urban Affairs. 
 
A 20 per cent increase in funding for urban transportation 
projects by the Department of Highways. A new initiative to 
support needed sewer and water projects to preserve and protect 
our environment. All of these, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
However, we will continue to meet the wishes of SUMA as it 
relates to the revenue-sharing pool. We will continue to meet 
the wishes of SUMA for the distribution of that pool by 
maintaining a safety net for communities so that no community 
receives less than 5 per cent below last year’s grant. So that 
although, as I mentioned earlier, we did not increase the size of 
the pool, we have, by virtue of consultation with SUMA, put in 
a 5 per cent safety net so that those communities that are 
experiencing declines in their population will not suffer a loss 
of more than 5 per 

cent in their revenue-sharing grant. 
 
I’m pleased to say that I have already notified the mayors and 
councils of all communities, all communities, informing them 
of the level of their grant for this fiscal year so that they can 
indeed finalize their municipal budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on occasion, along with all of the dollars and 
capital dollars that I’ve just talked about, on occasion our 
government is asked to provide financial assistance for 
special-purpose urban capital projects, such as the 
Regina-Moose Jaw carbon filtration plant. I’ll mention that one, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because a lot of the people in my 
community, in my constituency, are familiar with that. The 
Lloydminster sewage treatment plant is another one. In 
Saskatoon we’ve had Saskatchewan Place. Those special 
purpose funding. 
 
This year, this fiscal year we’ll provide funding for the 
implementation of the beginning of the Regina rail relocation 
project. And it will represent the first year of the province’s $25 
million commitment to that project so that the people of Regina 
would have to understand that our government has a 
commitment now of $25 million for the Regina rail relocation 
program — significant capital dollars that sometimes the people 
of Regina overlook that the provincial government is indeed 
contributing to the city of Regina coffers — $25 million. 
 
Now when complete, the project will provide Regina with 
numerous opportunities for economic and commercial 
redevelopment in various areas. And if the city ever gets to 
phase 2, the downtown core, well then it would even be more 
significant. 
 
One other thing in our budget that might go unnoticed in the 
urban affairs side of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is something that I 
would talk about for a moment, the rat eradication program that 
people in urban centres might just have a little difficulty 
understanding. But one of the primary roles of any government 
is the protection of society. And last year we demonstrated our 
commitment to protecting our residents when we passed 
legislation to control dangerous dogs. This year, as part of a 
six-year program, our government will allocate $1.6 million to 
implement a thorough and complete program to rid our 
province of a real menace — rats. 
 
It is estimated that rats cause at least $30 million damage each 
year — each year $30 million damage through the loss of 
foodstuff and damage to buildings. More importantly, more 
importantly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rats present a greater threat to 
society through the transmission of disease to livestock and 
humans. Our goal is to make Saskatchewan a rat-free province 
within the next decade. 
 
Now I mention that in context with our dangerous dog 
legislation, and I say that for a reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
reason is, the NDP thought that the dangerous dog legislation 
was pretty comical and they laughed at it. I hope for the sake of 
this province that the NDP opposite will not see the rat 
eradication program in the same light. It is indeed a serious 
problem that our government is prepared to do something 
about, and I 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

453 
 

believe the people of this province will really appreciate when 
the program is complete. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year we have transferred a couple of 
programs from our Urban Affairs budget to other departments 
to improve implementation as well as program delivery. The 
transit for the disabled program that has been in our department 
for a few years now has been transferred to Saskatchewan 
Human Resources, Labour and Employment in order to build 
closer links with other programs targeted for disabled people 
that is in their budget already. So it will be kind of a central 
clearing-house for all of the disabled programs. The 
communities that have been involved in that program with us in 
the past appreciate the fact that I have already indicated to them 
that their budget dollars will be the same and simply be 
delivered through another program. 
 
One other change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, funding for urban 
parks. Wascana Centre in Regina, Meewasin Valley Authority 
in Saskatoon, Wakamow in Moose Jaw, and Chinook Parkway 
in Swift Current are being transferred to Saskatchewan Parks, 
Recreation and Culture to bring about again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a closer co-ordination in park planning and 
development throughout the province. 
 
That department, as we all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is doing 
a magnificent job on our provincial parks. Urban parks are very 
important to our government, and with the expertise in that 
department I think it only stands to reason that an amalgamation 
of that sort is very positive. And I’m confident that these 
program changes will result in improved service as well as 
program delivery in those areas. 
 
You know, it’s amazing. I’m talking here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about a couple of changes in our budget, one being in the area 
of urban parks, and the other one, transit for the disabled. 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont, from his chair, cried 
something about the ward system. Now if you have ever lived 
in the past, if you have ever had your head in the sand, if you 
could ever start walking backwards into the future, I’m . . . you 
guys take the cake. Talking the ward system. Well I’m not even 
close to . . . and the ward system is a part of . . . Get with it. Do 
you think the people in Regina Rosemont are concerned at this 
time with the ward system? There isn’t even another municipal 
election for a couple of years, so get with it. You’re so out of 
step with the people of your constituency and of this province, 
you don’t have the foggiest idea what’s going on out there. 
 
Good lord, you know, all he can do is speak from his chair 
about the ward system. Even the media is giggling about that. 
They haven’t written about the ward system for the last seven or 
eight months. I mean, it’s a part of history now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned a little bit earlier about business tax 
and about how our government wanted to be a part of the 
solution if we could. It was a problem that the urban 
municipalities had at the local level, but I’ll just go into it a 
little bit more detail because this budget continues our 

government’s program of helping to stimulate business and 
industry, something that the NDP members opposite know very, 
very little of. But we like to believe, and we know, after 
discussions and consultations with our friends in the business 
community, that we on this side of the House certainly do know 
how to assist our businesses stimulate business. We know how 
to assist our business community and stimulate their side of 
their commercial activity. 
 
(1515) 
 
One way, of course, is the business tax. And by stimulating that 
particular sector of our economy, it encourages growth and 
expansion, and indeed it provides more jobs and diversification 
and more business opportunities for the citizens of this 
province. It’s kind of a snowballing effect and things just keep 
rolling along. 
 
But with their typical anti-business attitude, the NDP simply 
cannot understand the support and the encouragement that our 
government gives to small business in this province. It will be 
interesting one day . . . As I looked at the orders of the day in 
the blues, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see that one day we will be 
having a debate. There is a resolution put forward by the NDP 
concerning small business and diversification of our economy 
and the like. And I am looking forward to that debate because I 
can assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I will stand in my 
place on that day as well and talk nothing but business to them 
for a couple of hours or more to try to give them a lesson. I’ve 
been doing that for five or six years now — they still don’t 
understand what it’s all about — but with their typical 
anti-business attitude, the NDP simply cannot understand the 
support and the encouragement that our government gives and 
will continue to give small business in this province. Small 
business is indeed the engine that drives the economy of this 
province, and we will continue to grease the wheels of that 
small engine. 
 
The NDP still don’t realize after seven years in opposition that 
it is the small business and industries here that drive the 
economy in this province, that we have to diversify. No longer 
can we just sit down and get after one sector, the agricultural 
sector; we have to diversify. 
 
It’s business and industry . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Lining the pockets of the Tories . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Now the member from Regina Elphinstone 
comes in. Now here he is; here’s a member that moves in from 
— a parachute candidate — and moves into Regina 
Elphinstone, purports to know everything about agriculture, and 
now he comes in here and he knows everything about business. 
Well we’ll find out, we’ll find out if the member from Regina 
Elphinstone indeed does. And when your resolution comes up, 
I’d like you to speak first and I’ll make a few notes and then 
we’ll compare after it’s all over. And rather than speaking from 
your chair as you always do, get up and speak on it. 
 
It’s business and it’s industry that provides the jobs and 
employment. And the only way the NDP knows how to create 
jobs is to add people to the provincial government 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

454 
 

payroll and to appoint all of their friends and to appoint all of 
their relatives to various positions throughout government. 
Every now and then they accuse of us of doing that thing, but if 
we ever started comparing the lists, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
would be overwhelming to see the appointments that go on over 
there, because that’s the only way that they believe the 
economy can go along, and that’s the size of government, 
adding people to the provincial government payroll. 
 
And it was those thousands of jobs that they added to the public 
payroll and their family of Crown corporations and in 
government departments and agencies that helped to create the 
deficit that we’re now working hard to reduce. When we took 
over this government in 1982, the size of government was 
overwhelming because that’s all they knew — big government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is solidly behind business. We 
represent the business community of this province. We know 
it’s business that creates wealth in our society. We know that 
it’s the private sector that creates the jobs and opportunities, not 
government. This government works to assist small business 
and industry in every way that we possibly can. We don’t stifle. 
We don’t strangle them with bureaucratic regulations the way 
the NDP did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Like Sunday shopping. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Like Sunday shopping. You want to debate 
Sunday shopping with me? The member from Prince Albert — 
now it’s interesting to note that it comes from you, because you 
know that your city council is withdrawing the by-law, and they 
will let the business community regulate shopping hours in 
Prince Albert. Now where have you been while they made that 
announcement? Now he’s not talking from his chair; he’s pretty 
quiet. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be visiting that community and 
I will be speaking to the retailers of that community, because I 
don’t have a problem at all in consulting and discussing with 
the sector that I came from — the retailing industry. I have no 
trouble with discussing with them the pros and the cons of 
Sunday shopping. They don’t have to open on Sundays if they 
don’t want to. People don’t have to shop on Sundays if they 
don’t want to. 
 
The people that argue Sunday shopping on the basis of religious 
freedoms, the fact that they can’t go to church, are hiding 
behind something that isn’t there. Statistics indicate that only 15 
per cent of our population attends church regularly. So you 
can’t say then . . . you can’t use it as an excuse. You can’t have 
it both ways. You can’t have the chairman of the Coalition 
Against Sunday Shopping breaking his own regulations. You 
can’t have that. 
 
You can’t have major, large department chains that prey 
continually on rural communities saying that opening on 
Sundays is going to destroy the fabric of rural retailing when 
it’s those very large enterprises that are attacking it with 
catalogue shopping centres paying very small portions of 
business tax, hiding behind that skirt. Mr. 

 Deputy Speaker, I’ve gone around this province a long time 
speaking about Sunday shopping. Why do you have to regulate 
people’s lives? The market-place will regulate itself if you 
allow it to and if you stay out of interfering with their life. 
 
This budget’s $1.1 billion construction program for provincial 
hospitals, for schools, for highways and road construction, for 
other capital projects, will be a tremendous boom, an asset to 
our small business and industry segment of our economy. 
Imagine, $1.1 billion going to our businesses and industries in 
this province. Do you recognize at all what that will do for 
them? We estimate that that program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will 
support more than 9,500 jobs. 
 
Also included in the budget is the $10 million business tax 
assistance program that will assist municipalities with that 
battle and which will provide the business community with 
badly needed tax relief. For the past year the business tax has 
been a key issue with the business people, and I’m pleased that 
our government is now going to be a part of the solution. 
 
In this session I will introduce the business tax assistance 
program that will be a three-year, $30 million program. And 
reaction to that program has been extremely positive. And you 
know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP are going to vote 
against that. They will vote against that business tax assistance 
and all the while claim that they are friends, the new-found 
friends of the business community, and they will be voting 
against the business tax assistance program. But reaction to that 
program has been extremely positive from the business 
community, obviously, but also from the local government 
sector. 
 
In developing the program I carried out extensive consultations 
with the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, and 
it’s as a result of their suggestions that we decided to make the 
provincial rebate program unconditional — not to have it tied to 
similar cuts on the municipal side. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the program will have the effect of 
reducing business taxes about 25 per cent right across the 
province. And the rebate formula will provide relatively greater 
benefits to the very smallest of businesses so that for them, for 
indeed an awful lot of our small businesses throughout the 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will effectively be no 
business tax. 
 
Our initiative on the business tax situation is only a part of the 
solution. As I mentioned, I don’t look upon it as a permanent 
program; it’s only a bridge. It’s my hope that municipalities 
right across the province will look seriously at the level of 
business tax in their own communities with the aim of reducing 
or eliminating the tax. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my own city, Regina, my 
constituency, Regina South, where an awful lot of members of 
the business community live, here in Regina, unfortunately we 
have a severe business tax problem. And I hope that the city of 
Regina council can really do a job at looking at the high level of 
business tax. It seems that municipalities throughout the 
province are prepared 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

455 
 

to look at their business tax and do something about it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, while the mayor and most of the council in the 
city of Regina sit idly by and will not do anything for the 
business community in Regina. 
 
And I plead with them, regardless of the political outlook that 
they may have, regardless of the political stripe that they may 
carry, I plead with them to show compassion for the business 
community of the city of Regina and do something about the 
high level of business tax in this city. 
 
Even the NDP opposite claim to be their friends. Well then if 
they are — the business community friends — if they are, then 
don’t vote against this part of the budget. Vote for this business 
tax. Don’t vote against it. You will vote against it . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
What a comment that was just made out of his seat. I won’t 
even repeat that. I won’t even repeat that. The member from 
Regina Elphinstone making a comment about one of the 
aldermen of the city of Regina by name. What a disgrace; you 
should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
It is my hope that municipalities across our province, as I 
mentioned, will look seriously at the level of business tax in 
their communities with the aim of reducing or eliminating the 
tax. You know, it’s only by reviewing their own revenues and 
spending priorities and by working with their own business 
community that a lasting solution to the business tax problem 
can be found, and some communities have already discovered 
that. Some municipal councils have already decided to provide 
their own rebates to businesses, and I hope that more will 
follow so that eventually the tax can be eliminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to comment briefly in my remarks today 
on a couple of additional programs and activities from my 
Urban Affairs portfolio that I haven’t spoken of, that are also 
included in some of the changes contemplated in our 
department. I think that we all agree that good budgeting, 
accounting, and financial reporting are corner-stones upon 
which sound government decisions can be made from all levels 
of government. 
 
The public expects and deserves good financial management, 
and because of this The Urban Municipal Act set certain 
standards regarding municipal accounting and reporting 
practices. Over the past three years my department has reviewed 
these standards with a view to modernization and improvement, 
and this has involved extensive consultations with 
municipalities, with municipal auditors, and financial experts 
right across Canada. 
 
The result of this work has been the recent introduction of a 
new accounting and financial reporting package for urban 
municipalities. We hope that this new package will accomplish 
the following objectives: greater consistency in municipal 
accounting policy and practices; more meaningful presentation 
of financial information to councils, the general public, and 
indeed to the provincial government; enhanced financial 
management at the community level; and finally, greater 
accountability. 
 
As with any new approach or system, there are transition 
challenges and growing pains. We expect some of this, 

and we are looking forward to working with municipalities on 
this very important venture. 
 
Included in the budget this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
pleased to indicate a small increase and report to this Assembly 
that the Saskatchewan Municipal Board that became operational 
October 1, following legislation that was passed in the last 
session, will have an increase in its budget. The new board 
combines the jurisdictions and responsibility of the previous 
local government board, the planning appeals board, and the 
assessment appeals board. It combines all of this into one single 
board. The new board provides both local governments and 
members of the public with more effective service. It now has a 
broader base of expertise among its staff and board members on 
which to draw, and a greater flexibility to respond to increased 
work-loads. 
 
(1530) 
 
I’m pleased to tell this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
amalgamation of these three agencies into one more effective 
body is proving to be a successful move. I’m confident that the 
new Saskatchewan Municipal Board will help our local 
government deal with the issues and challenges of the 1990s. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has been almost six years since The 
Northern Municipalities Act was passed, establishing our 
northern municipalities and giving them the framework for 
local government and local decision making. And it was a 
milestone in the development of our northern communities 
because it put the responsibility for local decisions where it 
belongs, with the local community leaders. And I commend our 
northern community leaders for having taken up the challenges 
of local government. 
 
And as I visit my friends in the North and the new leaders of the 
municipalities in the North, we have extremely interesting 
discussions. And it’s interesting to note their change in attitude 
and how their concern for their communities and how their 
concern for good, effective government at their level is really 
starting to come about. They have seemed to be always satisfied 
with the budgetary decisions made by the provincial 
government. It appears that where at one time the northern 
communities were always so desperately seeking nothing but 
funding, their attitudes now are such that they are reasonably 
satisfied with the level of funding. 
 
But they’re searching for something else; they’re searching for 
guidance; they’re searching for encouragement as they deal 
with the problems in their local communities. And where 
originally, when I was first elected in 1982 and visited the 
northern communities, there was a little feeling of, maybe, 
uneasiness, or you quite didn’t know what their attitude would 
be or our attitude would be as it related to some of these 
changes, now you go in with confidence and enjoyment as you 
sit around the table and discuss problems of mutual concern, 
knowing that in all probability these problems will be resolved 
and the leaders will return to their communities encouraged and 
feeling vibrant and showing the leadership skills that they have. 
And that is why they were elected to lead in their local 
communities. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

456 
 

And while I’m speaking about that, it’s interesting to note that 
last year, for instance, when I announced the renewal of the 
capital funding for the northern communities, they were more 
than pleased, more than pleased that the government was able to 
continue that capital funding for them, while here in the 
southern part of the province the capital funding was still not in 
place. 
 
And the northern communities recognized that they were 
getting that something special because of the reduced tax base 
that exists up there. But by the same token, the government 
recognized the need for capital funding for their communities to 
keep their small northern communities alive and vibrant. And 
this year the revenue-sharing pool, again through the formula 
with SUMA — and the northern representatives sit on the 
SUMA executive — the 5 per cent safety net applying to the 
northern communities equally as it does in the communities in 
the South, they recognize that. The revenue-sharing 
distribution, they have no problem with any of that. And it’s 
really an encouraging thing to see, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I travel with my friends in the northern 
communities. 
 
But getting back to The Northern Municipalities Act, the 
legislation was first developed with the intention that northern 
municipalities would be extended the same powers and the 
same responsibilities that urban municipalities have under The 
Urban Municipalities Act. However, since The Northern 
Municipalities Act was brought in, a number of major 
amendments have been made to The Urban Municipalities Act, 
and most recently of course last year with amendments dealing 
with store hours and control of dangerous dogs. And as a result, 
The Northern Municipalities Act has become out of date, and 
northern municipalities no longer have the same powers as their 
southern counterparts. 
 
And it’s kind of interesting — again, and I refer to the 
dangerous dog legislation — the northern communities have 
problems in the North with dangerous dogs. The leaders do 
want to address the concerns that they have. The leaders 
recognize that they don’t have the authority to deal with the 
dangerous dogs up there and want to. They don’t believe that 
there’s anything funny about the changes that we made to the 
urban Act the way the members of the NDP do. The northern 
communities are waiting for the same power so that they can 
indeed deal with their problems in the North. It is a not a 
laughing matter for them. 
 
But in this session, I hope to bring forward a fairly lengthy Bill 
to bring The Northern Municipalities Act up to date and current 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if you had something to 
say, you could get up here and stand and debate the budget. I 
don’t know, you’re getting up and walking around. I don’t 
know if you’re going to prepare your remarks or not. Let’s see 
what you’ve got to say when it’s your turn. If you can get up 
here and stand up and make some sense, you’re more than 
welcome. I’ll sit down. 
 
In a few short years under our government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we here in Saskatchewan have become the leader in 
North America in providing quality social housing for those 
who need it most, for our senior 

citizens, for low income families, for disabled people. 
 
And I’m going to talk for a moment about the other side of my 
portfolio which is indeed housing. But our success has been 
achieved through the efforts, really volunteer efforts, of our 
local housing authorities right across our province, along with 
other non-profit, private and public housing organizations 
working in close co-operation with Sask Housing, and of course 
with our strong federal partner, Canada Mortgage and Housing 
Corporation — all of us serving in the finest Saskatchewan 
traditions, sharing our time, knowledge, and energy to help 
others. 
 
What successes the corporation has accomplished, and it’s 
owed mainly to the partnerships, as I mentioned, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that have been made between all levels of government 
in our province — federal, provincial, municipal — and with 
the local housing authorities, all of those volunteers, and with 
the non-profit and private developers in Saskatchewan, we now 
have the amazing total of over 280 local housing authorities 
across our province providing services in public housing at the 
community level. 
 
And our successes in social housing have been pretty 
significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, including the accommodation 
we have developed for our senior citizens in enriched housing 
facilities across our province, in special care homes, and our 
housing programs for low-income families and for the disabled. 
And I’ll mention in detail some of those programs in a moment 
or so. 
 
The introduction of seniors’ enriched housing has enabled 
seniors to remain in their own communities and maintain their 
independence while offering such added advantages as the 
companionship of other seniors living in the same complex, 
greater opportunities to participate in social and recreational 
events, and the focus for the delivery of home care services. To 
further support this concept, this budget contains a total of 
$720,000 for the provision of enhanced services to seniors. 
 
Now while our achievements in public housing in 
Saskatchewan have been outstanding, the challenges facing us 
in the future will be almost overwhelming. Consider the 
situation that we will be facing with respect to housing 
accommodation for simply our senior citizens. 
 
Our elderly population is growing at such a rate, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that by the year 2000, 25 per cent of our total 
population will be considered seniors. Right now in 
Saskatchewan about 13 per cent of our adult population, about 
132,000 people, are over 65 years of age. In these 
circumstances we must face the problem of supplying even 
more housing accommodation to meet the growing increase in 
the number of seniors. 
 
As minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation, I want to assure you that we are tackling the 
problem head on, that we are working now in partnership with 
the local housing authorities and other housing organizations, 
developing new ideas, new projects to provide not only more 
high standard housing for seniors but also for low income 
families and the disabled for now and for in the future. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

457 
 

Two years ago I had the pleasure of introducing a new housing 
program which will help resolve some of the major challenges 
ahead of us, and it’s known as the innovative housing program. 
The program was set up to encourage communities, non-profit 
groups, private developers to organize, to develop housing 
projects in their local communities together with public sector 
assistance. 
 
The innovative housing program gives communities across the 
province the opportunity to advise their provincial housing 
corporation what they need and what they require in terms of 
public housing and then put together proposals to develop these 
facilities with the financial assistance of Sask Housing. 
 
As the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have long felt that the 
most appropriate method for solving the housing needs of a 
particular community should come from that community. I 
spoke earlier on consultation and the consultative process, and 
here again in housing we find that it is critical, absolutely 
critical, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that consultation does occur. And 
it should come from that community because it’s at the 
community level that local needs and resources and options 
available can indeed best be brought together. 
 
For instance, facilities valued at over $40 million, providing for 
a total of 547 housing units, were approved in the first year of 
the innovative housing program back in 1987. Of this total 
expenditure of $40 million — the member from Regina Victoria 
should pay attention to this because in your very constituency, 
your very constituency, for your knowledge, contains many of 
these innovative housing projects. 
 
And at the time that you were employed, under the former NDP 
administration you were employed at Sask Housing, you didn’t 
have these kind of innovative programs. You delivered 
arbitrarily where you felt, when you felt, how you felt, and why 
you felt, without regard for the seniors or the public or anybody 
else. 
 
We’ve changed all that. So don’t you sit there and talk out of 
your seat without entering this debate, condemning programs 
that you know nothing about, that your constituency is enjoying 
and admires and respects. You should be ashamed of yourself. 
 
But of this total expenditure of $40 million, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I must have wounded 
him; he sounds mortally wounded, to quote my colleague. He’s 
still spouting off and running at the mouth. Don’t worry about 
an election, boys. When the time for that comes . . . I remember 
’82 was the same foofraw from the NDP. Boy, they were wiped 
right off the face of the map. So don’t get too excited because 
when it’s over for you and we’re back here, you won’t be 
getting a job with this government. 
 
But a total of $24 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is being 
supported by private sponsors and non-profit groups, and about 
$16 million is supported by public agencies. 
 
Last year 13 projects in 10 communities were approved, 

and these projects will provide a total of 291 housing units for 
our seniors and for low-income families. 
 
I feel that the innovative housing program will be the great way 
of the future for social housing in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And through this program many new projects will be 
generated to help us meet the challenges of fulfilling our 
housing requirements in the years ahead. 
 
Our accomplishments in social housing over the years have 
been truly outstanding, but the challenges ahead to continue to 
maintain the high standard of public housing that we have 
developed will take our most dedicated efforts. 
 
(1545) 
 
It is desirable that as many services as possible for those who 
need assistance be delivered at the community level. Local 
people are most in touch with the housing needs in their 
communities and the opportunities available to meet those 
needs. 
 
Our very successful local housing authority system, which 
provides the key community input into the management of 
public housing, has met all the challenges in the past, and 
working with the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, I know 
they will continue to do so in the future. 
 
I want to express my appreciation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
many, many volunteers on the local housing authority boards 
and to those in other housing organizations across our province. 
They serve in the finest Saskatchewan traditions, and in so 
doing are helping to build better communities across our 
province, and indeed a stronger Saskatchewan. 
 
Under innovative housing, the Government of Saskatchewan 
encourages non-profit organizations. I wish that my critic for 
housing would be here to pay some attention to these remarks, 
because I’m going to describe . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are not to 
make comments about members’ presence or absence in the 
House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I will describe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few 
of our newer programs. And I hope the members opposite pay 
attention so that they can recognize some of the significant 
changes that our government has put into the housing 
corporation. 
 
Under innovative housing, the Government of Saskatchewan 
encourages non-profit organizations and members of the private 
sector to develop their own creative solutions to the local 
housing needs. No longer will anything be imposed on them. 
We’re asking them to come up and to tell us innovative 
solutions. And upon project completion, sponsors will own and 
manage the facilities for the benefit of their community. 
 
And any sponsor interested in providing housing assistance may 
request assistance under the innovative 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

458 
 

housing program. Assistance is allocated following an annual 
province-wide competition. Innovative housing proposals are 
judged on how creative they are, how cost-effective they are, 
and how appropriate each solution is. Applications may be 
submitted for projects from anywhere in Saskatchewan. And to 
receive subsidies, projects must provide accommodation for 
low income seniors, for families, or for individuals in need of 
housing. 
 
Applications for innovative housing are made in two stages, and 
in stage one, proposals are described in general, and terms are 
assessed by the corporation. In stage two, refined project plans, 
marketing strategies, and details of financial arrangements that 
demonstrate the viability of the project must be submitted in 
sufficient detail in order to receive a commitment from the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, and application forms are 
available from any office of the Sask Housing Corporation. 
 
We have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we call life-interest leases 
that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has become involved 
with through the innovative housing process. And a lot of 
people, particularly the members opposite, are not familiar with 
what life-interest leases are. Well I’ll explain that. 
 
Many innovative housing projects for senior citizens in 
Saskatchewan offer a tenant option that we call the life-interest 
lease. And this option applies to the non-subsidized units — the 
non-subsidized units — and permits higher income residents to 
join in on the benefits of our enriched projects. 
 
And the lease is a means of prepaying for the accommodation 
while providing the senior with lifetime security. The 
life-interest lease is designed to guarantee exclusive possession 
and enjoyment of a unit for the senior’s lifetime. 
 
So therefore, if you’ve got a senior in a building with a 
life-interest lease, he can live with his friend that requires a 
subsidy, live together and enjoy the rest of their time. Leases 
may be held by an individual or a couple. And if a couple holds 
the lease, the surviving member is secure in keeping that 
accommodation. 
 
An agreement between the sponsoring organization of the 
innovative housing project and the tenants clearly states the 
term of tenancy. And although terms may vary widely, 
responding to the needs of the community, some agreements 
require the sponsor or the building owner to repay the surviving 
tenant or their estate either the initial purchase price or the 
current market value of the tenant’s accommodation. So it’s 
really a fair, fair situation for our seniors. 
 
Agreements require the tenant to pay a fair and appropriate 
share of the operating costs of the project on a monthly basis. 
And these costs include such expenses as light and heat and 
insurance and taxes and maintenance and repairs and 
management services — just the normal day-to-day operations. 
 
And a life interest lease is similar to ownership, just as 

though they owned their unit except that the tenant’s investment 
in the housing unit is protected by the sponsoring organization 
while granting the tenant an interest in all of its real and 
personal property. The lease is always sold back to the 
sponsoring organization. It’s not like a security or stock and 
bond that we’re encouraging people to sell and promote and to 
make money on, but rather they sell it back to the sponsoring 
organization and they would resell the unit. The tenant may not 
realize a profit therefore on the sale, but would be offered upon 
vacating the lesser of either the original purchase price or the 
then current market value. 
 
Several advantages to the tenant in using the life-interest lease 
option: it gives them lifetime security in the innovative housing 
project; continued lifetime security for the surviving spouse. It 
allows seniors with available capital and income to share in the 
benefits of services and facilities represented by the innovative 
housing project. They include common amenities and managed 
and co-ordinated programs and activities for a healthful 
life-style. 
 
The economics of scale resulting from a project having 
non-subsidized units in combination with subsidized units 
means more seniors can enjoy an enriched and independent 
life-style. And this combined approach reduces the overall 
construction costs in comparison to building two separate 
projects. So there is a major advantage to everybody — to the 
sponsoring agency, to the community, and indeed to the seniors 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll describe enriched housing for the 
members opposite. For many Saskatchewan seniors the need for 
housing extends beyond simple shelter. The enriched housing 
concept provides housing for seniors that helps them to 
maintain their independence. The housing is enriched by the 
services available to residents. Services vary from community 
to community, based on the choices or needs of the seniors and 
local community, or the local commitment. Community 
organizations, volunteers, families of residents, and the 
residents themselves provide the enriched services. 
 
Any Saskatchewan resident over the age of 60 may apply for 
enriched housing. Preference, of course, is given to seniors with 
lower incomes. Residents in enriched housing projects pay a 
monthly rent of not more than 25 per cent of their incomes. 
Income levels are reviewed to assure that, indeed, fair rents are 
assessed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In enriched housing projects, 
health care services are available on an assessed needs basis 
through the Saskatchewan home care program. 
 
Enriched housing projects have been established in more than 
200 communities throughout Saskatchewan to serve our 
seniors. While any Saskatchewan senior may apply to live in an 
enriched housing project, preference is given to seniors 
experiencing difficulty in living in their own homes and then as 
a result want to move out and have less work and be with their 
friends. And preference is also given to the lower income 
seniors, as I mentioned earlier. 
 
And the enriched housing projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
operated by the local housing authorities that I mentioned 
earlier in my remarks, and they are managed 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

459 
 

by a board of volunteers right from their own community that 
serve on a volunteer basis. And so applications for the enriched 
housing should be made through the local housing authority in 
the local community where the senior would live. 
 
We often hear the term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, public housing. 
What do we mean by public housing? Well, subsidized public 
housing projects are operated, maintained, and managed by the 
corporation at several locations throughout the province. Public 
housing units are available to senior citizens or to low income 
families, physically disabled people, as well as other 
individuals. Applications for public housing are determined by 
income levels of applicants, as well as the availability and 
appropriateness of housing locally. Public housing tenants pay 
monthly rent not greater than 25 per cent of their income, and 
income levels are indeed reviewed periodically to assure that 
fair rents are assessed. 
 
At present, Mr. Deputy Speaker, public housing units are 
located in more than 280 communities across Saskatchewan. 
New units will be constructed in other communities where 
long-term demand can be demonstrated. And applications for 
individual units in public housing are again made through the 
local housing authorities. And again the appointed community 
volunteer board manages public housing on behalf the Sask 
Housing corporation. 
 
In some communities though, non-profit organization also 
manage public housing, and the local housing authority 
personnel would assist anybody in contacting the non-profit 
organizations in those areas. 
 
We hear a term as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, rural housing. 
What is rural housing? Well, low and moderate income families 
living in communities with populations of less than 2,500 may 
apply for assistance to purchase or rent single-family housing 
units under this program. Housing under this program is 
allocated according to need. 
 
Families and individuals of low and moderate income are 
eligible to apply for rural housing. Under this program 25-year 
mortgages are available at competitive interest rates. Down 
payments are only $500. Monthly payments will not exceed 25 
per cent of the household income. And during the life of the 
mortgage, income levels are reviewed to assure fair rents or 
mortgage payments are assessed. 
 
Rural housing units are located across Saskatchewan in 
communities with populations of less than 2,500. To participate, 
applicants will be asked to provide satisfactory references, and 
purchasers will be required to provide satisfactory credit 
references. 
 
So that’s kind of a simple explanation of that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Again, the member from Regina Victoria, 
chiding from his seat. I’m glad at least that he’s paying 
attention. He might be familiar with one or two of these 
programs. He’s not familiar with the new ones because he 
doesn’t work there any more, but his colleagues certainly aren’t 
familiar with a lot of these programs. 

I will speak, before I close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the home 
improvement program which the NDP have been very silent on 
as well over the last couple of years, because they know now 
that the home improvement program is perhaps one of the most 
popular programs ever introduced by any government in the 
history of the province. 
 
And I would like to comment briefly on a rather important 
announcement that I had the pleasure of making last month, and 
there I advised the public at that time that more than $1 billion 
in home improvement activity has been generated to date by the 
home improvement program. And that’s the total value of home 
improvements made since the introduction of this very popular 
program in September of 1986. And it was an announcement, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was conveniently ignored by 
members of the other side of the House. I guess it was just too 
much for them to handle. 
 
(1600) 
 
As I mentioned, few programs ever introduced in our province 
have had the public appeal and at the same time generated the 
tremendous amount of economic activity for business and 
industry, for labour, for labour — member from Regina 
Rosemont — few programs ever designed have created that 
much activity for labour as the home improvement program. 
 
To the end of January of this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, over 
282,000 individual applications for matching grants have been 
processed under the program — almost 300,000. This meant, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that approximately 60 per cent of eligible 
home owners in the province have utilized all, or a portion, of 
the grant. 
 
The matching grant of $1,500 has stimulated home owners to 
the extent that many individual products have exceeded $3,000 
in total costs, and as a result, approximately $600 million on 
home improvements have been generated by the matching 
grants since the program was initiated. In addition, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, over 59,000 individual loans at 6 per cent interest have 
been made by lending institutions for home improvements 
valued at approximately $400 million. 
 
This program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has helped hundreds of 
thousands of Saskatchewan households preserve and enhance 
their most important investment, their home. It’s no wonder the 
NDP doesn’t contradict this program. It is one of the most 
successful job creation programs in the history of this province 
— estimated over 22,000 jobs will be created or maintained as a 
result of this program. 
 
And one other thing, one other thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, very 
successful in creating special employment opportunities for our 
students, not only in the summer-time but in the winter-time as 
well. 
 
And this program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’d like to get 
into a debate with my members opposite. I only wish that some 
days they would ask me questions during question period. This 
program is not a hand-out. This program is a partnership, a 
partnership between the 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

460 
 

people and between this government. It’s a partnership in which 
people make their own decisions, set their own priorities, work 
with the small businesses to get the job done and to create the 
jobs as they’re doing it. It’s a powerful force for job creation 
that has helped this province consistently maintain one of the 
lowest unemployment rates in Canada. 
 
This government is committed to encouraging economic 
development and job creation. And we also know that the home 
renovation industry is one of the most labour-intensive 
industries in North America. And the two members across are 
chiding now about this seat, and yet this is one of the most 
labour-intensive industries in North America. 
 
Are you against jobs? Are you against the union people that 
work in these shops under the home renovation industry? You 
must be. Well we don’t happen to be against any of that, and 
wherever we can help to maintain employment and create 
employment and create jobs, we will do that because we believe 
that’s what the role of government is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — In my home city of Regina, the program 
has generated a total of $192 million in home improvements to 
date. That’s the total value of home improvement work carried 
out by 59,000 individual applications for matching grants, and 
14,000 loans at 6 per cent made by the lending institution. That 
adds up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 73,000 people in the city of 
Regina who have taken advantage of the program since 
September of 1986. 
 
As you’re aware, the home improvement program provides a 
matching grant of up to $1,500 to home owners for renovations 
and other permanent improvements on their property. It 
provides for loans from financial institutions of up to $10,000 at 
6 per cent for 10 years. 
 
Home owners of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
tremendously proud of their homes. It’s probably the most 
important investment that they will ever make. And this 
program makes it possible for them to maintain and improve 
their homes and give them the pride of ownership that they truly 
want and truly deserve. 
 
In addition, the home improvement program has become, as I 
mentioned, a tremendous stimulant for economic activity. 
Surveys now show that it’s resulted in over 22,000 jobs for the 
people of our province since it’s been introduced. It’s helped to 
keep our unemployment rate among the lowest in the country, 
even during a time of stress in the economy resulting from our 
depressed agricultural sector created by that drought of last 
summer. Really it has become a year-round provincial 
employment program, creating jobs for the people of our 
province, especially in the winter months when work activity 
for various trades and supplies slows. 
 
You know, traditionally governments are required to implement 
a winter works project or a job creation project of some kind at 
some cost to the budget over the 

winter period. We have found, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that since 
the creation of the home improvement program, that particular 
expense to a government is not needed because the employment 
is there as a result of the program. 
 
Besides the jobs, the program has helped to keep an awful lot of 
our small-business sector alive and well. Small business and 
industry have really appreciated the economic activity 
generated by the home program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They really have. If you ever talk to any of them, you’d find 
that out. 
 
The member from Regina Victoria obviously never talks to 
anybody in the home renovation period . . . or business, because 
he’s surprised by that statement. I invite you to go and talk to 
some of these . . . Didn’t you talk to these renovation people 
when you were employed by the Sask Housing Corporation 
before you were elected? When the other NDP administration 
had you hired, what did they do — just pay you to look out the 
window? Why didn’t you meet with some of these people and 
find out what was going on? You go out and talk to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage home 
owners who have not already done so to take full advantage of 
the home improvement program. As it’s their style, members of 
the opposition very weakly tried to make some political hay by 
trying to find something to criticize about the program, but 
lately they’ve even been strangely quiet. I would assume that 
quite a few of the members opposite have indeed improved 
their homes as a result of this program. 
 
I think that they have come to realize that they’d better show 
some respect for a program in which nearly 350,000 home 
owners have participated. They had better show some respect 
for a program that has helped produce some 22,000 jobs for the 
people of this province, providing very welcome economic 
activity for small business and for industry in our province. And 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to encourage home owners 
to take advantage of the program so that they can improve one 
of the most important investments that they will ever make. The 
continued economic activity for small business, for industry, 
generated by these home improvements will help provide more 
jobs for our citizens. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, out of respect to the time, there is 
more that I could say, but I suppose the members opposite 
would want to get into this debate rather than speak continually 
from their seat as they do. So I will have more to say at some 
other time in another debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And at this time I suppose that it’s not really necessary for me 
to tell all members of this Assembly that without question I will 
be supporting this budget at the time the question is asked. And 
I hope that the members opposite, recognizing the good that has 
been done for our province as a result of that budget, 
particularly if they are serious about helping the small-business 
community, will not vote against the business tax assistance 
program but 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

461 
 

indeed they will support the budget as well. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, after witnessing the performance of the member from 
Regina South, I think to borrow a phrase from Churchill would 
be apt at this time: never has so little said so much about 
nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — And that’s precisely the content, Mr. Speaker, 
of the remarks made by the member from Regina South. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, in beginning my address today I would 
like to take this opportunity to thank the people of Regina 
Rosemont, the constituency I presently represent, for the 
support that I’ve received from them in the positions that I’ve 
taken in this House over the last few years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: — I think back, Mr. Speaker, to some of the issues 
which have arisen in the city of Regina in which the residents of 
Regina Rosemont have in their great numbers found themselves 
in support of the position I’ve taken in this House. Or to put it 
another way, and more modestly perhaps, that I’ve had the 
opportunity and the fortunateness — if such a word exists — to 
be on the same side as the issue of the people in this 
constituency. 
 
And I can think no further, Mr. Speaker, recently, to the 
question of the municipal election which has occurred in Regina 
last fall in which we found ourselves, in Regina, supporting the 
concept of a ward system in Regina. Now we took a position 
prior to the municipal election in Regina, saying that we think 
that the people of Regina have the smarts and the capability and 
the intelligence and the initiative to be able to organize their 
own affairs in a way that they want to, Mr. Speaker, to be able 
to dictate what form of government they will have in that city. 
And they voted overwhelmingly, Mr. Speaker, overwhelmingly. 
Over 75 per cent of the voters in Regina and over 80 per cent of 
the people in the constituency of Regina Rosemont voted in 
favour of retaining the ward system. 
 
Now why did they have to vote, Mr. Speaker? Why did they 
have to vote on that issue? You know, they had the ward system 
in Regina — a system that worked well, a system that provided 
the citizens of Regina one of the highest levels of municipal 
services in this country. But you know, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 
good enough. That wasn’t good enough for the member from 
Regina South, the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
That same minister, who moments ago talked about who 
represents whom in the city of Regina, had the audacity, and 
still has the audacity today, to stand there and say to the people 
of the city of Regina that he knows best, that he knows best, 
that he knows what’s better for the people of 

Regina than the people of Regina themselves do. Over 75 per 
cent of the people of Regina rejected that minister’s initiative in 
taking away their ward system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They call him the little dictator. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — They call him the little dictator because he acts 
like a little dictator. Those were the kind of comments that I 
heard as I travelled throughout Regina Rosemont during the last 
municipal election, and that since then I’ve continued to hear as 
I could travel about the constituency visiting with people and 
talking to them about the performance of this government. And 
I’ll go at great length, Mr. Speaker, into the nature of that 
performance. 
 
But I want to remind the member of Regina South that they 
didn’t elect him — not the constituents of Regina South, not the 
people of Regina, not the people of Regina Rosemont — they 
didn’t elect him to be a little dictator, to impose on them a 
system of municipal government which they don’t want. They 
didn’t vote for this government to do that. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t vote for the candidate 
put up by the member from Regina South, organized by the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, the former MLA for Regina 
Rosemont, Mr. Gordon Dirks, the PC stalking horse in that 
municipal election. The people of Regina rejected that approach 
to government. And not only did they reject it, Mr. Speaker, 
they rejected it overwhelmingly. They dumped Dirks. 
 
They took the opportunity to speak against the record of not 
only Mr. Dirks, but they took the opportunity to speak against 
the record of that Minister of Urban Affairs, the member from 
Regina South. They took that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to say 
to this government that they don’t want to be dictated to by 
little dictators, that they don’t want legislation crammed down 
their throats without consultation and against their wishes, in 
overwhelming numbers. They don’t want the kind of 
government represented by that member from Regina South, the 
Minister of Urban Affairs. They took that opportunity to vote 
for increased services, for maintenance of good administration, 
for maintenance of fiscal responsibility, and they took that 
opportunity to kick the candidate for the PC Party out once 
again. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, I think that says more, the actions of the 
people of Regina in that municipal election spoke more and 
says more about the performance of that minister, that member 
from Regina South, than any other thing that either he or any 
members on this side of the House could say. The people spoke. 
The people spoke, Mr. Speaker, and they spoke 
overwhelmingly. They gave a resounding no. The verdict of the 
people of Regina to the activities of that minister is a 
resounding no. 
 
(1615) 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House 
are now raising the call for an election. Because we know, not 
only in Regina, Mr. Speaker, but throughout this province, the 
people want an election to speak on the performance of that 
government. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

462 
 

And they want to do that, Mr. Speaker, they want to do that 
before this wrecking crew that sits on the opposite side of the 
House goes and sells off the assets that the people of this 
province have worked long and hard to build. They don’t want 
that government over there to sell off what belongs to them. 
They don’t want that government over there to give to their big 
business buddies that which they have worked to create and 
worked to build in this province. And that’s why they will want 
an election, and want an election very soon. 
 
I intend to go into the question of giving away our natural 
resources, of selling them off to the outside foreign big business 
interests outside boundaries of our country a little further on, 
Mr. Speaker. But before that I’d like to make a few comments 
directed specifically to what some people have been telling me, 
people in Regina Rosemont and around the city of Regina, have 
been telling me about this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is general agreement among my constituents 
and among the people of Regina, and I do suspect from the 
things I’ve been hearing and the phone calls that I’ve been 
getting and the people that I’ve been talking to around the 
province of Saskatchewan, that there is a developing consensus 
in this province that this budget is a corrupt budget, that this 
budget is a cruel budget, and that this budget is a cynical 
budget. 
 
They call it the three C’s. They call it the three C’s, Mr. 
Speaker, although goodness knows, with the performance of the 
government, why they don’t call it the seven C’s, since we all 
have a sinking ship, and that’s obvious to everybody in this 
province, in the government opposite. But they’re calling it at 
least the three C’s — corruption, cruelty, and a cynicism 
unsurpassed by any government in the history of this province. 
 
Now I’ll get into the cynicism of that government opposite in a 
few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but I think first of all I’d like to talk 
a little bit about the cruelty in this budget, because this budget is 
a budget for the rich, by the rich. It characterized in its cruelty, 
the nature it mirrors, the nature of the government opposite. 
Because the government opposite, after all the glossy brochures 
and after all the expensive ads are stripped away, this 
government in its heart is a mean government, is a 
mean-spirited government, is a vindictive government, and it is 
a cruel government. 
 
It’s a cruel government because it attacks the people of this 
province through the budgetary process — and this last budget 
is just a perfect example of it — by increasing the tax load on 
the average person in this province, whether they’re poor, 
whether they’re working on the land, whether they’re working 
in the city. They are attacking the people of this province 
through a tax load which hits directly at the working people and 
the poor of this province. 
 
Taxes, taxes, taxes. More and more taxes, less and less services. 
And that kind of operation, that kind of administration by this 
government is its hallmark. It is in that point that we find the 
kind of cruelty, and it’s an extended history of cruelty through 
taxation, carried out by this government since 1982. 

For example, we’ve seen, for poor people, for poor people, a 
freezing of the Saskatchewan assistance plan. We’ve seen 
freezes to the family income plan, so that those people who are 
the working poor of this province have less and less and less 
disposable income, have to make do with less and less and less 
because of the kind of measures introduced in the consecutive 
budgets of this government. 
 
You know, this is the government that introduced the flat tax, 
the famous flat tax . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — In the most brilliant budget. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — . . . in the most brilliant budget by one of the 
most intelligent, so-called, self-proclaimed intelligent Finance 
ministers, the minister there, the member from Kindersley. 
 
This was the government that introduced the flat tax. The flat 
tax, one of the most regressive of taxation instruments that one 
can find in the lexicon of the tax collectors in this country. A 
flat tax which hits more at the poor, more at the working poor, 
more at the working and more at the middle class than it does to 
those who have large disposable incomes and can afford to 
make their contribution, but who, because of tax accountants 
and tax lawyers and tax loopholes and this, that, and the other 
thing, are able to avoid paying their fair share of taxes. 
 
This flat tax, Mr. Speaker, comes from a government which 
promised to reduce taxation for the average person in this 
province, for the real people of this province. That government 
promised to reduce taxation, but what do we have? We have a 
litany of increased taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did they reduce taxes? No, no, they didn’t reduce 
taxes. Did they promise to reduce taxes? Yes they did. 
 
Now what taxes did that government promise to reduce? Did it 
promise to reduce the sales tax? Yes, it promised to reduce the 
sales tax. But did it reduce the sales tax? No, Mr. Speaker, that 
government did not reduce the sales tax despite its promise to 
do so. One promise broken. 
 
Did it promise to reduce income taxes for average people in this 
Saskatchewan? Yes, it did, Mr. Speaker. How much did it 
promise to reduce income taxes by? Ten per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
It said to the people of Saskatchewan, we’re going to reduce 
your taxes by 10 per cent. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House are 
still waiting for that 10 per cent cut in income tax, because we 
know the kind of hypocrisy and the kind of hypocritical 
statements which comes from that government when it comes to 
taxes. They say we’ll get a 10 per cent cut in income tax, but 
what do they give us? They give us the flat tax. They give us a 
flat tax which hits poor and working people in Saskatchewan 
the hardest. 
 
Now what did they say about the gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker? 
What did that government and all those members of the 
Progressive Conservative Party who ran throughout this 
province say about the gasoline tax? Did 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

463 
 

they say they were going to take the gasoline tax off? Yes they 
did, Mr. Speaker. They said, we will eliminate the gasoline tax. 
And for how long did they say they were going to eliminate the 
gas tax, Mr. Speaker? They said, Mr. Speaker, for ever, or at 
least as long as there was a Progressive Conservative 
government in power in this province. Right? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what was the real history of this gas tax? Do 
we have a gas tax in this province today, Mr. Speaker? We sure 
do. We sure do. The member from Moose Jaw South is 
absolutely right. We sure do have a gas tax in this province. 
That’s strange. That’s the government that said they were going 
to eliminate the gas tax as long as there was a PC government in 
this province — until their dying days, Mr. Speaker, until their 
dying days. 
 
Well I guess it’s no accident, I guess it’s no accident that we see 
a gas tax, and we see not just a gas tax but an increase in a gas 
tax, because these are the dying days of that Progressive 
Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. These are their dying 
days. The people of Saskatchewan are digging; you can hear the 
shovels hitting the earth; you can see the mounds of dirt being 
put up. Because each and every one of the members of that 
government office is being prepared for a decent political 
burial. 
 
And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
want to see those political corpses put in the ground so that we 
don’t have to smell the stink and stench of decaying politicians 
very much longer in this province. We want to see them gone; 
we want to see them buried. The people of the province do as 
well, Mr. Speaker. The dying days of the Progressive 
Conservative government are upon Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s unfortunate, it is unfortunate because I suspect that as 
poll after poll after poll comes in, I suspect that as they see the 
trend line staying bottomed out, I suspect as they hear from 
their high-priced pollsters that they’re not going to find a 
method of coming back, that they will hang on until the last 
breath that lies in their political bodies, irregardless of the 
effects it has on the people of this province, irregardless of the 
effects it has of the economy on this province. 
 
Regardless of the consequences, these people will hang on by 
their fingernails until the political rigor mortis has set in so hard 
that it will be hard to carry them into the political grave to 
which they’re headed. And why? Because they’ve done things 
like put on taxes on gas, taxes and flat taxes and income taxes 
and sales taxes, when they said they were going to do the exact 
opposite. 
 
And this budget, Mr. Speaker, carries on in that tradition of 
breaking the faith. That budget, that was presented by the 
Minister of Finance, carries on in that tradition. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I look at the Leader-Post in the 
first days following the budget, March 31, on the financial page, 
and it says, and I’ll use the quote, “NDP says Lane baked a flop 
for his budget.” 
 
And I think that there’s general agreement on that . . . there’s 
general consensus around Saskatchewan, 

because of the tax increases, because of the kind of misguided 
priorities of this government indicated in its fiscal statements, 
that it was a flop. 
 
Well we know what kind of flop it is in this agricultural 
province of ours, Mr. Speaker, don’t we? We know it’s the kind 
of flop that affects families and affects farming families and 
working families. We know what kind of flop it is. It’s the kind 
we step around, it’s the kind we try to avoid, it’s the kind that 
gets our boots dirty, and it’s the kind which muddies up the 
farmyards of this province, and the kind of which the farming 
people of this province, too, will have learned to avoid. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s a little bit more I’d like to say on the 
tax increases that are hitting all the people of this province. We 
have the amazing institution of the gambling tax, where the 
people of Saskatchewan are now going to be forced to, if one 
were to believe the Minister of Health — and that again is an 
open question and we’ll deal with the question of credibility a 
little bit later — but if one believes the Minister of Health, 
we’re going to put a tax on lotteries like the 6/49 and the 
Provincial, we’re going to put a tax on the gaming 
commissions, we’re going to put a tax in such a method that 
health care will be protected by gambling. 
 
Now you know, I think that most of the people of this province 
find that notion abhorrent, Mr. Speaker, that they have to 
depend on gambling for quality health care. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the kind of thing that used to be outlawed in this 
country. You know, it used to be illegal to buy Irish sweepstake 
tickets, and I’m sure all the older members of the government 
opposite remember that well. But the Irish sweepstakes were 
illegal in this country precisely because the abhorrent notion of 
using gambling to support health care is not accepted socially. 
 
(1630) 
 
There was a notion at one time in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
that health care was a collective responsibility. There was, prior 
to 1982, a notion that we all had to contribute our fair share to 
the health care system in order to develop the number one 
health care system in North America, the envy of North 
America, the kind of system that the American people 
themselves want instituted in their own country, the kind of 
thing that . . . the kind of health care system, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t leave 30 million American citizens without any kind of 
health care protection. 
 
They look north to Saskatchewan, and I can think of American 
leaders like Bobby Kennedy, and I can think of American 
leaders like Ted Kennedy, who still does point to 
Saskatchewan, who still points to Saskatchewan and says, that’s 
the kind of medical care system that they need in the United 
States, because it was based on the notion of collective 
responsibility, that we are all responsible for the health care of 
all our neighbours, of all our friends, of all our family, and of 
all residents in this country. 
 
But no, that notion, Mr. Speaker, seems to have gone with the 
wind. It appears to have blown away with the dust that is now 
littering the fields of Minnesota and North Dakota. It appears to 
have disintegrated, at least in the minds of 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

464 
 

the members of the government opposite. 
 
Health care is a social responsibility. We have a clear-cut 
differentiation between that government’s notion of health care 
and this sides of the House notion of health care. 
 
We say that health care is a collective responsibility; it is a 
social responsibility; it is a responsibility of all of us. Those 
members opposite say that health care is a responsibility of the 
gaming tables and the gamblers. They want to indulge in Las 
Vegas-style health care. They want to put health care at the 
same level as the Renos of the world. They want to tax 
gambling in order to bring the health care system — to try to 
bring the health care system back to where it was. 
 
And you know, there’s a certain abhorrence outside that notion 
that health care should be subject to gambling, that our health is 
something to gamble with. There’s another aspect of this tax 
that I find abhorrent, Mr. Speaker, and that is that this tax is a 
regressive tax. It is a tax which affects poor people and working 
people the most. Those who have the millions of dollars don’t 
worry about buying Lotto 6/49 tickets, but those who are in dire 
economic straits are those who see their real wages shrinking, 
as they have in the history of this government — buy lottery 
tickets hoping to hit the big one, hoping to find some financial 
stability and some financial independence for their own 
families. 
 
And yes, it’s a gamble; and yes, most of us who buy lottery 
tickets know it’s a gamble — 13 million to one, to win the 6/49, 
or is it 13 billion to one? Some astronomical odds anyway, Mr. 
Speaker. Some astronomical odds. 
 
And we all know that there are very few winners in that 
particular game. But to depend on providing money for our 
health care system based on Nevada and based on Las 
Vegas-style health care funding, I think, Mr. Speaker, meets 
with the disapproval of not only, of not only the majority of 
people in this province, because we’ve seen after all, the 
reaction of the member from nickelodeons . . . the member from 
Mayfair, Mr. Speaker, right, the member from Mayfair, right, 
who threw up the trial balloon that we were going to have 
electronic slot machines and electronic gambling, and who was 
laying the basis for that kind of electronic world where the poor 
pour their money in so that the government can tax, so that the 
government can tax those who participate in it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this was a member who said he was 
misspoken, despite the fact that his words are clear and his 
words are recorded by members of the press. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, through what that member said, what the plans of the 
government are, that the government plans to introduce 
gambling on a wide scale in this province, electronic gambling, 
in order to fund a health care system that these people have 
helped try to run into the ground. 
 
That’s not acceptable, Mr. Speaker, to the people of the 
province. And I wonder, as I stand here in my place and look at 
those people who sit on the other side, how acceptable is it to 
them. I wonder, I wonder, Mr. Speaker, how the member from 
Moosomin feels about funding the 

health care system through gambling. Right? Now here is a 
member who has proclaimed time in, time out, about his moral 
and uprighteous view of the world, who has wrapped himself in 
the cloak of the kind of morality and a return-to-basics morality 
that those on the more conservative side of the political 
spectrum tend to wrap themselves in, and I’ve seen that member 
stand here and try to lecture us on this side of the House about 
questions of morality. And I’m wondering where that member 
stands when it comes to providing increased opportunities for 
gambling in this province. 
 
And I also wonder, Mr. Speaker, how it is that the member from 
Rosthern, another one who cloaks himself in the deep purple 
robes of righteousness and morality, I wonder how he feels, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to the question of his government and 
his cabinet introducing gambling on a wide scale throughout 
this province. 
 
I wonder how he feels about that, Mr. Speaker, because, you 
know something, I tend to think that he may be feeling the heat 
and may be feeling the pressure from his social group and his 
bases in his constituency who, given their history and given 
their development and given their public statements, oppose 
that kind of venture by the government to have health care 
subject to the whims of gambling. I’m wondering how that 
member from Rosthern feels when members of his own 
congregation phone him to complain about the government’s 
activities when it comes to gambling. 
 
Or, Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse, another member who 
attends prayer breakfasts regularly, who tends to wrap himself 
in the cloak of righteous indignation, how does he feel? And 
what do his constituents feel about funding health care in this 
province through gambling? What kind of moral dilemma does 
that member find himself in, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s an interesting question and one that, hopefully, that 
member and the member from Rosthern and the member from 
Moosomin and perhaps, if we ever get a word out of the 
member from Biggar, or if we ever get a comment out of the 
Environment minister, who again is another one of those who 
wraps himself in that particular cloak of moral righteousness to 
try to . . . What is their opinion of gambling? What are they 
going to say about the government’s attempt to introduce 
gambling for health care on a mass scale? And I wonder. I think 
it will be interesting, and the people of this province will be 
interested to hear their comments on that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there was one comment I wanted to 
make regarding taxation, and that is the question of the gas tax, 
because I find that as I go about since the introduction of the 
budget, that this is probably, more than any other item in the 
budget, is the thing which, I wouldn’t say tickles the fancy of 
people, but has certainly got their attention. I think tickles the 
fancy would be not an apt expression. I think it’s caught their 
attention. 
 
You know why, Mr. Speaker? Because not only has the 
government promised, not only did this government promise to 
eliminate the gas tax, they now have one of the highest gas 
taxes of anywhere in Canada. 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

465 
 

And though they have a rebate program which excludes about 
one-third of the people of this province from participating in, 
just because people don’t like the kind of red tape and 
bureaucracy in keeping all the little receipts, and I wonder why 
that they don’t use these plastic health cards to identify people. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance over there, the 
minister keeps talking about, well, the NDP wants a gas pump 
for in town and a gas pump for out of town and a gas pump for 
this. I’ve got a suggestion for that minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, why don’t you use the health care card to identify 
Saskatchewan residents? That seems to be no problem, Mr. 
Speaker. That seems to be no problem. And if you’re worried 
about commercial uses of in-province, then I think that the 
minister may take it upon himself to change some of the 
regulations to in fact allow small trucking concerns and school 
boards and municipalities, and all those who use fuel — all 
those who are burdened by this taxation — to allow them to use 
that great plastic health card so that they don’t have to go 
through all this rigmarole of the rebate. A plain and easy — 
plain and easy — a plain and easy solution to the minister’s 
problem, Mr. Speaker. Why not use the health card so that 
people get the rebate at the pumps, so that they’re identified as 
Saskatchewan citizens, so that they don’t have to pay the gas 
tax? 
 
But you know why, Mr. Speaker, that minister won’t introduce 
it? And I see the Deputy Premier over there is chuckling a little 
bit. You know and I know what he’s chuckling about, because 
not only we have a solution to that particular problem, it’s not, 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, the Deputy 
Premier now says he’s agreeing with me. So we will expect, 
Mr. Deputy Premier, if I heard you right, that announcement to 
come forthwith that health care cards will be used to give 
people their gas tax rebates as they pay for the gas. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that that’s going to 
occur, because the reason that the rebate system is introduced, 
Mr. Speaker, was this. First of all, a third of the people don’t get 
their money back because they don’t apply for the system 
because they’re tired of the red tape. But the second reason, Mr. 
Speaker, the second reason is this, is that the government gets to 
keep the money and the interest off the money collected in the 
gas tax rebate. Not only do they get to keep the gas tax itself, 
they get to keep the interest off the gas tax. And we’re not 
whistling Dixie here, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the amount 
and the sums of money involved. We are dealing with millions 
of dollars in interest which the government keeps by using 
money which the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 
essence have loaned them. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, I say that if this was done in the private 
sector, those people would be charged by the police for 
perpetrating a swindle on the people of this province. I say that 
if a scheme like that was cooked up anywhere else outside the 
cabinet rooms of this particular government, that it would be 
investigated for the kind of nefarious swindle which it is. 
 
Think, Mr. Speaker, these people take your money, they earn 
the interest off us, they only give part of the money back, and 
they keep the interest. I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, 

why don’t you use the health care card so that people can get 
their rebate instantly, and why don’t you give the people their 
interest back? Why don’t you give, when it comes to the rebate, 
give those people who get their initial tax, why don’t you pay 
the interest on top of it, Mr. Speaker? It seems to me that with 
all the modern, leading edge technology that this government 
likes to say that it’s into, that they’d be able to figure out what 
the interest on your money would be. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that to the Minister of 
Finance, that those are a couple of easy ways he has in dealing 
with the question of the gas tax, since he doesn’t seem to be 
able to come up with any solution by himself. And I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Minister of Finance would 
appreciate this kind of help, needs this kind of help, given his 
performance as Minister of Finance over the past few years in 
this province. 
 
But that’s enough about taxes, Mr. Speaker. I want to come to 
what I consider now the question of what this budget is really 
about, what this budget is really about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1645) 
 
We’ve seen the kind of cruelty it imposes on ordinary working 
people. We have seen what it does to working people in this 
province. You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s not just political 
rhetoric. When I say that the actions of this government have 
impoverished the people of this province, that is not just a 
question of political rhetoric. If you look at the statistics, Mr. 
Speaker, of the wage levels of working people in this province 
since this government has come to power, you will see that it is 
not just political rhetoric. 
 
I have here, Mr. Speaker, a brief, a newspaper called, “The 
Impoverishment of Saskatchewan Workers — Unemployment, 
Underemployment and Poverty.” It’s done by Mr. Gordon 
Ternowetsky, from the social administration research unit, 
Faculty of Social Work, Regina, Saskatchewan, February 26, 
1988. 
 
And what it does, Mr. Speaker, is outline the fall in wages, the 
fall in real wages of the working people in this province since 
1981, and it does it both with urban incomes and with rural 
incomes. And what’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in this particular 
paper, this particular collection — the statistics, by the way, 
come from Statistics Canada — is the kind of fall in real wages 
experienced by the people of this province. 
 
You take some people in the rural postal code area in 1981, the 
rural postal code area S0A, and the S0A rural postal code area 
covers the area of east-central Saskatchewan. That’s represented 
by the member, for example, from Saltcoats, represented by the 
member from Yorkton, areas represented by the member from 
Melville. And that particular rural area, Mr. Speaker, based on 
1981 dollars and the use of the dollars as constant dollars, 
which means that the dollar of today is worth 140 times more 
than the dollar of 1981, for this purposes, that based on these 
statistics of Statistics Canada up till 1986, we find people in 
east-central Saskatchewan, 1981, the average female 
employment 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

466 
 

earning in that area was $7,634.66 a year. That’s pretty bad, Mr. 
Speaker. And that was 1981 — 7,634.66. 
 
In eight years of this government, have the women workers of 
east-central Saskatchewan benefitted by the economic policies 
pursued by this PC government? Well according to this, they 
haven’t. In 1984 . . . pardon me, in 1986, whereas the average 
woman worker in east-central Saskatchewan earns $7,634, in 
1986 it’s now down to $7,590.56. There’s an actual decline in 
average earning of women workers in east-central 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go through east-central Saskatchewan and 
northern Saskatchewan and west-central and south-central and 
south-east and south-west, all through these area codes — and 
what do we find? The same type of statistic. Real wages in 
Saskatchewan for women workers were higher in 1981 than 
they are in 1986, thanks to the economic policy of this 
government. 
 
But that should be no surprise, Mr. Speaker, because the 
economic policy of this government was outlined in a speech by 
the Premier of the province not very much long ago in Moose 
Jaw. Right in Moose Jaw, several weeks ago, the Premier of 
this province said, our economic policy is based on this: we 
want a policy of cheap land and we want a policy of cheap 
labour. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the policy that this 
government has pursued since 1981. And that, Mr. Speaker, is 
why female workers and male workers in this province have 
suffered a decline in their real income all throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I could go on and on and read area after area, statistic after 
statistic, that deals with this question. I won’t, because quite 
frankly the statistics speak for themselves. They show that the 
people and the working people of this province have suffered at 
the hands of this government and suffered at the hands of this 
government’s cruelty because of the policy of cheap land and 
the policy of cheap labour. 
 
Now let’s deal with the question of cheap labour first of all . . . 
cheap land, excuse me, Mr. Speaker. We know that in the 
Premier’s speech he talked about cheap land that’s available for 
outside investors. He talked about foreign investors finding 
cheap land in Saskatchewan attractive. He talked about the 
opportunities that cheap land represented to foreign investors in 
Saskatchewan. And what has he done? What has he done to 
pursue that, and what has that government done to pursue that? 
Well they set up the Saskatchewan government growth fund, 
the SGGF. 
 
And the SGGF was set up, the Saskatchewan government 
growth fund was set up to allow offshore investors, primarily 
from Hong Kong and Macau — and that’s in the statements of 
the people who set up the Saskatchewan government growth 
fund — to invest in Saskatchewan so that (a) they get Canadian 
citizenship, and (b) they get tax advantages by investing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And where do you think the Saskatchewan government growth 
fund is going to invest, Mr. Speaker? Where do you think the 
$34 million that is available in this year, and this year alone, is 
going to end up being invested? Well the Premier says it’s 
available for investment all across the 

piece, that’s it’s available for investment in small business, any 
kind of small-business opportunities that the growth fund deems 
advisable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know where the funds in the Saskatchewan 
growth fund are going to end up. We know that that is where 
prairie agricultural services, the private land bank set up by that 
government, is going to get its funding. We know that off-shore 
investors are being given opportunities to invest in 
Saskatchewan land through the Saskatchewan growth fund, 
transferring the money to Prairie Agricultural Services, Prairie 
Agricultural Services, so that they can buy up farm land here in 
Saskatchewan — turn Saskatchewan farmers into tenant 
farmers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Feudalism. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Feudalism. They talk about going into the 
future, Mr. Speaker. The future in Saskatchewan is not a return 
to feudalism. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Serf training program. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We’re not interested in serf training programs. 
We’re not interested in developing a kulak class in this 
province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pleasant peasants. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — We are not interested in developing, as my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, says, 
peasant pleasants, but that government is, because that 
government is committed — it is committed. Your government 
is committed to a policy of cheap land, and they’re going to 
achieve that policy by driving thousands and thousands of 
farmers off this land — the thousands and thousands of farmers 
that they have already driven off this land; the three farm 
families a day which are leaving this land; those farm families 
that the Premier of this province is foreclosing on as the 
Minister of Agriculture; those farm families that the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier of this province, has put his name to in 
terms of developing a death warrant for those foreclosures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province is committed to a 
cheap land policy for foreign investors and the proof is in the 
pudding. We’ve seen the thousands and thousands of farm 
families leave this province since 1982. That Premier is 
committed to his cheap land policy at the expense of 
Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the House long ago, in 
1944 and 1945, made it a principle that Saskatchewan land 
belonged to Saskatchewan farm families. We say no to cheap 
land, Mr. Speaker. We’re saying no to the sell-off of 
Saskatchewan farm land. We’re saying no to that kind of 
privatization to foreign investors of Saskatchewan land. 
 
We’re saying no to a cheap land policy, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
saying yes to Saskatchewan farm families owning 
Saskatchewan farm land. And, Mr. Speaker, you can be assured 
that after the next election there will be policies in place to 
pursue that path because members on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, know that one of the jobs that 
  



 
April 3, 1989 

467 
 

we’re going to have to do is to rebuild rural Saskatchewan. We 
know one of the jobs we’re going to have to do is find methods 
and mechanisms to attract people back onto the land. We know 
that people on this side of the House are committed to that 
because we know that without a viable rural Saskatchewan 
there is no viable Saskatchewan; that without lots and lots and 
lots of people being productive on the land and productive in 
small rural communities, that there will be fewer jobs and fewer 
jobs opportunities, not only in rural Saskatchewan but in urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that is why, Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the 
House are saying no, no to the cheap land policy of the Devine 
PC government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I wonder what those rural members on that 
side of the House say to the Premier and his cheap land policy. 
What does the member from Biggar say, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
when the Premier says cheap land, is he talking about that 
member’s land, or his neighbour’s land, or his friend’s land? Is 
he in favour of a cheap land policy? Is he in favour of lowering 
the asset base of his friends and neighbours, Mr. Speaker? Let’s 
hear from the member from Biggar during this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. I would be pleased, pleased to listen to that member 
give his opinion on the Premier’s cheap land policy. 
 
Or how about the member from Redberry? Agricultural 
community — how about the member from Redberry? 
Agricultural community, a community dependent on 
agriculture. What does that member have to say about the 
Premier when the Premier says what we need is cheap land, and 
what we need is to sell off Saskatchewan farm land to foreign 
investors, and what we need to do is get rid of Saskatchewan 
farm land so that these foreign investors can come up and buy 
that cheap land? What does that member think about that 
particular policy? We’ll be here. We on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, are going to be more than pleased, more than 
pleased to hear that kind of response. 
 
Or how about the member, Mr. Speaker, from Shellbrook-Torch 
River, another agricultural constituency. Does he favour the 
Premier’s policy of cheap land and cheap labour? Is he one of 
those who when it comes to voting in caucus that that will be 
the economic policy of the government — cheap land and cheap 
labour — which way did he vote in caucus, Mr. Speaker, on 
that? Was he in favour of lowering the asset value of the farm 
land of his friends and neighbours and his own supporters? Is he 
voting for cheap land? because I think he is, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that he is so wedded, so tightly wedded to that right-wing 
ideology of free enterprise and foreign enterprise, that that 
member there would sell his own friends and neighbours down 
the river for the sake . . . sacrifice them on the altar of cheap 
land and cheap labour. I bet you he voted for it, Mr. Speaker. I 
bet you, I would bet you any money on that, right? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes down to it — and you 
will see, and those members will get their opportunity to vote 
— when it comes to voting on this budget, this budget is an 
economic document which supports the Premier’s policy of 
cheap land and cheap labour, we will see how those rural 
members sitting on 

the government side of the House vote, Mr. Speaker. We will 
see whether they’re voting for cheap land for their neighbours, 
of their neighbours. We will see whether they’re going to vote 
to drop the asset value of their friends, of their neighbours, and 
of their supporters. We’re going to see whether they vote to 
decrease the asset value of their own farm families through this 
cheap land, cheap labour policy. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan will be watching through our eyes, 
Mr. Speaker. They will determine at the next polls, and they 
will determine because they’re determining it now, whether or 
not they want to see farm families driven off the land here in 
Saskatchewan so that the farm land is overturned to foreign 
investors through the Saskatchewan government growth fund. 
We know that Prairie Agricultural Services is a nice little 
private company set up, set up so that the Saskatchewan 
government growth fund can provide foreign investment into 
Saskatchewan farm land. 
 
We know that mechanism. We’ve learned that game. We’ve 
seen how they do it, Mr. Speaker, and we know that that is an 
integral part of the Premier’s financial strategy, or otherwise 
why would he say it? Why would the Premier say it? He was 
speaking before a group of Conservatives, at a Conservative 
Party function in Moose Jaw. He was talking to Tories about 
what the economic strategy of the Tory party was going to be, 
and of his government. And what did he say to those group of 
Tories? He said, we’re going to turn Saskatchewan into a haven 
from foreign investors. We’re going to turn Saskatchewan into 
a haven where they can pick up at bargain basement prices 
cheap land and cheap labour, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to sell 
off Saskatchewan farm families to foreign investors in order 
that they’re able to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 o’clock, the House now is recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


