





























































Hansard: August 14, 1989


August 14, 1989 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motion for Interim Supply (continued) 
 

Mr. Trew: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I understand the Minister of Highways is handling the questions 
tonight. Is that correct? Okay. Thank you, sir. Now I know who to address my remarks and questions to. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about your ever-growing deficit. And I want to express some very great concerns held 
by, I think, the majority of Saskatchewan people, those concerns being that you are doing some things in this 
year’s annual budget that are simply not sustainable, and indeed only marks the deficit problem. 
 
What I am referring to, of course, is the $200 million transfer from the Crown investments corporation that is 
a one-time, one-shot payment into the general revenues for the year that we’re talking about. On the surface 
of it, that doesn’t sound too terrible because we on this side of the legislature have long said you should be 
taking profits earned out of Crowns such as -Saskatchewan potash corporation, and used to be Sask Minerals 
before you privatized that – the cash-earning Crowns. You should be taking some of the profits and putting it 
into general revenues to pay for health, to pay for hospitals, to pay for education, and highways. I suspect 
you’re a little bit interested in highways, although it’s only a suspicion on my part. You certainly couldn’t tell 
it by the looks of the highways around our province. 
 
Minister, this year, in 1988, what you and your government have done is you transferred all of the retained 
earnings from SaskTel, earning that had accumulated since 1947 when SaskTel because a Brown corporation. 
You took all of the retained earnings up to the end of 1988. Those retained earnings amounted to some $237 
million, and that’s nothing to be sneezed at. You took those retained earnings, transferred them into the 
Crown investments corporation, and then snafued a $200 million dividend into the Consolidate Fund. The 
point I’ve been trying to develop is that that is a one-shot effort. SaskTel does not have $237 million for you 
to latch onto next year. 
 
You’re in the process of getting rid of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, which is like a cash cow to 
the people of Saskatchewan; a cash cow in terms of their ability to pay revenue and pay dividends to the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Weyburn says, Kim, we lost that one. 
I can assure you that though we came out on the short side of the vote you just wait, just wait until the next 
election – whenever the Premier’s got his courage – wait and we’ll see who wins and who lost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: – And it’ll be the people of Saskatchewan that will win and I can . . . Mark my words, the member 
for Weyburn, along with a huge number of other present government members, will be no longer elected to sit 
in this great legislature. 
 
So my question to you, Minister, is: how in the world do you convince yourselves, let alone the people of 
Saskatchewan, that this one-time money grab of $237 million out of SaskTel’s retained earnings – earnings 
that took 41 years to accumulate, and you snatched them away in one quick, magical grab – how do you 
convince yourselves and the taxpayers that that was a good deal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say that indeed many of the Crown corporations under 
this administration in the past years have gone significantly better with better management practices than in 
past years, and I would throw out a few Crown corporations as examples. 
 
And firstly, I’d like to talk a little bit about the Crown corporation, SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance). There was a corporation that we took over as government in 1982, and I think beyond the question 
of a doubt, if you would hire any financial adviser to review the performance of that corporation. You would 
see that that corporation has done exceedingly well in the last few years. I throw out Saskatchewan 



Telecommunications as another very good example with good management practices. There has been, indeed, 
been some fairly significant profits. 
 
What we have done in this budget is taken from those Crown corporations actual profits of the last year – not 
gone back in and actually bled the corporations dry, as has taken place in past years, but actually took true 
profits from these corporations and certainly transferred them to the Consolidated Fund. I don’t think that that 
is a very unusual practice; I believe it is a practice that has been followed by many administrations in prior 
years. And quite frankly, I think it just makes good financial management sense to transfer those profits that 
have accrued to the Crown corporations and bring them into general revenue. 
 
Mr. Trew: – Minister, did I hear you say that you’ve taken the profits from the past year only from the 
Crowns and transferred them into the general revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Yes, that is correct. 
 
Mr. Trew: – Well, Minister, I think you should be coming a little bit closer to skirting with the truth. 
SaskTel, in its 1988 annual report tabled in this legislature, available to all 64 MLAs, available to anyone in 
the public, in the annual report it very clearly shows you snafued not the past year of profits for the 
Consolidated Fund. You took 41 years of accumulated profit. It took SaskTel 41 years to build up $237.8 
million and you, sir, and your government just snafued that in one magic grab. It is the exact opposite of what 
you have just stood and told this legislature. 
 
Now either you’re incompetent at the job you’re doing right now, in which case perhaps we should put this 
off until the proper minister comes back, or else you’re being more than just a little bit mischievous with us 
here. Now which is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Before the hon. member makes accusations such as he has, I would like to offer an 
explanation. And indeed, what I told you was true. Indeed the actual profits from the . . . Telecommunications 
company were transferred to the Consolidated Fund; however, that transfer comes from Crown Management 
Board. And certainly there was a full $238 million transferred to the Crown Management Board, but from the 
Crown Management Board to the Consolidated Fund came only the figure that was based on actual year-end 
profits of the past year from SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Trew: – So from the Crown Management Board you got $200 million in the year that we’re talking 
about, correct? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well what you want to check, Minister, is the annual report for 
SaskTel, which show the profits for the year that we’re in, for the year 1988. The profits were far less than 
half of that $200 million figure that you are bandying about and telling us that we should be trusting. 
 
I would appreciate some clarification on this, because either there is . . . something wrong somewhere, and I’d 
appreciate if you can straighten that out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Quite shortly, the figure from SaskTel, a portion of that 200 million, the portion that 
SaskTel profits made up, were $71 million from their 1988 profit-loss statement. 
 
Mr. Trew: – And the balance of the $200 million that the Crown Management Board paid to the 
Consolidated Fund comes from the 106 million that the potash corporation made and others. And at any rate, 
what you have done is, you have taken $237 million from SaskTel. You can stand here and tell us that you 
didn’t transfer $237 million into the Consolidated Fund, but you transferred $237 million in the interim step 
into the Crown Management Board. In either case, SaskTel no longer has that $237 million to use to invest in 
services such as your much-touted individual line service, a service that I don’t disagree with, but the fact is 
every time SaskTel purchases new equipment – and indeed they’re getting into the cellular telephone market 
right now – they’re forced to do so on borrowed money because of this grab. SaskTel operates to a fair degree 
on borrowed money. 
 
By this move to grab $237 million in to the Crown Management Board and the next step being in to the 
Consolidated Fund, you’ve done two things. You’ve covered up the deficit by $200 million this year alone, 
and the second thing is you have increased the cost of operating SaskTel by the cost of borrowing $237 
million. 



 
I’d be more than a little interested in hearing how you square those two forces which are opposed to the 
common good of the people of Saskatchewan, the people that elected you and I supposed, elected us to 
represent them. So how do you square that with the increased costs that SaskTel is forced to pick up simply to 
hide your ever-spiralling deficit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I would just offer to the member opposite the following explanation. The transfer that 
took place between SaskTel and Crown management was an equity transfer, and in fact you would not have a 
significant impact on the true financial statements of SaskTel. In fact what Crown Management Board has 
done is taken an equity position in place of the retained earnings on the SaskTel balance sheet, and you would 
not see any true impact on the SaskTel corporation. 
 
Mr. Trew: – Minister, thank you for the response. I think we’ve muddied those waters sufficiently to have 
everybody thoroughly confused by now. 
 
I was interested in your first remarks when you talked about some Crowns being better run under your 
administration than they were under ours, and I can appreciate you mentioned SGI, but I noticed you were 
very short on mentioning any others. And I noticed, very conspicuous by its absence, was the Crown that you 
are responsible for, Saskatchewan Transportation Company, where you took over a million dollar surplus and 
you now got nearly a $20 million debt . . . 
 
(1915) 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Not this minister. 
 
Mr. Trew: – Not this minister. Yes, I can assure you this minister. I think enough said about that, from my 
perspective anyway. 
 
You are, of course, welcome to respond to it, but the fact is you can’t just say oh well, we’re managing 
everything so wonderfully, because the exact opposite is proven in Crown after Crown after Crown. You just 
look at their annual reports from before your administration took office, look at them since your 
administration took office, and you’ll see that the example that I use of Saskatchewan Transportation 
company is not all that far off the mark with a great many of the others. 
 
Certainly SGI has been making money under your administration and been making more money than it made 
under the NDP. But I can remember the former member from Regina South, every day in the newspaper 
hammering the then Allan Blakeney government about his high SGI rates. And then you look at what you’ve 
done with drivers’ licence costs; you look at what you’ve done with vehicle registration costs; you look at all 
of those things with respect to SGI and, of course, it’s not much wonder that it makes a profit now. You look 
at you having changed the deductible from $200 to $500. It’s not much wonder that when you have that kind 
of rule change at your fingertips, it’s not much wonder you can make a monopoly insurance company make 
money. 
 
I would argue that it would take some wizardry to make it lose money year after year rather than make 
money. 
 
So the simple fact that . . . The simple issue that we’re dealing with here, though, comes back to the manner in 
which you’re trying to cover up the deficit. And it is simply not sustainable. Crown management can’t take 
another equity position, because there isn’t another $237 million in retained earnings in SaskTel for them to 
grab on to. And as I’ve mentioned, I’m not trying to drag up the debate that we’ve been through in the last 
few days, but the potash corporation is gone and the people are asking, what is going to be next? They’re just 
hoping that it’s going to be the government that’s the next to go. 
 
So I’d appreciate if you could have one more stab at trying to explain the 237 or 38 million dollars from 
SaskTel to Crown management. You say it’s an equity transfer, but it’s equity that SaskTel no longer has at 
its immediate corporate disposal, it’s equity that the Crown Management Board in its benevolence may grant 
back to SaskTel. So please have a stab at that, Minister. 
 



Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I think I have explained to the member opposite, as best I know how, the fact that the 
transfer of the equity interest that Crown Management Board has taken in SaskTel will not have an impact on 
the balance sheet of the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Company. 
 
I would like to respond to the hon. member a little bit about management of the different Crown corporations, 
and he has spoken a little bit about the STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) – the bus company, and 
SGI and a few others and, indeed, there are Crown corporations today under this administration that are 
having difficulties. And I think the hon. member would – or at least should – respect the fact that things 
change, time change, and over the past seven or eight years, with respect to the Saskatchewan Transportation, 
you have seen a number of changes in that market-place. 
 
You have seen general ridership levels actually plummet throughout not only Saskatchewan, but throughout 
North America. You have seen very much increasing costs, or a cost when it comes to overall operations of 
that corporation. You have seen intense competition from such sectors as the courier sectors. And I believe 
that most small towns in Saskatchewan are now serviced by couriers, and I believe that that is good for the 
people of Saskatchewan, but it does come at a cost: it is a form of competition to the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. And indeed, those are some of the reasons that the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company is having financial difficulties at this time. 
 
I could go on at length and talk about the management of many corporations, but I do believe it fair to say that 
there have been some very good success stories when it comes to the overall management of Crown 
corporations under this administration. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I would ask you to explain to me how the 
machinations with SaskTel actually work. I note there is, under budgetary revenue, an item of $200 million 
from the Crown investment corporation in the Estimates. I also note that in SaskTel there is something called 
an equity advance of $250 million. Perhaps you’d like to tie those together and explain what’s going on here, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I would answer the hon. member by saying indeed . . . And you have picked up on a 
discrepancy. And in fact what happens is that from SaskTel to Crown Management Board went 238 million in 
retained earnings. In exchange for that, Crown Management Board paid back to SaskTel, in a form of an 
equity advance, $250 million. So there is a difference there of $12 million. 
 
An in answer to the former member’s question, in fact the SaskTel balance sheet would improve by that 
difference, would improve by $12 million. So once again, $238 million of retained earnings went to Crown 
Management Board but in turn Crown Management Board has taken a $250 million equity position in 
SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Why was that done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I believe if the hon. member would look at most Crown corporations you would find 
that Crown Management Board traditionally, both under this administration and under former administrations, 
has held equity positions in most of the Crown corporations. This has not yet taken place before with SaskTel, 
so you are now seeing Crown Management Board for the first time hold an equity position or an equity 
interest or an equity line on the balance sheet in SaskTel. 
 
You will also see that what this does for Crown Management Board as a corporation is increase the retained 
earnings on their balance sheet. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Why take out 238 million and put back in 250 million> 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – The discrepancy simply is a rounding sort of an operation for one. When Crown 
Management Board deals with this type of money, it rounds it out to a nice even figure, and it is the first time 
that Crown Management Board has taken an equity position in SaskTel. 
 
So indeed, there’s a $12 million difference. It is an exchange of numbers; there is no money made nor lost on 
this transaction. What you’re talking about is a $12 million difference, a $12 million difference. Here again it 



is simply a paper transaction. There is no money made nor lost on a transaction of this nature, and indeed 
what it has done is enhanced the actual position of the SaskTel balance sheet by some $12 million. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – But I may say no one’s going to accuse you of not being thorough when you round. I 
mean, you’re not rounding to the nearest thousand or hundred or million. You round off to the nearest quarter 
of a million dollars. 
 
Al I can say is, Mr. Minister, if you were as thorough in fixing the highways as you are at rounding off the 
Finance minister’s budget, you could play pool on these highway in this province, they’d be that smooth. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d like to find a serious response. You’re not seriously gong to tell me that they 
took out $238 million, put back in $250 million, all for the purpose of rounding out the figures. Surely it is not 
a serious comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I don’t think there’s much more that I can add to what I have said. And perhaps my 
terminology of rounding of figures was not exactly accurate. But I can only once again stress that this is a 
paper transaction. No money is gained nor lost on this transfer. In fact, what it has done is enhanced the 
balance sheet of SaskTel by $12 million. What it would in turn do is decreases the benefit, if you like, to 
Crown Management Board by the same $12 million. I can really offer no further explanation than what I’ve 
given. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Tell me, Mr. Minister, does your department do a lot of this kind of rounding? Are there 
other examples of rounding off the nearest quarter of a billion dollars just to make . . . I assume, just to keep 
the figures simple? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – As I’ve said to the member opposite, there’s little or more . . . nothing that I can add to 
what I have said. Only that Saskatchewan Telecommunications, under this administration, has been a very 
well run operation, a very well run operation. And certainly Crown management Board taking an equity 
position in SaskTel is nothing weird or unusual, nothing unusual whatsoever. In fact, Crown Management 
Board holds equity positions in not only SaskTel but virtually all Crown corporations. That is a practice under 
this administration; it was a practice under the former administration. 
 
Now the member opposite may tease and jest about rounding of figures, but I just stress once again that there 
is no moneys gained, nor lost, on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan in this particular transaction. It is 
an accounting procedure, not an unusual accounting procedure. And the members may jest and laugh at that, 
but if the truth of the matter were known, if the members opposite had an ounce of genuineness in them this 
evening, they would get down to some of the real issues at hand in this Appropriation Bill 
 
I can tell the members opposite, and I can tell the members of the –Saskatchewan legislature this evening, that 
there are people in Saskatchewan who are dependent on funds from government who are very dependent on 
this one-twelfth or one month supply of funds, and if the members opposite wish to continue to jest and to 
tease about a rounding figure, they may do so. I will be here all evening. But I can really offer no further 
explanation to you, sir, than what I have thus given. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(1930) 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Okay, I will accept . . . I think the member from Melfort may have some appreciation of 
why the Provincial Auditor has so much difficulty with this province’s books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, I’ll accept your explanation that the reason for the quarters of a billion 
dollars was it just was a nice, simple figure to deal with. I’ll accept that, Mr. Minister, and I will not question 
that again. As far as I’m concerned that’s biblical. 
 



Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d like to get back to my original question. I never really asked you how you 
come to pick a figure of a quarter of a billion dollars. I didn’t really want to know that that figure appealed toy 
you because it was round. I really wanted to know why anyone would take out 238 million and put back 250 
million? The question was why the in and out, not why you found a quarter of a billion dollar figure so 
appealing. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. I’d ask the members on both sides of the House to keep it down a bit. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Well I will make one more, one more at this for the hon. member’s benefit, and once 
again, and I will go through this as slowly and as painstakingly as I can. When you have SaskTel providing to 
Crown Management Board $238 million in retained earnings, now what that does is increase, naturally, 
Crown Management Board, not unusually, taking an equity position in SaskTel, as it does in many other 
Crown corporations, both under this administration and under the past administration, what you have is 
simply an equity position for the first time that Crown Management Board holds in SaskTel. 
 
Now once again, that transpired under the former administration; it has transpired under this administration; 
and in fact what it is is a swap – retained earnings for equity. Nothing unusual. It is an accounting practice 
that increases Crown management Board’s retained earnings. 
 
The answer that the member opposite is looking for, well what happens when Crown Management Board has 
an increase in retained earnings, indeed, then that corporation from time to time will pay to the Consolidated 
Fund a dividend. And I believe that that is what the hon. member has been after, and that, quite frankly, is the 
simple answer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, you’re right; it’s a paper transaction. Why bother? Why take out 238 million 
and put back 250? What sense does that make? There’s got to be some reason for it. It didn’t occur just 
because someone felt like juggling figures. There’s got to have been a reason why you would take out all the 
money and put it back in. there’s got to be a reason for it, Mr. Minister. I wonder what the reason is. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Well sir, I have just told you, when crown Management Board, through this 
transaction, has an increase in retained earnings – and that is what happens through this transaction: Crown 
Management Board has an increase in retained earnings – then in turn, in turn, and this is as well place under 
your administration, from time to time Crown Management Board will pay to the Consolidated Fund a 
dividend, and indeed that is the answer that I believe you are looking for. And certainly, certainly that was 
one of the merits in performing this particular accounting transaction. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, that’s an absolute non sequitur. It doesn’t make any sense at all. Mr. 
Minister, why would someone take out 238 million and put back 250 million? Mr. Minister, you start at the 
second step. You say, but once you’ve taken out 238 million, then the money’s got to go somewhere and this 
is as good a place as any. Send it back where you got it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like you to start at step one. Why was the 238 million taken out if they’re only going to put 
it back again? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – After consultation with Finance officials, some of them who have been around since 
Ross Thatcher’s days, I might add, as minister of Finance, I can only once again provide to the members 
opposite the simple explanation that from SaskTel to Crown Management Board goes $238 million in 
retained earnings. From Crown Management Board back to SaskTel is taken an equity position in SaskTel. 
Indeed, the effect that this has is increasing the retained earnings in Crown Management Board and in turn, 
not unusual, but in turn from Crown management Board to the Consolidated Fund from time to time is paid a 
dividend, and this is what transpired. I can offer no further explanation than that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, this has little, I think . . . Your difficulty in explaining this, I think, has little 
to do with the fact that you aren’t the Finance minister. I don’t think the member from Lumsden’s comments 
would have been any more intelligible had he been here. The bald fact is there is no explanation for this that 
you or any minister would ever care to give in this Assembly. I said, I’m about . . . Patience, patience – the 
truth will come to he who waits. I say that the member from Lloydminster. 
 



Mr. Chairman: – Order, order. Allow the member from Regina Centre to make his comments. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, I said when this budget was brought down that the budget was cooked, and I 
think I said it was crooked. It was this kind of machination, it was this kind of thing that led to that comments. 
Let me explain it to you in the simplest of terms, Mr. Minister, what this is all about. 
 
There is a difference between the province’s fiscal year and the Crown corporation’s fiscal year. You can use 
that difference in the fiscal year, and you in fact are using it, to move the debt forward one year in time. You 
can borrow it this year and pay it back next year and by so doing you move the debt forward one year in time. 
 
What the minister has done is to in fact hide a debt of $200 million. That’s what he’s done with this. That’s all 
this is, is an attempt to cloak a $200 million grab, a $200 million debt. He’s artificially reduced the 
indebtedness of the province by $200 million. That’s what this is all about. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you, Mr. Minister, that the comments of the Provincial Auditor, in his report that The 
Globe and Mail described as scathing, surely must have had this kind of thing in mind. Surely this is what he 
had in mind. Surely, Mr. Minister, when the Provincial Auditor said that this government’s books were in 
shambles, as they did, it was this kind of thing he had in mind. 
 
What you’ve done . . . Well I cannot see the person I’m speaking to. Mr. Minister, what you’ve done with this 
transaction, this is what I said when I said you cooked the books. Mr. Minister, I would suggest you ought to 
leave the officials out of it. The officials who are in this Assembly are, by and large, people of the highest 
reputation and integrity. I would ask the minister not to blame this bit of chicanery on the officials. This little 
bit of chicanery is vintage member of Lumsden. This is vintage, this is vintage member from Lumsden. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is pure unadulterated chicanery. I know it. I suspect the Premier knows it. You may or may 
not know that, Mr. Minister, but that’s what this is all about. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have an additional . . . I’m going to ask . . . I’m going to perhaps allow one of my colleagues 
to raise a question or two next, but that, Mr. Minister, is what all this is about. It’s unadulterated chicanery. 
It’s crooked. And when I said the books are cooked, it was this kind of thing that I was referring to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I will be very brief in my response to the hon. member. But I would say this, and I 
would say this to all members opposite. Here is an opposition that has spent – what? – the last four of five 
months, talking and talking and talking about all the reasons that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
should remain in the government’s hands, talking about all of the benefits to state-owned Crown corporations, 
giving all of the smart and stupid arguments in the world that the government should run all of these Crown 
corporations. If indeed the members opposite were correct in that philosophy, if they were correct, all of these 
Crown corporations would be making hundreds of million of dollars each and supply tot he government, to 
the Consolidated Fund, money that would cover the deficit 10 and 20 times over. 
 
The fact of the matter are that these corporations, many of them that should be privatized – the potash 
corporation being a prime example – is one of the reason that we have the difficulties financially that we do in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I would ask the member opposite again, if they are wondering, well why this $200 million, I ask the 
question to them: why not 4 or $500 million from the state-owned Crown corporations to which members 
opposite hold on to with such a passion, with such a passion? 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I say that indeed there has been a $200 million transfer; I’d say indeed, Mr. Chairman, it is 
generally accepted accounting principles of which we are dealing with here tonight, matters that are not 
unusual, matters of practice that have taken place under the former administration and under this 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(1945) 
 



Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, if those comment made any sense at al, then they were an argument in 
favour of privatizing SaskTel. If those comments made any sense at all, that’s what you were saying. I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Minister, if you think that privatizing the gas side of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) 
constituted stormy seas, wait until you try and privatize SaskTel. Then you really are going to see very, very 
heavy seas. 
 
Mr. Minister, your comments, the comments you just made, are really staggering. Apart from being an 
argument in favour of privatizing SaskTel, what you’re also saying is that it is legitimate to sell off capital 
assets and use the proceeds from the sale of capital assets for operating deficits . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Mr. Minister, now that’s what I just heard you say. 
 
Mr. Minister, there isn’t a reputable economist of accountant in the country who would suggest that’s a proper 
way to run a government. It’s not a proper way to run . . . It isn’t the proper way to run a household. It’s not 
the proper way to run a farm. I am quite sure, Mr. Minister, you don’t operate your auctioneering business in 
such a fashion, by selling off assets to pay debt, and it’s not the proper way to run a government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I am shocked that you would state that it’s appropriate to sell of capital assets to pay debt, and 
that’s what you just finished saying, apparently. And I find it equally appalling that you would make an 
argument in favour of selling SaskTel so that you have some money to pay the deficits, and that’s what you 
appeared to say. Both comments, Mr. Minister, were appalling, absolutely appalling. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you gave any thoughts to the comments of the Minister of Finance who had some 
different theories about what ought to be done with the proceeds. I wondered, Mr. Minister, if you bothered to 
check your comments with the Minister of Finance’s comments before you made them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I think the hon. member should know that my thoughts on the particular matter do not 
disagree whatsoever with, I think it would be say to say, everyone on the government side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – And I do believe, Mr. Chairman, that it would be fair to say that when the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan shares are sold and the public are allowed to invest in this corporation, I would 
say that the funds realized from the proceeds of that sale, indeed, in part at least, should be used to look after 
some debt. As well, Mr. Chairman, I would think that the public of Saskatchewan should have some input as 
to where those moneys goes. 
 
I believe, Mr. Chairman, that it’s well-known throughout the province of Saskatchewan that demands for 
funds with respect to highways, with respect to ever-increasing costs of health care, with respect to 
educational needs through this province in order to make our young people as keen and competitive as 
possible, that those demands are there. And I would say, Mr. Chairman, that most fair-minded and reasonable 
people in Saskatchewan would agree that funds realized from the gains on sales of corporations or the loss on 
sales of corporations like this, when those funds are taken into government’s hands, then indeed significant 
consultation with the people of Saskatchewan should, and I might add, will take place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is that these assets should be sold off to provide you 
people with an election slush fund. That’s precisely what you’re saying. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you given any thought to the day, which isn’t too distant at the rate your going, when there 
isn’t going to be anything more to sell off? Have you given any thought to what you’re going to do that day, 
when that day comes? Because at the rate you people are going and the rate you’re selling things, that day is 
going to come pretty quickly. What do you intend to do then, Mr. Minister? 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, you can’t seriously argue that it is sound management to pay off . . . to sell capital assets 
to cover debts. This is like, Mr. Minister, a farmer who’s in trouble who sells a quarter section to pay his 
debts. He’s on slippery slope, because without the quarter section you’ve got less income, and you have less 
ability service the debt. And the more you sell off assets, the faster you’re sliding down the slope. 
 



I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you don’t see that same thing applying to your government. You’re selling off 
assets which are earning money. As you sell them off and squander the proceeds on an election slush fund, 
you then, Mr. Minister, have less income available to service the debt, and you are on the same slippery slope 
that the farmer was I just described. 
 
Have you given no thought, Mr. Minister, to what’s going to happen to you when that day comes when you 
run out of capital assets to sell off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I certainly have given considerable thought to that and given considerable thought to 
what will transpire when some of these assets are put back into the people’s hands. I’ve given considerable 
thought to the future of the young people in Saskatchewan when they have a corporations, such as the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, in which they could, number one, invest, and in which, number two, they could 
have the prospects of new jobs and new opportunities when it comes to the diversification of such 
corporations as the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
I and all members opposite have given considerable thought, and that is precisely why we have introduced 
and passed in this legislature legislation to sell the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to sell the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say in fairness, Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite were to get really honest tonight with himself, 
he would say that indeed some of the members opposite back in 1981 or 1982 gave the same types of 
consideration to this corporation and the young people and the future of this province when they laid before 
Crown Management Board, the government corporation, a document, a plan, a strategy to privatize many of 
the corporations that were held in government hands. I recall reviewing that document, Mr. Chairman. I have 
it in my desk and it list the potential privatization of aspen and paper plants, natural gas corporations, potash 
corporations, uranium developments, and on down the line. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Chairman, the member opposite asks, have we given consideration to what may transpire with the 
privatization of these assets? I say to you, Mr. Chairman, we have given careful and serious and continuing 
consideration to a very important juncture at where we are today. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the future of 
Crown corporations and the future of our young people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, the obvious question that arises: if you’re concerned about the young people 
in the future, then why are you living for the moment by selling off capital assets as quick as you can and 
spending the money as quick as you can? Surely if you had any interest or concern about young people in the 
next generation, you wouldn’t be squandering these assets here and now to create some kind of an 
immediately favourable environment. Surely you’d leave some of these assets to future generations. 
 
Mr. Minister, your behaviour is the precise opposite of what your suggest. Rather than having concern about 
future generations, you have no concern at all. Your behaviour, Mr. Minister, is the height of irresponsibility. 
You’re selling off assets as quick as you can. You’re spending the money as quick as you can and giving 
absolutely no thought to the future. Your behaviour, Mr. Minister, is the precise opposite of what you 
suggested. You’re not concerned about young people in the next generation. It’s just the opposite, Mr. 
Minister. You’re concerned about yourselves in the next election, and you frankly could care less what 
happens to this province or the people thereafter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly disagree vehemently with what the member opposite 
has stated. Once again, Mr. Chairman . . . And I would stress that if members opposite were genuine, were 
genuine about where the best bet for the future lies with respect to these Crown corporations, they would 
come back to their own document of early 1982, wherein they themselves recognized that there were to be 
significant benefits in the privatization or the public offerings of many of the Crown corporations – a 
document a plan, a strategy devised by members of the NDP to do precisely what this administration is doing 
today. 
 
Now the members opposite, over the past four or five months, have chose not to talk about that document, 
have chose not to talk about their own plan for the privatization or the public share offerings in those Crown 



corporations. And I wonder today, as I stand here, Mr. Chairman, why have they chosen not to talk about it? 
Are they ashamed, are they embarrassed, or just what took place? Did the radicals across the way, Mr. 
Chairman, really grab a hold of the NDP and say, no, we can’t do this, although it does make economic sense, 
although it does make good sense for the young people of Saskatchewan? Did the radicals across the way 
really get a hold of that document and cut it to shreds, and say, no, we will not allow this to happen? 
 
Is that what took place? I really wonder if that took place, because, Mr. Chairman, it is a strange course of 
events, a strange course of events where members opposite – and I could list the names – sat and planned and 
analysed with many good financial advisers beside them, many good people, not politicians but good 
financial advisers by their sides, assisting them in drafting up this vision for Saskatchewan, a vision that 
would privatize or offer public share offerings in uranium, in pulp and paper, in natural gas, in potash, and a 
list of others. 
 
They sat there and they devised that plan, and they said, yes, it was a good idea. And why have they chosen 
not to talk about it, Mr. Chairman? It’s a fairly serious issue that the radicals opposite said, no, it may be 
good; all the financial advisers may say, yes, it’s good for the people of Saskatchewan; but we’re not going to 
do it because we’re radicals and it just doesn’t fit in with our own personal philosophy. Is that what 
happened? I wonder. And the people of Saskatchewan, I will guarantee you, will have access to that 
document, and the young people in my constituency will read that document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – They will read that document and they will see the utter hypocrisy of the members 
opposite. And attached to that document, do you know what will be on the front of it? There will be a 
covering letter, a covering letter talking about these plans devised by the NDP, taken over by the radicals and 
shredded. 
 
There will be a covering letter talking about Tommy Douglas, and a great man for this province he was in 
many ways, but I will tell you, he talked one thing in the legislature and he did another thing outside. That is, 
he preached all of his life about the big, bad multinational corporations, but what did he do afterwards? He sat 
on the board of directors of the Husky Oil corporation. 
 
Attacked to that document will be a little letter, and it will also talk about the former premier of this province, 
Mr. Allan Blakeney, who preached all of his political days here in Saskatchewan about the big, bad 
multinational corporations; about how you shouldn’t privatize, how you should not offer shares to the people 
of Saskatchewan. But what did he do within minutes of being defeated out of this legislature? What did he do 
himself? Bought shares personally in the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation. It’s not good for the people, 
but I, Allan Blakeney, I will go ahead and I will buy shares in Sask Oil and Gas. 
 
There will also be on that document, Mr. Chairman, that will go to every one of my constituents in the 
Melfort constituency, a little line about the Leader of the Opposition, a man who condemned multinational 
banks and say that, oh they’re just big, bad multinationals, but am going to go to work for them and assist in a 
legal capacity in foreclosing on farmers. 
 
Mr. Chairman, those things will be given, and I will absolutely give you my assurance that that document and 
that letter explaining what s right for the people of Saskatchewan as admitted by the NDP in their document, 
it will go to every one of my constituents, and I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, that the hypocrisy of the 
members opposite will be shown in a clear-cut, concise manner, Mr. Speaker; that my people in my 
constituency will read and understand and be shown, be shown the real hypocrisy of the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, I just want to say in the beginning, I have not seen that kind of a tirade 
from a minister, I guess, since the member from Arm River, who used to sit on this side, threw his water 
across the Assembly when he got out of control. 
 



But I want to say to you that, first of all, before you bother sending a letter out to all your members in your 
constituency, you should think about meeting with your mayor, who is very upset with you as the member 
and the minister because of the pulling back on the fertilizer plant that was to be built in your constituency 
which you didn’t do anything about. And you may be sending a letter about some document, but we’ll be 
sending a letter to your people in your constituency about their member who didn’t stand up for them in this 
legislature to protect a fertilizer plant that was promised and to be delivered until you backed out and went 
with Cargill. You individually did not stand up in this legislature, even to this day, to defend that project for 
your own home town. And we’ll be sending that letter out to all the people in Melfort explaining your role – 
I’ll carbon coy it to you – your role in this Assembly in protecting the people. 
 
But I want to ask you a question on the deficit. You’ve outlined how privatizing, in your mind, has lowered 
the deficit of the province. Can you indicate to me now what the total debt of the province is? What is the 
total debt of the province at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – The member opposite, Mr. Chairman, may well have at his side the budget address 
given by the Minister of Finance in March, 1989. I will refer him to page no. 31 in that document and he will, 
by turning to those pages, see both the estimated 1989 and the estimated 1990 gross debt figures to which he 
is questioning, as well as the actual 1988 figures provided on page 31 of the budget address, March 1989. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, I don’t have my copy. Will you give me the numbers, the total deficit of 
the province at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I will give you as provided or in this document on page no. 31: gross debt, estimated 
1990, 11,155,719. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – You’ve been rounding off things to a quarter of a billion but rounding them off to the 
nearest 10 billion just won’t work. can you give me that number again? It’s not $11 million, I don’t think, sir. 
I think it’s more than that. Can you give me the number that the debt is at the present time. and I want the 
Consolidated Fund and in the Crown corporation, CIC (Crown investments corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
all the Crowns. What is it at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Total between the Crown corporations and the Consolidated Fund, $11,155, 719,000. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – And I wonder if you could tell me what it was in 1982. Your officials will know roughly 
and you can give me this to the nearest billion. Will you give me what the debt was when you took over - -the 
wizards of the economy who were going to solve the economic problems that were created by, as you say, 
members on this side, who you say didn’t know what they were doing with the economy. What was the debt 
at the time that you became a member of the economy. What was the debt at the time that you became a 
member of this legislature? Just so I can make the comparison, and this one you can round off to the nearest 
billion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – My officials advise me that they do not have that figure with them this evening. 
 
I would offer to the members opposite a simple fact, and that was when this government did take over the 
reins of administration, there were many departures from normal, given accounting principles and practices. 
And the members opposite have made the case, when we were government, we had no debt, we had surpluses 
every year. Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chairman, I campaigned in 1982 and was successful in 1982 in part on the 
management of the financial affairs of the province of Saskatchewan of the NDP administration. 
 
I would say, Mr. Chairman, and I will offer you this simple explanation, and I think, Mr. Chairman, this tells 
a whole lot about members opposite in their many years as government. Today, Mr. Chairman, I as a private 
citizen in the province of Saskatchewan get a power bill every month for my personal residence and other 
buildings. And I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, for myself and for every other taxpayers, ever utility user in the 
province of Saskatchewan, I want them to know that when they get their power bill, 40 cents out of every 
dollars that they goes to debt, goes to paying the interest on the debt of the power corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And I would say, Mr. Chairman, that that debt did not begin with this administration. 
 



I will make the case to you, Mr. Chairman, that 40 years ago the power poles that were placed in the grounds 
of rural Saskatchewan, today have not been paid for. I would make the case to you, Mr. Chairman, that Crown 
corporations under the NDP administration were indeed bled dry, bled dry, Mr. Chairman, and the 
multimillions of dollars borrowed from those same big, bad multinational banks, not Canadian big, bad 
multinationals even, but American big, bad multinational corporations to finance these Crown corporations 
and yet not even pay the debt on the power poles that are in the grounds of the province of Saskatchewan 
today for 40 years – have not been paid for yet. 
 
So I would make the case to the members opposite, don’t talk to me about your surpluses and your 
tremendous financial administrative abilities, because frankly, Mr. Chairman, the sins of those past years are 
today coming to haunt us. And that is precisely why, Mr. Chairman, it takes good, sound fiscal and financial 
management practices to look after the many sins, quite frankly, of years gone by under NDP administrations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Mr. Minister, you’ve admitted to me that the debt at the present time is $11 billion. I 
want you now to tell me what it was back in 1982 when you went over it. Now this will be the total debt from 
1905 until 1982 – the total debt for that period of 70-some-odd years. Can you tell me what the total debt for 
77 years was when you people took over. We know it’s 11 billion now. That’s in seven years, after seven 
years of your government. but what was it when you took over? I’m sure that your officials would have it at 
their fingertips, to the nearest billion, what the debt was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – My officials come in here with current information. They come in here, certainly, with 
some historical information, but I might add, Mr. Chairman, my officials do not come in with filing cabinets; 
they come in with brief-cases. And I would tell the member opposite that those are not available this evening. 
I would be more than pleased to undertake to provide that information to you in writing and, I might add, in a 
timely basis. But this evening my officials do not have that information with them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – I wonder, Mr. Minister, if your officials don’t have it – and I know the people you have 
on staff and I know that they know. What you’re doing is to refuse to give it to us. You have very professional 
people with you tonight. They know what the debt of the province was. You’re simply refusing to give it to 
the committee, and I would ask, Mr. Chairman, whether or not this is proper, for a minister who obviously has 
officials who know the answer to refuse to give that information. 
 
Mr. Chairman: – I can’t make him answer the question if he doesn’t have the information with him. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – I wonder then whether the minister would ask the Premier, who’s sitting in the desk just 
next to him, if he knows, if he knows what the debt was when he became Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, I have indicated to members opposite that my officials have indicated to 
me that they do not have that information with him. I have also indicated to members opposite that I will 
make a personal undertaking to provide that information to them, and I would say on a timely basis. that 
information, I am sure, is available, but once again, I remind members opposite that my officials here this 
evening do not have that information with them, but I will provide that to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Minister, I have here a document – it’s called The Saskatchewan Economic 
and Financial Position, July 1986 – and the individual’s name on it is the Hon. Mr. Gary Lane, the Minister 
of Finance. And I want to tell you what the debt was because you refuse to give it, and then you will know for 
another committee, or someone may ask you on the street or a radio program because . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – And you might want to put this in the letter that you send out to your constituencies so 
you get some truth out there. but the debt in 1982, as of March 31, was 3.5 billion. Do you want to write that 
down, just so you have it – 3.5 billion. Now this wasn’t just for the New Democratic government, I’ll remind 
you, for the 11 years they were in government. This is from the period of 1905 to 1982. The debt was 3.5 
billion. 
 



Now that built all of the highway system. That built all of the power plants that were in place at that time, 
every office that is around the province – SaskTel, SaskPower, all the government agencies the debt was 3.5 
billion. It was the money that was borrowed, 418 million, part of it, for the potash mines. All the debt, the 
total debt, was 3.5 billion. It included the money that that may have put into major dam projects back in the 
1930s and ‘40s, money that was borrowed. Every one, every project in the history of the province, the total 
debt was 3.5 billion. 
 
Do you want to then tell me how much, Mr. Minister, you ran the debt up. Can you do that calculation and 
give it to us. It was 3.5; it went to 11.155 billion. Can you tell me how much of the debt then, of 11 billion, is 
yours in seven years? Can you tell me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – The hon. member conveniently, Mr. Chairman, that I feel most people in Saskatchewan 
know and recognize. And I would start, Mr. Chairman, by mentioning to you that if you look at the general 
economic situation of the entire country and specifically Saskatchewan over the past few years, you would 
find, Mr. Chairman – and members opposite may not realize it and I can go into why . . . They may not realize 
the impacts of $2 wheat. Maybe they don’t realize the impact of $2 wheat. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Chairman, they don’t realize the impact of drought upon drought. Maybe, Mr. Chairman, they 
don’t realize the impact of a crash – a literal crash – in the oil market, for instance, Mr. Chairman. Maybe 
they don’t realize what it means to have oil drop from 28 to $30 a barrel down to $10 barrel. Maybe they 
don’t realize what it means to have an international crash of the potash market, an international crash of the 
potash market, an international crash of the uranium market. And maybe, Mr. Chairman, members opposite 
fail to realize the significance of all of these factors. 
 
(2015) 
 
And I say frankly, Mr. Chairman, they do fail to recognize it because they live in what I view as a fantasy 
land, the same fantasy land, Mr. Chairman, that we discovered when we opened up the books of this great 
province. and what had other provinces done over that time period from 1095 to 1982? Other provinces had 
done precisely what every . . . I shouldn’t say what every . . . Other provinces did over that period of time, 
1905 to 1982, what most reasonable Saskatchewan families do, and that is when times are good, when we’re 
making pretty good money, let’s sock a little away in a savings account. Let’s put a little away for a rainy day. 
Let’s be a bit prudent. Let’s let the good times look after some of the bad times. 
 
But members opposite, in their many years in government, did not have the same common sense that the 
average Saskatchewan family has, and as a result, Mr. Chairman, what did members opposite put away for 
those years in government? I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, when I walked into this legislature in 1982, and 
when this administration walked into this legislature in 1982 and opened up the books – and the people of 
Saskatchewan thought and had placed trust that members opposite would have put away a little for a rainy 
day in something called the heritage Fund – well, Mr. Chairman, when we walked in here the cupboard was 
bare. Our province, not like Alberta, had a Heritage Fund, that was there in name only. As far as any real, 
cold dollars, Mr. Chairman, there was nothing there. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, I used the example of Alberta, the province of Alberta who had 10 to $12 billion put 
away in a Heritage Fund – [put away, Mr. Chairman, just like the average Saskatchewan family would put 
away a little money when they had a good year; just the same way, Mr. Chairman, that my grandparents and 
my parents did when they had a good year in whatever business or job they had, put away a little in case 
things got a little tough. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, members opposite did not. The people in the province of Alberta did, to the tune of 10 or 
$12 billion. But members of the NDP said, no, let’s buy a potash mine; let’s nationalize something else. 
Maybe let’s take over the farm. Maybe someone out there is making a profit in some business; let’s 
nationalize that. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, that is precisely what took place. We formed government, the cupboard was bare, and 
indeed, indeed through these difficult economic times when there was no reserves to draw on, indeed the 
deficit in this province has increased and increased significantly. And I say, Mr. Chairman, that it has been 
with a great deal of difficulty that we have managed through these difficulty times. But I believe the people of 



Saskatchewan recognize what we have been through, the people of Saskatchewan recognize the compassion 
and the understanding that this administration has had when it comes to things like high interest rates and with 
no Heritage Fund to draw on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: – Well, Mr. Chairman, this is going to take all night because I ask the minister a simple 
question about the deficit. He has admitted that the debt today is $11 billion, and that we now know that when 
he took over it was $3.5 billion, and I asked for the difference or the amount that they had built up in the last 
seven years. I asked a very short question. He gets up and gives a radical statement for 15 minutes about 
everything except the answer. 
 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that the total debt in the province when you took over office as 3.5 
billion. This was the debt that was incurred during the Depression of the 1930s. Like, you’re not the first 
people to have a drought. This included the debt that built up before there was potash and uranium 
 
I want to say to you, as well, that in 1971 when the New Democratic Party was first elected, the price of oil 
was not $10 a barrel or 20, it was $2.70. That what it was in 1971. In 1975, at mid-term, it was 7.50 a barrel. 
But I want to tell you that in 1985, Mr. Minister, while you ran up one of the biggest deficits in the history of 
the province, the price of oil ranged between 25 and $30 a barrel, and the production was 50 per cent higher 
than it was in 1982. These are facts and you know them. 
 
The simple question, Mr. Minister, is: where is the money going, where’s the money? And besides that, not 
only has the deficit gone up by 6.6 billion – 6.6 billion – you have also sold off massive amounts of assets, a 
great amount of the assets of the province. Pardon me, it’s 7.7 billion – 7.7 it has increased in seven years. 
That’s a billion dollars a year – a billion a year. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, you say that privatizing is solving the debt problem. You’ve been privatizing; you sold 
off Sask Minerals to Quebec and Ontario companies; you’ve sold off Saskoil; you sold off the P.A. pulp mill; 
you sold off the coal mines; you sold off potash equipment; you’ve sold off major parts of SaskTel; you sold 
off the highway equipment; you privatized the dental plan and sold off that equipment. 
 
Now not only have you created the deficit to go from 3.5 billion to 11 billion, but you’ve sold off a great 
number of assets. When do you think we’re going to hit that break-even point where you sell off enough 
assets to get the debt, not reduced from where it was in 1982, but you’ll end up selling the whole shooting 
match, and your’ going to have a debt higher than it was when you took over? Can you tell, Mr. Minister, at 
the rate you’re going, when will it be that you start turning it around? When is the date that you anticipate that 
the debt crisis in this province will turn around? 
 
We know that the Premier could care less about the deficit of the province. Everyone knows the boondoggle 
at Rafferty where he’s got money sunk in that place down there, and he doesn’t even have the legal status to 
go ahead with it. He doesn’t even have the legal right to go ahead with it. The federal court, which is 
appointed by the federal Tories, have told him it’s illegal; that’ he’s been acting illegally even though he’s 
dumped $30 million into it. That’s what they’re saying, that’s what they’re saying. They’re saying that when 
he sells off the assets that he’s gone mad. This is what they’re saying – it’s a Premier who’s gone totally mad 
with privatization. 
 
And they’re also saying, where is the money going? Where is the money? You’ve admitted the debt is $11 
billion -- $11 billion, up from 3.5. And you’ve privatized, for seven years you’ve sold off assets. How can 
convince the people of the province that privatizing, selling off assets, is going to solve the debt problem? 
 
Now you’ve mentioned tonight that you intend to privatize SaskTel. You’ve said that in a comment made to 
the member from Regina Centre. And we’ll be sending Hansard out; we’ll be putting it in the pamphlets in 
the next election with a letter to all the people in the province that the Acting Minister of Finance on August 
14 made this statement to the legislature, that he intended and wanted to privatize SaskTel because it would 
the debt problem. He said that tonight. I’m saying to you and asking you quite seriously: where does it end? Is 
there any limit to what you will privatize? 
 



Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – The member opposite has talked about a variety of specific points. And his first 
question was the difference in debt between 1982 and 1989 and just what that figure is, and I’ll have to take 
the member opposite’s figures as reasonably accurate. I would say, Mr. Chairman, in answer to that, the 
difference in figures is about three-quarters of Alberta’s Heritage Fun – about three-quarters of Alberta’s 
Heritage Fund. 
 
And I remind you, Mr. Chairman, that this province in 1982 had no Heritage Fund. It had a Heritage Fund in 
name only, but where was the money? Where was that money, Mr. Chairman? And it’s a fair question to ask. 
And if I want to look back in history, Mr. Chairman, there’s a fair number of the problems today that relate 
back to that zero Heritage Fund. 
 
If members opposite wanted to be fair and reasonable, they would stand up and say yes, yes, Mr. Minister, I 
realize that every province across this country in days like these, in the economic times such as these, has a 
deficit. Every single province across this country, Mr. Chairman, has a deficit. 
 
And Heaven knows, Mr. Chairman, we don’t want to have a deficit. Heaven knows, Mr. Chairman, if there 
was one political party that has taken more courageous stances with respect to deficits, it has been without 
question the Progressive Conservative governments across this entire country – every one of them, Mr. 
Chairman, taking strong stances with respect to deficit reductions. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Chairman, in the perspective of socialist type parties and socialistic thinking type people, 
all the time asking for more, more, more. And members opposite have stood in this legislature and said, spend 
more money on health care, more money on roads, more money on education, more money on social services 
more money one everything and anything that they could possibly think or dream up, more money, and at the 
same time sit there and try and complain about deficits. Well, Mr. Chairman, the people of this province will 
soon figure out, figure out the utter, utter nonsense paid out by members opposite. 
 
The members opposite say, well where has all this money gone? Where did you spend the money? Well, Mr. 
Chairman, frankly, Mr. Chairman, I’m glad they have asked that question. I am very glad they have asked 
where the moneys have been spent because, Mr. Chairman, I believe that members of the NDP need a little bit 
of memory refreshing as to where moneys have been spent. 
 
And I will firstly start, Mr. Speaker, in an area of spending that the NDP refused the people of Saskatchewan 
and that was with respect to the high interest rates of the early 1980s – 22 and 23 per cent interest rates. And 
what did members opposite do? They turned their back completely on the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I submit to you, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan shall not and will not forget 
the lack of compassion the utter lack of compassion that members opposite had in the days of 1981-82 – 
friends of mine, people that I went to school with, people that I worked with, having their homes on the verge 
of being foreclosed on and taken back by the banks because members opposite had no compassion for high 
interest rates. 
 
Well, Mr. Chairman, it has been under this administration that a great deal of compassion and, Mr. Chairman, 
a great deal of money was spent on reducing and protecting people from high interest rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Members also ask, well where else has the money gone? Well quite frankly, Mr. 
Chairman, we have taken a natural resource that bounds in the province of Saskatchewan called natural gas, 
something that we are rich with. As a matter of fact, Mr. Chairman, one could argue we are wealthy, we are 
wealthy with natural gas. But members opposite were not wealthy with compassion, were not wealthy with a 
vision, were not wealthy with any common sense when it comes to taking care and use of that natural gas and 
spreading it all throughout rural Saskatchewan. And I would say, Mr. Chairman, that that natural gas 
distribution system that has been put in place by a Progressive Conservative government, indeed, Mr. 
Chairman, was an investment in the future, and indeed there were literally hundreds of million dollars placed 
in that distribution system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 



Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Members opposite will say, well where else did that money go? Well I will also talk, 
Mr. Chairman, about a place where that money has gone. That is an investment in the future of Saskatchewan, 
is an investment, Mr. Chairman, that is well worthy of, and that is taking care of our senior citizens. And, Mr. 
Chairman, notwithstanding a moratorium, an NDP moratorium or freeze for five years on the construction of 
nursing homes, not a single bed, not a single new bed put in place by members opposite who speak out of one 
side of their mouth about being compassionate, but they didn’t build a single bed . . . And the pent-up demand 
in this province of Saskatchewan for senior citizens housing was beyond belief, Mr. Chairman, and that is 
where a good portion of the money went, Mr. Chairman, a good portion of the money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(2030) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, members opposite will say, well where else did the money go? Well the 
money went into another place, another place that members opposite refused, and that was, Mr. Chairman, to 
provide rural people with the same standard of living as people with the city get. And, Mr. Chairman, most 
people in Saskatchewan, city or country, would not disagree with that; most people, city or country, would 
agree that people in rural Saskatchewan should not be second-class citizens; people in rural –s should be able 
to pick up a phone and have a private line. Is that something so terrible, Mr. Chairman? I say it’s terrible to be 
denied that. And, Mr. Chairman, that, as well, is a place where the money has gone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, I could go on at length, but I believe that that should be a sufficient 
number of examples of where some of the expenditures have gone, and why they have been an investment – 
an investment in the future of Saskatchewan. These types of things, Mr. Chairman, are capital investments 
that will pay back big dividends over time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: – We’re almost convinced by not quite, not quite. And I want to pursue how well off the people 
are and so I’d ask you another simple question. How much annually are we paying to service the debt under 
your administration this current year. How many millions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Page no. 27 of the budget address provided by the Minister of Finance in march 1989 
on page no. 27, I believe you would find it on about the fifth or sixth line and you would find it to be in, in 
1989 329,500,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – That’s ’89. I’d like ’90. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – That figure for 1990, it is an estimated figure of 380.847 million. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Well this is great news for the people of Saskatchewan. Do you realize that the debt, the 
interest that we pay, 380-some-million dollars estimates, is the third highest expenditure in the budget every 
year? That doesn’t pay a cent off principal, Mr. Minister. 
 
Do you realize that that costs the people of Saskatchewan over $1 million a day, and you still don’t even pay 
off the interest on the debt that you have left? Now that’s a tremendous legacy that you have left. Young 
people that are building a future in this province should really be up and thankful for your administration, that 
they’re burdened with $11 billion debt, 7.7 billion since you took office, $390 million annually just to pay the 
interest. And what else have you done? 
 
As my colleague indicated, you sold off asset after asset and debt has gone up – 248 million, you told the 
people of Saskatchewan. You sold off the pulp mill, didn’t get a cent; never will, but you said you sold it off – 
248 million. You sold off Saskoil. You pocketed another over $100 million. You sold off Sask Minerals, $15 
million. You auction off the highway equipment, and God knows what you got for that because you’re the 
auctioneer and I don’t suppose we got a fair price. You understand that, do you? And you’ve sold and you’ve 
sold and you’ve sold. 



 
And what is happening for the future generations? They’re burdened with debt – debt -- $390 million 
annually just to pay interest, Mr. Minister. What a legacy you leave behind. You should be proud. I think you 
should go back to Highways. You can’t handle that, but I mean you’ve demonstrated that you don’t need a 
promotion. That’s one thing you’ve guaranteed us. You should stay in the B team. 
 
And I want to ask, Mr. Minister, what is the net worth when you took . . . of the province – that is the assets, 
less the liabilities – when you took office, and what is the net worth of the province today? That is, if you sold 
off all the assets less the liabilities, where do we sit today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I do not have the figures from years ago. I would provide to the hon. member just a few 
comments. And if you were to take the members’ viewpoint with respect to some of the programs and 
initiatives over the past seven years, you would find that in fact what the member is doing is denying senior 
citizens such things as the 2,000 or thereabouts nursing home beds that were built under this Progressive 
Conservative administration. 
 
You would find that the member opposite would deny the literal thousands of farmers in Saskatchewan the 
use of the great natural resource that we are wealthy with, called natural gas. You would find that the member 
opposite would in fact be denying our rural people individual line service that is private telephones. You 
would find that the members opposite would be denying our young people an investment in their future, and I 
used the example of a $100 million agricultural building in the city of Saskatoon for the use of all agricultural 
students through this province. You would find that members opposite are denying people through 
Saskatchewan protection from high interest rates of 23 and 24 per cent. 
 
And I say, Mr. Chairman, that the moneys that we have expended, I believe, have been spent really on 
projects and programs that impact directly on people in the province of Saskatchewan. I would make the 
argument to you, Mr. Chairman, that the people of Saskatchewan will not likely forget a government who has 
assisted them through these very difficult years by providing programs that I think show, indeed, the true 
compassion of this administration – programs that provide nursing home beds, that provide protection from 
high interest rates, that provide services to rural Saskatchewan, that make them not second-class citizens as 
some members opposite may want. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, once again, these moneys have been expended, I believe judiciously, have been a very 
good investment in the future of this province of Saskatchewan. The member opposite asks about the total 
assets less liabilities. It is shown on page 25 of the Budget Address of March 1989, given by the Minister of 
Finance, and you would see, Mr. Chairman, that the estimated 1990 figure, net debt, end-of-year, 
$3,069,389,000. 
 
Mr. Koskie: – Net debt, province’s equity, $3 billion -- $3 billion in the hole. If you sell every single thing 
the province owns, less its liabilities, and we’re $3 billion. And when you took over, Mr. Minister . . . Since 
you don’t know, I’ll read it from one of your reports. The province’s net debt equity at the year end of 1982 
was just over $1 billion -- $1.1 billion – and today it’s $3 billion in the hole. Boy, you’re managers, 
tremendous. 
 
And you talk about what you do for the people. What about the people that come behind? What about the 
young people with the $390 million annual payment? What about the young people who have to pay off the 
$7 billion of debt? What about the people that follow, the young people of this province who have no assets 
left because you’ve sold them off and have squandered them? What about their future, Mr. Minister? And you 
continue to sell, and sell, and sell, and the net result if that the province goes further and further into debt. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about keeping promises, and I take a look at one of your election campaign ads, and 
one of the first things you indicated was that you provide a 10 per cent reduction in provincial income tax. 
And you know what we have today? We have the highest per capita; we have the highest personal income tax 
of any province in Canada at $35,000 income. We have the highest personal income tax in all of Canada. And 
at 40,000 annual salary, we are second only to Quebec. Now that’s a great situation for the people of -
Saskatchewan. 
 



If you take a look at what has happened to the credit rating of the province, there is nothing but . . . Ever since 
you took office, the credit rating of this province has continued to deteriorate. Moody’s has lowered the 
Saskatchewan rating as follows, since 1982: July 1985, from an AA plus to an AA; January ’86 from 1 to 
AA-3; August ’86, AA-3 to A-1. Standard and Poor’s has lowered the Saskatchewan rating as follows: 
August ’86, from AA plus to AA. Canadian Bond Rating agency has lowered Saskatchewan’s rating as 
follows: January ’86, from an AA plus to An AA; January ’87, from an AA to an AA minus. 
 
I’ll tell you this. This province is in a shambles financially under your administration, Mr. Minister. And how 
do you justify burdening the future generations just for your election promises? How can you stand here with 
a straight face, that in the election year that your Minister of Finance and you were a member of the cabinet, 
allowed the expenditures of over $800 million over and above the amount that was budgeted? That is crass 
politics, Mr. Minister. And the people of Saskatchewan are on to you birds, and they’re not prepared to accept 
that type of crass politics any longer. 
 
And exactly the same thing is happening in respect to the potash corporation. You come into this legislature, 
and we ask you what you’re going to do with it, are you going to lower this debt. And what’s the answer? The 
Premier says one thing outside the House, the Minister of Finance says, we don’t know yet, we don’t know. 
You sell off the potash corporation for the sole reason that you’re going to diversify. And we ask the man 
that’s putting through the privatization what his plans are, but he says, we don’t have any plans yet. This is 
the type of administration that the people of Saskatchewan are sick and tired of. 
 
And I want to ask you: having sold off all of these assets, can you account for the $248 million from the sell-
off of PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company)? Can you account for the hundred million that you got – or 
more – from the sale of Saskoil? Can you account for the hundred million-plus that you got for the Manalta 
Cola, for the coalfields at Coronach? Can you account for the sale of the . . . the money that you got from the 
sell-off of dental equipment, highway equipment, Sask Minerals, SaskCOMP? 
 
You have sold, sold, and sold, and the legacy that you leave behind is continuing debt for the people of this 
province, but we’re still higher and higher taxes, and every individual service has been increased 
astronomical. ask the farmers in respect to licensing their trucks how dramatically they have increased. Ask 
the individual that has to license a trailer, where it went up from 27 to $48 in one year. ask those that want to 
go and use some recreational facilities in this province to go fishing, from $5 or less -- $5 when we were in 
and $15 today. Ask those that want to go to use a park, what it costs for parking their trailer. Ask those in 
small business who want to reincorporate a partnership or incorporate a company, the level of fees that have 
increased. 
 
And we have documented all these. And how can you stand here so brazenly and try to indicate that the 
people of Saskatchewan are better off with this type of management? All that really you have to left behind is 
a destruction and a sell-off of assets. 
 
(2045) 
 
And imagine a business man or a farmer, Mr. Minister, in the end of the operation he sells off his farm or sells 
of his business. And besides he has debts. and how can you stand in here and say that the people of 
Saskatchewan are improving their position under your administration? This is the most ludicrous, 
incompetent, mismanaged province in all of Canada. And the statistics indicate it. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, I can guarantee you, Mr. Minister, when given an opportunity, will react. 
And I hope that you have the courage before you scorch the earth of this here province any further with your 
administration, that you’ll have the nerve to call an election, because the people of Saskatchewan are looking 
forward to it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, I would like to respond to a number of the points raised by the member 
opposite. I can’t help but think where this province be today financially compared to where we are today, had 
the members opposite indeed been the prudent financial managers that they make out to be here this evening. 
 



And, Mr. Chairman, I once again stress to you that when this government took office, when this government 
opened up the books, when the people of Saskatchewan expected there to be a heritage Fund, such as the 
Heritage Fund they had in Alberta of 10 or $12 billion – when this government took office, Mr. Chairman, 
there was nothing there. there has been no reserve to draw on in these difficult times. There has been no 
savings account to draw on like the average Saskatchewan family would have. There was no money put away 
in a tin box in the back of the cupboard like many people in Saskatchewan have had over the years. There was 
no member of the family of Crown corporations that one could count on that might help out in difficult times 
like there would be in most Saskatchewan families. There was nothing there, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan and this government have been through these past seven or eight years hand in 
hand through very difficult times, undeniably difficult, Mr. Chairman, and this administration has provided, I 
believe some pretty fair programs and policies to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, members opposite wouldn’t have even had to have put away money for 
a rainy day. All they really would have had to do was to have kept – kept – their socialist mitts out of 
business; all they would have had to have done was kept from nationalizing potash mines that were already 
there, that were already functioning; all they would have had to have done was not nationalize part of the 
meat-packing industry, for instance, and these other things that they just had to get their hands on because 
they thought someone might be making a little bit of money, and that profit is a bad word, and if there’s going 
to be profit, let us have it in the state’s hands. 
 
And had they done that, Mr. Chairman, with just the potash corporation, had they not nationalized it, had they 
put those moneys in the band, had they put those moneys in the banks rather than borrowing moneys from 
American banks, Mr. Chairman, the equity of the money they put down on those potash mines over the last 13 
years probably would have doubled twice at interest rates of which we have seen. And, Mr. Chairman, that 
alone would have helped out significantly. 
 
But what did members opposite do? They had to, they just had to get their hands on these corporations that 
were already there. They had to buy these things – not build them, but buy them – and there is that 
fundamental difference. And so, Mr. Chairman, I say, the problem started there. 
 
And then we had a difficult economy for seven years. And then we’ve had a government and a Premier who 
has chosen, who has consciously chosen to provide programs and policies that have compassion for the 
people of this province, and I could list all of them again for you, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Oh then, Mr. Chairman, he member opposite will say, oh, we’ve got it so tough today; it’s so difficult in 
Saskatchewan; the sky is falling in, and it’s just so hard on everybody. We, Mr. Chairman, indeed I respect 
the realities of today’s economy, but I also, Mr. Chairman, must make the following case of the policies of 
this administration that prove beyond the question of a doubt, Mr. Chairman, that this administration puts 
people first and makes government the servant and not the master. 
 
And I talk about the terrible system that we have as viewed by members opposite: a system that does not 
charge for health care; a system, Mr. Speaker, that does not charge people a sales tax on their clothes under 
$300; a system, Mr. Chairman, that has no tax on major utilities; a system, Mr. Chairman, that provides nine 
and three quarters per cent interest rate protection for homes. Probably the biggest investment that most 
people make is their family home, something they take pride in the ownership of. Well, Mr. Chairman, this 
terrible system, this terrible government, provide nine and three-quarters per cent interest protection, 
something that was denied by the NDP over their years in government. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, this terrible system and this terrible government provides interest rate protection to 
farmers on two different programs at 6 per cent and nine and three-quarters per cent respectively. This terrible 
system, Mr. Chairman, provides a pension plan – the first of its kind in Canada – for Saskatchewan home-
makers and Saskatchewan small-business employees. This terrible system, Mr. Chairman, provides a new 
Saskatchewan heritage program grant for our senior citizens. 
 



And, Mr. Chairman, when you add up all of these protective type policies and all of the tax credits, or non-
taxed items such as clothing purchases under $300, or such as gas purchases with rebates, you will find, Mr. 
Chairman, for a Saskatchewan family with a $20,000 per year income, that those people, adding up all of 
these taxes under this terrible system, places Saskatchewan taxpayers with a $20,000 per year income, 
compared with British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, P.E.I., 
or Newfoundland, you would find, Mr. Chairman, that we are the second lowest, the second lowest taxed 
province in the country. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe that that’s too bad a record. And I believe that families in and around that 
$20,000 per annum income would say, fairly, Mr. Chairman, if provided this information in a fair and open 
way, those people would say, hey, this isn’t too bad a system. In fact, Mr. Chairman, if you take taxpayers 
with a $40,000 per year income, you would find that Saskatchewan probably places somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of third in the entire country. 
 
I say, Mr. Chairman, that a province of Saskatchewan administered by this Progressive Conservative 
government under this leader has provided many policies and many programs that really count for people, all 
within the context of nothing there for a rainy day because of past practices by the NDP administration. 
 
All of that, Mr. Chairman, I believe, supports the case that, given what we were left, given the economic 
times, and given the conscious choice to put people first, that this government has provided a pretty strong 
and convincing record of good administration on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: – Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find the words of the junior Minister of Finance curiouser and 
curiouser as her proceeds. Just in wrapping up, he says that there was nothing for a rainy day – nothing for a 
rainy day. And somehow in 1982, when he and his colleagues walked into this Assembly for the first time, 
many of them into this building for the first time, sat down and opened up their desks and opened up their lids 
and found that they weren’t full of money and somehow assumed that the cupboard was bare. 
 
There was a Heritage Fund. And, Mr. Minister, we saw the end of that Heritage Fund this morning at 10 
o’clock. Part of that Heritage Fund, just part of that Heritage Fund, was the assets in the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, which you moved this morning – in spite of the fact that the people of Saskatchewan 
objected to the sale-off and the give-away of their heritage Fund in the form of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan – invoked closure this morning at 10 o’clock. You chose to get rid of the last of the heritage 
Fund that you inherited in 1982. That’s the reality, that’s the reality. 
 
Perhaps you couldn’t understand that because it wasn’t stuffed away in your desk drawers in one-dollars bills 
but that was the reality. And I ask you, I ask you, Mr. Minister, was it doom and gloom? Did these best 
business minds of the PC Party walk in here in 1982 and discover that the New Democratic party had just run 
the province amok, instantly realized it because of your best business minds and because the cupboards were 
bare, you say? 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, let me quote to you what your Premier, what your Premier said in New York, in January 
19,1893. In New York in January, 1983, some nine or 10 months after having assumed the Premier’s office of 
the province of Saskatchewan, what did he say? Having had 10 months to review the books from the 
Government of Saskatchewan, having had 10 months – by that time every one of you had found the 
washroom, every one of you had had a chance to go through your desks and discover that they weren’t full of 
one-dollar bills – and what did the Premier of Saskatchewan have to say to the New York bond lenders in 
1983? 
 
What did he say? He said this. And let me remind you, Mr. Finance Minister, this was the assessment of your 
Premier nearly a year after having come to office in the top office in the province of Saskatchewan. He said, 
and I quote: “Saskatchewan has so much going for it, you can afford to mismanage it and still break even, “ 
he said. So much going for it, you can afford to mismanage it and still break even – still break even, he said. 
 
Now you’ve told us earlier, just earlier this evening, that in 77 years of the history of the province of 
Saskatchewan, we had a total net debt in 77 years of $3.5 billion. After seven years of PC government, after 



seven years when your Premier was saying this province has got so much going for it, you can afford to 
mismanage it and sill break even, have you broken even? After seven years, you’ve managed to take a $3.5 
billion debt over 77 years, and in seven years you’ve managed to increase it by another $7.7 billion from a 
Premier and a government that said Saskatchewan has got so much going for it, you can afford to mismanage 
it and still break even. 
 
Mismanagement was the promise and mismanagement is what you have delivered. That’s what you’ve 
delivered. You said you could mismanage it and still break even. You’ve mismanaged it and gone $7.7 billion 
deeper in debt. And I ask you, sir, you’ve been telling us here tonight that this $7.7 billion of additional debt 
that you and the Premier from Estevan have accumulated in the last seven years has somehow . . . Somehow 
this has all gone to the improvement of quality of life for people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so will you answer for me, Mr. Minister, just how it is that this fiscal management of the best business 
minds of the PC Party has managed to set a climate in which, comparing the last five years, ’76 to 1981 of a 
New Democrat government in the province of Saskatchewan, we averaged, according to the Bureau of 
Statistics, an annual investment in this province of $3.75 billion? What is it today? Over the last five years, 
$3.52 billion under the best business minds of the PC Party. 
 
(2100) 
 
Unemployment in Saskatchewan: you came into government, Mr. Minister, inherit a situation in which there 
were 28,000 unemployed; today, 38,000 unemployed. How is that a measure of the quality of your money 
well spent? 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, in terms of youth employment, the opportunities for the young people in our 
province: 109,000 young people between the ages of 15 and 24 working in 1982, down today to 90,000. How 
is that a measure of the benefit for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Let’s talk about migration, people coming in and out of the province. Mr. Minister, how is it that if things are 
so rosy that over the last four and a half years, and we have had in this province a net loss of 47,000 – over 50 
per cent, nearly 60 per cent of those, Mr. Minister, at the age of 29 years or younger, the youngest in our 
province? How is it that we’ve had that? Over 14,000 net loss in 1987;13,000 in 1988, doubly as bad as any 
other province in Canada; and that exceeded by 1,3000, a net loss of 14,600 in the first seven months of this 
year alone. Mr. Minister, how is this a measure of your performance? 
 
And the list goes on. Minimum wage: you inherited in 1982 the highest minimum wage in Canada, increased 
since then by 6 per cent, while other jurisdictions of this country have increased by somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of up to 50 per cent. The working poor in –s have not benefitted as a result of your best 
business minds of the PC Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan: 1982, 280; 1988, 450 under your government and the 
leadership of the best business minds of the PC Party. 
 
Number of farms in the province of Saskatchewan: 1982, 67,000; 1986, 63,000, best business minds of the PC 
Party. 
 
Housing starts in Saskatchewan: 1975 to 1981, an average of 10,000 homes started in the province of 
Saskatchewan from 1975 to 1981 over a period of six years; 1982 to ’88, the first six years of your 
administration, and average of 5,500, a drop of 4,500 – just a little over half as many in your first six years as 
the last six years under New Democrat administration, thanks to the best business minds of the PC Party and 
the Premier who says this province has got so much going for it you can afford to mismanage it and still break 
even. Somehow you managed to drop by $7.7 billion, and that’s mismanagement. 
 
So there it is, Mr. deputy junior Finance minister. Those are your . . . You’ve been telling us here this evening 
how somehow you’ve managed to translate $3.5 billion of accumulate debt over 77 years of history, and to 
take that and increase it by $7.7 billion in just seven short PC years and that somehow, somehow all of the 
people have benefitted as a result of this, in spite of our Premier after a year, nearly a year of being office, 



saying this province has got so much going for it you can afford to mismanage it and still break even. Them's 
the facts them the facts. 
 
And I ask you, Mr. junior Finance minister, how it is that in light of those facts, you can come before this 
Assembly this evening and say in our cavalier sort of way that somehow you have done a good job of 
managing this province. Mr. junior Finance minister, I say it has been a sham, and it has been a mess 
throughout. And it is irresponsible, irresponsible of you to stand in your place tonight and not to admit to the 
facts, plain and simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – Mr. Chairman, I believe that the member opposite has shown, beyond a shadow of a 
doubt, his lack of understanding of what this province has been through over the past seven years. 
 
The member opposite talks about farm families, and the impacts of agriculture and I really question whether 
that member, or in fact, virtually any member opposite, really understand the impact that an international 
crash in the price of grains throughout the world has done to this province and other provinces like it. 
 
When, Mr. Chairman, you have a province that has probably half of the farmers in the entire country, it shows 
beyond a question of doubt the impact and dependence that we have on agriculture, and the impact the crash 
in international grain prices can have, droughts upon droughts can have, high interest rates, and all of these 
factors, Mr. Chairman, and how they have impacted on Saskatchewan. 
 
And where do we go from here, Mr. Chairman? Where does a wise, prudent government go? Well, Mr. 
Chairman, what a government does is, firstly, provide programs, and policies, and protections for people. I 
have goes through that list, Mr. Chairman. What a government also does is manages, manages the resources 
that this province has been given. 
 
The member opposite has referred to the Heritage Fund in terms of some of these Crown corporations. And, 
indeed, Mr. Chairman, in the context of the overall economy of the province of Saskatchewan, one has to take 
a really keen, thorough look at the Crown corporations that this province has, Mr. Chairman, that is precisely 
what this government has done. Mr. Chairman, in fact it is precisely what the member opposite did back in 
the late 1980s. And, Mr. Chairman, this province is at a juncture. This province is at a point in its history that 
major decisions must take place for the benefit of all of the people of Saskatchewan, for the benefit of the 
financial security of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I stress, Mr. Chairman, that these Crown corporations indeed play a major role in . . . will play a major role in 
the future of this province. And, Mr. Chairman, if these past few years haven’t been a good enough lesson in 
the history of the province, I don’t know what would be. Mr. Chairman, I believe that most people in 
Saskatchewan would recognize that after the effects of the past seven years of droughts, and high interest 
rates, and international commodity price crashes, that a wise and prudent person would say, let us look at 
those Crown corporations, let us manage those Crown corporations, let us manage, if you like, that Heritage 
Fund in the member opposite’s own words. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, what shall we do? Well, Mr. Chairman, let us examine what we are doing today and 
compare it with what the NDP of 1982 chose to do. And, Mr. Chairman I would give members opposite full 
credit. I’m not above, Mr. Chairman, provide credit where credit is due. And I want to provide members 
opposite and their advisers of the day with a fair bit of credit for their foresight in what direction that Heritage 
Fund or those Crown corporations should take. 
 
I’d say, Mr. Chairman, members opposite were wise in the program that they laid out for the management of 
these Crown corporations. At the same time, Mr. Chairman, I must vehemently, vehemently condemn 
members opposite for not standing in their place and admitting: yes, we had – and even call them tentative if 
you like – we had tentative plans to manage those Crown corporations. 
 
And I’d like to go through with you, Mr. Chairman, the management of those Crown corporations for the 
benefit and the future of all Saskatchewan people as outlined by members of the NDP back in the early 
months of 1982. And I will read to you some of the members opposite, members of the NDP who were in 



attendance: Elwood Cowley, Allan Blakeney, Walter Smishek, Ted Bowerman, Don Cody, Eiling Kramer. I 
am prevented from using members opposites’ names that sit there today but there were members opposite 
sitting in their place today, this very evening that were in attendance. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, their vision of Crown corporation management was not all that different than what is 
being implemented today. Some of the guiding principles of the management of that heritage Fund or Crown 
corporations, if you like, were to provide a mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan to invest in the 
province. Is that so terrible, Mr. Chairman? Or was it in fact a good guiding principle? 
 
Principle number two by the NDP: to provide an alternate source of capital for major new investments in 
resource enterprises and industrial projects – another guiding principle, Mr. Chairman - -to reinforce the 
identification of a partnership between the government and the people of the province in the development of 
our economy. 
 
The proposal, Mr. Chairman, would be initiated by issuing a prospectus outlining a list of potential 
investment projects that have current dramatic interest, such as aspen newsprint, aspen market pulp, heavy oil 
upgrader, ammonia plant, direct iron ore reduction, tertiary recovery projects, potash mines, uranium mines, 
natural gas exploration. 
 
What we are talking about here, Mr. Chairman, is a plan by the NDP, tentative if you like or rejected by some 
of the radicals who have gained control of the NDP, but an outright plan, Mr. Chairman, to offer shares to the 
people of Saskatchewan to provide an alternative source of capital, Mr. Chairman, members opposite have at 
the time recognized the need for such a program and such a policy. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, there will be a time – and it may not be tonight, it may not follow from this little speech 
that I am providing tonight – but I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, there will be a time in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the not too distant future that members opposite will be found out. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have found in life that you that you can run from things, but you cannot hide. Members 
opposite can run from this document, can hide their heads in the sand and say no, that wasn’t us, but Mr. 
Chairman, the root truth of the matter, the facts of the matter are these. The Crown Corporations today in the 
province of Saskatchewan are at a juncture in time when public share offerings are the right thing to do for the 
future of our young people in the province of Saskatchewan; when economic diversification, that is, the 
creation of job, the creation of wealth, the creation of opportunities, has never before been so important as it is 
today. 
 
This has been proven out, Mr. Chairman, by the facts in history, in recent history of the difficult times we 
have been through. We cannot as a province remain so dependent on agriculture, Mr. Chairman. We must 
diversify; we must create jobs; we must create opportunities and wealth. And by so doing, Mr. Chairman, we 
will provide for a future for our young people. 
 
And, Mr. Chairman, we will do it, not exactly, but pretty close to the plan drafted up by members of the NDP. 
And that plan, Mr. Chairman, included – and I have it right here before me, Mr. Chairman – to provide a 
mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan to invest in the province, and that includes right here, Mr. 
Chairman, on about the fourth page, potash mines, natural gas exploration. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have stated again, Mr. Chairman, that this plan will be found out by the people of 
Saskatchewan. The NDP cannot hide, Mr. Chairman. The people of Saskatchewan in the very near future, I 
believe, will find out that members of the NDP have been hiding from the real truth, have been hiding from 
the people this plan to offer shares, to offer investments to further diversify the Crown corporations and our 
economy. And, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan will turn their backs once again on the NDP when 
this is found out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
(2115) 
 



Mr. Shillington: – Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, one of the comments you made was that SPC was 
groaning under the debt which had been accumulated during the period before you took office. And you said 
that the power poles which were put in in 1952, the debt was still outstanding on those power poles; poles 
were falling down and the debt was increasing. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you’d like to give us the debts of SPC, since you used those figures. I wonder if 
you’d like to give us SPC’s debt today and SPC’s debt in 1982 when you took office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – All this information is available in the Budget Address of March 1989. I do remind 
you, Mr. Speaker, that is some four months ago or thereabouts. The information you requested is on page 31; 
the figure is, in round figures, $2.5 billion, and I would be happy to find a document, a copy of this document, 
and provide it to the member opposite. 
 
I do want to remind you, Mr. Chairman, that this information is public. It is some four or five months old, and 
tonight we are dealing with interim supply, which is a mini-budget, if you like, in itself, but people certainly 
are waiting to be paid. There are hospitals who need to be funded. There are educational institutes that are 
awaiting the supplies from this Appropriation Bill, and I would ask members opposite to bear that in mind 
when they are asking their questions, that many of the question of which they are asking are certainly public 
information and have been provided to them some four months ago. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – What about the 1982 figure? I asked you for that as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I do not have that with me, but I would direct the officials present to provide that for 
you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, you used the figures. Let me give you the . . . I’ve taken the liberty during 
the period of time that you have been trying to put the Assembly to sleep with your comments –successful 
with your own members, some of them. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 1981, at the end of 1981, a scant two months before you took office, three months before you 
took office, the debt of SPC was 1.1 billion. I want to remind you, Mr. Minister, that that had paid for 
everything from Thomas Edison forward. That had paid for all of those power poles of which you complain. 
That had paid for all of the offices. It had paid for a number of dams, a number of goal generating stations, 
Mr. Minister, it had paid for all of those things. 
 
Mr. Minister, today that debt has increased by almost 150 per cent. It’s not 2.5 billion, Mr. Minister, and your 
increase in debt paid for very little. Apart for one-half of Nipawin – and you don’t think you paid for half of 
Nipawin, but let’s be generous and concede that you might have paid for half of that – and some rural 
transmission services, that’s all we got for 150 per cent increase in the debt. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you people are having difficulty being honest with yourselves, much less the 
Saskatchewan public. It is high time, Mr. Minister, you acknowledge and admitted that the problems which 
you have financially have very little do with bad luck and very little to do with lack of rain and a whole lot to 
do with bad management. The 150 per cent increase in debt at SPC did not occur because it didn’t rain, and it 
didn’t occur because of bad luck. And it wasn’t anything that was done to you by the Trudeau socialists or the 
Blakeney socialists or whoever else you blame for all the world’s evils, or the nationalist socialists, or 
anything else. 
 
Mr. Premier, the debt of SPC, like the debt of this province, increased by 150 per cent because you people are 
abominable manager – abominable managers. That’s the story with respect to SPC, and that’s the story with 
respect to this province’s finances. 
 
I’d like to tell you just one other thing, Mr. Minister. Your bad management of this government is catching up 
to it. And I predict that very shortly you’re going to have the opportunity to stand on this side of the Assembly 
and ask questions. Mr. Minister, the public are simply not prepared to tolerate this degree of bad management. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – In just a very short response to your questions regarding the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation and its debt, and indeed there is significant debt in the power corporation, I do want to remind the 



member opposite that within those debt figures are a long-range program or a program that is and should well 
be capitalized over a long period of time. And you would find that to be a program that goes directly to rural 
people, and that is the natural gas program. And you may find it interesting to note that that natural gas or 
rural gas program has cost somewhere in the neighbourhood of probably 5 or $600 million; indeed, 
significant dollars and a significant long-term investment on behalf of the people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: – Mr. Minister, if it’s proper accounting and management to amortize long-term debt, and I 
don’t deny that, how is it then that you’re using that debt as a pretext for selling off a portion of SPC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: – I believe that if the members opposite would have allowed a full-scale debate in this 
Legislative Assembly on the proposal to privatize the Sask Energy Corporation, the members opposite would 
find that certainly debt reduction was one of the benefit s that would accrue from privatization of the 
Saskatchewan Energy Corporation. 
 
But there are many other benefits that would as well accrue, and I would include among those benefits, 
diversification. And that is the expansion of the energy corporation, the diversification of the energy 
corporation that would allow for the creation of jobs and the creation of wealth within that corporation for the 
people of Saskatchewan – not dissimilar, not dissimilar in many ways to the Nova Corporation in Alberta that 
has expanded very quickly over the past number of years; that in fact today, I would bet, would be employing 
many of the class-mats that graduated in the same year that I did back in 1973. And I remember clearly, 
amongst my graduating class, many of them travelling to Alberta working in the oil field and working for 
such corporations as the Nova Corporation. 
 
So I say to the hon. member that that is a very detailed subject that at some point in time I do hope and trust 
that we can debate at length in this legislature. But tonight I do remind the member opposite that we are 
dealing with the interim supply; that is the appropriation of moneys that people in the province of 
Saskatchewan are waiting for, and I would remind the member opposite of that fact. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – One of the things that your government has been remarkably consistent n, Mr. Minister, has 
been in finding new and innovative ways of raising taxes and gouging the Saskatchewan people. And we can 
go right back to a raising in the fuel tax, an innovation of the flat tax, then going up to that infamous used car 
tax. We saw an increase in our income tax; we saw an increase in the sales tax. 
 
There’s one tax that has been slated to be increased, but you have not yet implemented, and will not be 
implemented – is not slated to be implemented till September 1. And I ask you that, in view of our experience 
with the used car tax – you had a lot of public opposition to that and you finally conceded and came around to 
it, and you dropped the used car tax – and in view of the results and the decreases in sales that you’ve had in 
the bingos and in the lotteries, you have a chance to make good, you have here an opportunity to make good, 
you have here an opportunity to make good by listening to the people of Saskatchewan and refer to the casino 
tax which is slated to come into effect on September 1. I think the agricultural support groups or the groups 
that they support would be more than pleased to hear an announcement from you, Mr. Minister, tonight in 
saying that, yes I’m prepared to drop that tax in casinos. Will you do that now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I wonder why the hon. member would feel that people who gamble in casinos would not 
have to pay a tax towards health care. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – The minister would do well to listen to the advice that some people are giving him, 
including people who are running our exhibitions, who need funding to run the exhibitions. If the exhibitions 
were cut short of some funding, they may well not be able to just province the rest of the cities in Saskatoon 
and Regina and the other bigger cities in the province with their revenue that comes to the cities with 
exhibitions, one of the things that really keeps them going. 
 
Now you’re telling me you’re not prepared to drop it with that answer. Would you at least consider, Mr. 
Minister, to postpone the date from September 1 – it’s only two weeks away – postpone it for at least a month 
before you implement it. You got the advice from “Lottery Life,” and I’ll quote to you one paragraph, part of 
one paragraph. Lottery Life, people who given an MLA report on lotteries, and they indicate what’s happened 
to the sales of tickets and they say: 
 



For this reason we believe there should be a period without any further change or any new lottery 
programs introduced. 

 
They don’t’ want to see any new lottery programs introduced for fear of what’s happened. So would you at 
least consider postponing it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We did postpone it for two months. Just to put it in perspective to indicate that the 
government isn’t supporting the exhibitions, I think we can take a look at many new facilities in the 
exhibitions that have been supported by the provincial government. They have never made the argument to 
me that the government has not been supportive. 
 
With regard to the casinos, the two exhibition associations in Saskatoon and Regina indicated to me some 
time ago that they would have proposals to raise the equivalent amount of revenues through an alternative 
suggestion. I have not . . . They have not forwarded those to me. If they do have them, I had indicated to them 
well last spring when the proposal to get more of the gambling moneys to health care was first raised, that we 
would be certainly open to consultation. That offer stands. Some have indicated that they would want it in the 
form of an admission charge, rather than some other form. I’m certainly open to suggestions. 
 
But we did give them an additional two months at their request. They wanted some time, given the summer 
season. But I certainly at this stage . . . unless some very good reasons would be brought forward, but they’ve 
had the two months. They’ve had time. They have certainly the offer from me, and it still stands to discuss 
alternatives if they wish. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Perhaps the lack of an alternate proposal comes as a signal that what they’re really asking 
for is that the tax just not be implemented in view of what’s happened to the other lotteries when the tax was 
implemented. What is the method that you plan to use to raise the tax money? Could you tell me, are you still 
definite on having a head tax when people come in? 
 
(2130) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Well there was a . . . The proposal that is out to the casino operators, whoever they may 
be, is the $5 per person tax plus an increase in the licensing fee. There was an argument presented that 
perhaps it should be on the casino chips, but there were some difficulties with that. And so at least at this 
stage . . . And they have not come back to us with a counterproposal, as I have indicated. I did have some 
indications a couple of months back that there would be one. There was none forthcoming. So I have to 
assume from that that they don’t have another one. But I stand by the offer that I made – that we would 
certainly be prepared to consider alternative proposals that generate the same amount of revenue. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Are you proposing that a head tax be charged on the gamblers and, in addition to it, 
anybody that may walk in with them? Sometimes you’ll get a spouse, friend may come in with somebody that 
wants to gamble. Are they to pay the $5 as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We couldn’t differentiate between the two and they couldn’t be identified. It would be 
basically an admission charge. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – And then in addition, you’re talking about a tax on the . . . I guess it’s what they call the 
hold. Is it the hold, what they call the hold, or it is what they call the drop? Is it 10 per cent on the hold that 
you’re proposing, that’s the amount that’s left at the end of the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – It’s currently 7 and it will go to 10. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Okay. It’s 7 now, it’ll go to 10, and we’re talking about taxing the amount of money that’s 
left at the end of the day. They take in so much money and then they pay out a certain amount of prizes. Is 
that the amount we’re talking about? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes, that’s correct. 
 



Mr. Kowalsky: – And that would not include, then, any subtraction for wages; it would simply be the amount 
taken in minus the prizes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Has this information been sent out in detail to all of the . . . to the kiosks? Because if it 
isn’t, I think we’re looking at a two-week time line here. I certainly wouldn’t want to have to happen to them 
what happened to some of the kiosk operators where they found they were collecting tax and then they were 
getting information subsequent to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I’m assuming rather than kiosk you mean, in the case of . . . has the information been sent 
out to the casino operators. I’m advised that it has been. If you have a circumstance that . . . Where it hasn’t, I 
would appreciate being advised so that we can communicate with them. But I have been assured by my 
officials that the information was sent out some time ago. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – Now I want to ask a couple of questions with respect to the collection of bingo taxes. Could 
you advise this House, Mr. Minister, about last year’s record in collecting taxes from the licensees? How 
many licensees were there that you were unable to get a hold of after the event and unable to collect the tax 
from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – We have to go back and collate the numbers in a different form. And here’s the 
information that I have, but we’re not sure it reflects the answer, that the licences . . . Let me just get this 
straight. The licences required, 3.157; and the reports back received, 1,421; pending, 1,736. Now this would 
be from April 1, ’88 to March 31, ’89. 
 
Now I caution the member, I don’t think that is . . . we don’t think that that answers the question that you’ve 
raised, but we have it down by licences and not by operators. So we have to go back and try and find that 
information for you, if you understand what I’m saying. There could be series of licences to the same 
organization, same operator, and it’s broken down by licences and not by the operator. So I can’t give you 
that information tonight; we would have to try and pull that information. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – If I could ask you to, say, within a couple of weeks, to supply that kind of information as to 
the number of licences that have been issued. And I ask that question with this in mind, Mr. Minister. There’s 
a 2 per cent tax which has been levied over the past year on bingo licences. Of those bingo licensees you’ve 
got right now, if I heard you correctly, was 1,736 who have not yet paid their . . . instances, instances of times 
that they went and played bingo or . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – Yes. That’s not licensees’ that’s the licences. You know, there could be many licences at 
the same licensee. That’s where I have some difficulty responding to you and I . . . If you could tell me what 
information you’re looking for, then given what I tried to supply you with tonight, we would have to go back 
and try and pull the other information. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – I think the 1,736 would be quite accurate, because what it would reflect would be the 
number of times somebody took a licence to sponsor bingo at a bingo hall, and it would represent the number 
of times that they did but did not yet remit the tax. So the government has levied the tax, but has been unable 
to collect it, from what I can see, 1,735 times – for 1,736 separate different nights at different places. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – No, no. Don’t attribute, if I may, Mr. Chairman, that they haven’t paid the tax. They have 
to file the reports and these things come in . . . I forget what the deadlines are in the legislation, but again, I’m 
just saying to treat that with caution. And again, I simply ask if you could specifically indicate, we will try 
and get that information and pull it for you. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: – What I want is those people that are in arrears. How many situations are in arrears? All 
right? And then we can follow up and then the . . . Perhaps once I get those, we will be able to follow through 
and we’ll have opportunity to do so, I’m sure, in Finance estimates, if you’d do that for me. Thank you. 
 
Motion agree to. 
 



Hon. Mr. Lane: – 
 

Be it resolved that a sum no exceeding $336,074,000 be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1990. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses 
of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1990, the sum of $53,675,000 be granted out 
of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $53,675,000 be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1990. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(2145) 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – I move that the resolutions be read the first and second time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, and the resolutions read a first and second time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 93, An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the Public Service for 
the Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1990, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: – By Leave of the Assembly, and under rule 48(2), I move that the bill be now read a second 
and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a second an third time and passed under its title. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 85 – An Act to amend The Mineral Taxation Act 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight on second reading of Bill No. 85, An Act to 
amend The Mineral Taxation Act. The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983, in fact, provides the authority for the 
collection of production taxes on minerals produced in Saskatchewan. 
 
The amendments contained in this Bill basically have four major points to them: the implementation for a 
new tax system for potash; number two, to implement a new sodium chloride production tax; three, to provide 
for reciprocal agreements with other governments for the exchange of information needed to administer the 
Act; and fourth, to remove the requirements for tax return forms, to be prescribed. 



 
Mr. Speaker, on the potash taxation, the major amendment contained in this bill will create the legislative 
authority to implement a new tax system for potash. We are ending the practice of taxing the potash 
companies through agreements, more commonly known as the Potash Resource Payment Agreements, or 
referred to hereafter as the PRPAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the executed first in 1979 for a period of five years and have been extended and modified a 
number of times since that time. The tax system prescribed in legislation and regulations will move the potash 
industry to the same basis of taxation as applies to all other non-renewable resource sectors. 
 
Advantages of the new potash tax system. Mr. Minister, the potash industry is a very large and important 
sector of the Saskatchewan economy, as we have heard over the last four months in this Assembly. The 
industry consists of seven companies that operate 10 mines and employ 3,200 workers. The new tax system is 
designed to strike a balance the need to maintain a healthy industry, which will in fact be competitive in world 
markets, and the revenue requirements of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new tax system will not increase the level of taxation for the potash industry. The 
competitiveness of existing mines will be maintained and employment will be protected. At the same time 
there will be no erosion in government revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the system is designed to encourage new investment as required. Firstly, through depreciation 
treatment, new capacity will be encouraged when it is needed. Also companies will be given an incentive to 
invest in project to deal with environmental protection. It will also continue to support market development in 
joint research and development projects to address mining, production, and environmental problems. These 
activities are fundamental to securing a share of growing offshore markets and maintaining the long-term 
competitiveness of our industry here in this province. 
 
The system is also designed to be simpler and more equitable. The new tax system is less complicated than 
the PRPAs where companies pay taxes when the potash is produced and again o the profits earned when that 
potash is sold. This new system, Mr. Speaker, also provides a more reasonable treatment for recovering 
capital costs before taxes on profits are payable. 
 
Briefly, Mr. Speaker, the new tax system will feature a single as payment of $11 per K2O tonnes sold. That is 
replacing the old two-tier system of $6.60 and $8.27 per K2O tonne. It also has a graduated profit tax 
calculated on profits per tonne sold, with tax rates ranging from 15 per cent to 50 per cent, depending on the 
profitability of each mine. Under the old system, profit tax rates varied from zero to 50 per cent when 
measured against the capital investment made to establish it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the base payment will be recognized as a credit towards profit taxes. The base payment (to 
establish profit tax rates) will be indexed to adjust for the effects of inflation, and the base payment will not 
be higher than 35 per cent of profits. 
 
Depreciation will be calculated on a declining balance basis for new investment, and these rates, Mr. Speaker, 
will be: 20 per cent for capital to maintain and improve the efficiency of existing mines; 35 per cent for 
capacity expansions which have received prior approval from the minister’ and 50 per cent for eligible capital 
expenditures for environmental protection. The companies will be able to claim full depreciation deductions 
each year. Any operating losses can be carried forward for a period of five years. 
 
Tax credits totalling up to $5 million per year for the industry will be continued to support market 
development and joint research. Mr. Speaker, the revenue impact for Saskatchewan: over the long term the 
new tax system is expected to collect the same share of industry profits as the old system .In 1990, under the 
new system, we expect to collect $148 million in potash tax revenue. That, Mr. Speaker, is an increase of 7 
per cent over what would have been collected with the existing system, and that simply is due to the increase 
on the base payment from the 6 and the 8 to the $11. 
 
The new tax system, Mr. Speaker, will be effective January 1, 1990. In order to allow time for regulations to 
be prepared, the PRPA agreements have been extended a further six months to December 31, 1989. 
 



The second component of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, deals with sodium chloride. Sodium chloride tax will 
allow the department to collect a new tax on the production of salt from both Crown and freehold lands. The 
rate, Mr. Speaker, will be 72 cents per tonne of salts produced and sold in the province after July 1, 1988. 
This is equivalent to about 6 per cent of the value of salt, and the next tax is in addition to a small royalty paid 
to the Crown on production from Crown-owned minerals equal to 3 per cent of selling price of 33 cents per 
tonne, whichever is greater. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first tax increase for the salt industry in the past 20 years. Salt producers will now face 
a similar tax system as other mineral producers in the province such as cola, potash, and oil. Salt revenues for 
the fiscal year are estimated to be approximately $390,000. 
 
The third change in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the exchange of information. The third 
amendment is an administrative nature, and this amend authorizes the Government of Saskatchewan to enter 
into agreements with the Government of Canada or the government of any province or territory for purposes 
of exchanging information needed for tax enforcement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the information reported by individuals involved in mineral exploration, development, 
or production is very confidential. However, there is a growing recognition by taxing jurisdictions that 
information exchange makes a significant contribution in improving the enforcement of taxing legislation. 
The taxpayer also benefit from a more equitable application of the taxing provisions, particularly where 
operations are carried on in more than one jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the information that is exchanged between jurisdictions is used only for audit or investigation 
purposes. Each party to the agreement will be required to respect the confidentiality of the information and 
the documents received. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Chairman, is housekeeping items. The fourth amendment can be considered in fact a 
housekeeping item. The change will allow the department to accept forms approved by the Department of 
Energy and Mines rather than prescribed forms. And Mr. Speaker, this change will assist the industry in filing 
returns in the future. 
 
With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 85, An Act to amend The Mineral 
Taxation Act. 
 
Mr. Solomon: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I’ve had an opportunity to just briefly look over 
the Bill that was tabled in this House, and I was waiting for your comments with respect to that Bill, and I’d 
like to take some time to review your comments in Hansard. 
 
But I wanted to take some time, Madam Minister, because what we’ve seen in this legislature in this province 
in the last couple of months is an effort on the part of your government to give resource companies in this 
province the breaks in every circumstance. We’ve seen you, Madam Minister, and your colleague, the 
member from Qu’Appelle-Lumsden invoke closure in this House to sell off the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. You invoked this unprecedented action to muzzle the opposition and curtail debate on an 
issue, which we feel is tantamount to the future of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we see this Bill No. 85, which is a restructuring of the potash taxes and the taxes that the potash 
producers will be paying, it makes me and members of the opposition highly suspicious or what your 
intentions are. You stand in this House and you talk about the Bill being revenue-neutral. Well we’ve seen the 
benefits you’ve given to the resource companies in the past, and we, as few moments earlier, discussed this 
matter with the acting junior deputy Finance minister, the member from Melfort, and he couldn’t give any 
answers on this matter either. 
 
What we witnesses in this House, Madam Minister, was an example of your government undertaking a policy 
with regard to the oil companies in this province that has cost the taxpayers $2.469 billion in the years 1982 to 
the end of 1988. And we have seen a result of this wonderful initiative of your government to subsidize the 
Exxons and Texacos and Shells of this world with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars result in the situation that 
we’re in now with regard to oil drilling activity in Saskatchewan that is at its worst level in 10 years. And this 
is a statement made by oil company after oil company. So, Madam Minister, I would like to take some time to 



review your comments and come back to this House and give our position with regard to this Bill. And at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(2200) 
 

Bill No. 90 – An Act to amend The Legal Aid Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Schmidt: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to speak today on the amendment of The Legal Aid Act. 
Briefly legal aid had a long history in the province of Saskatchewan. It was originally provided by the private 
bar as part of their responsibilities to society, and then later the Government of Canada and the Government 
of Saskatchewan got involved in legal aid and started to provide a more comprehensive service, so that last 
year the Legal Aid Commission opened 18,434 cases, which was up 4.2 per cent from the prior year. 
 
The commission operates with approximately 55 lawyers, 20 paralegals, and 50 administrative and support 
staff throughout 14 area offices in Saskatchewan. I might say, Mr. Speaker, that in the two and a half to two 
and three-quarters years that I am the minister responsible for legal aid, we have made small improvements 
year after year while legal aid has wrestled with their budgeted and has managed it very adequately. 
 
Legal aid now, Mr. Speaker, is operating very efficiently, and I am satisfied that they have attained a 
professional level which puts them on a par with the private bar in Saskatchewan, both as far as competence, 
delivery or service, and the respect level of the fellow members of their profession. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that the legal aid system is now a very professional system. It’s a very professionally 
run system, and it’s come along way from the period when it was perceived to be a small “p” political 
organization involved in advocacy and not nearly as involved in the delivery of legal services, as it is now. I 
would say now they are 10 per cent involved in delivery of legal services. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, are not very complicated nor are they very lengthy. They deal with three 
main areas. The first are has been somewhat contentious in the province of Saskatchewan, is the contribution 
of applicants and potential clients toward their legal services where this is possible, where they can afford it 
 
What has happened is that in 1987 the Legal Aid Commission commenced a contribution policy or a partial 
payment of fee for those clients of legal aid that had incomes that were at the upper range of the allowable 
limit before you are cut off and not qualified for legal aid. 
 
The effect of that program was to feather in people who were at the cut-off line for no longer qualifying for 
legal aid and allowing some of those people who would have faced some hardship to qualify for legal aid if 
they make some contribution towards their fees. I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that legal aid deals primarily 
with criminal cases; the bulk of those cases are criminal. They also deal with civil cases and matrimonial 
matters, and in areas where the client has a case that is not revenue-producing. 
 
With respect to this amendment on contribution, as I indicated earlier, it was somewhat controversial. It was 
commenced by legal aid in 1987, and I might say from what we gathered from the Legal Aid Commission, it 
worked better than they expected in that initially there was some resistance by their staff. There was certainly 
resistance from the opposition to the contribution policy; however, once it was implemented, it worked 
reasonably well, and my advice is that the legal Aid Commission is now looking forward to being able to 
reinstate this kind of a policy. It instils more responsibility on those members of the public who are qualified 
for legal aid but do have incomes close to the cut-off level. 
 
The policy of contribution is not inconsistent with the policy of the government, that where people can afford 
to pay something towards their services, they should be required to make some payment, as the bulk of 
citizens who do not qualify for legal aid pay 100 per cent of their legal costs. The argument has been made 
that this places a burden on citizens, however, the workings of the commission in the period of time that they 
have the contribution showed quite otherwise. 
 



In addition, Mr. Speaker, all the legal aid plans in Canada, except two, all except the province of Prince 
Edward Island and the Northwest Territories, have contribution schemes. For example, the province of 
Manitoba collected 3 per cent of the commission revenue last year from contributions from clients; the 
province of Alberta had a contribution of 6 per cent from their clients. 
 
In their year of operation under this method of collection, the commission collected only 1.5 per cent of their 
revenue from contributions. So what is being done in this amendment is not unusual in the ordinary workings 
of legal aid commission throughout Canada. 
 
I might also say, Mr. Speaker, that the contribution as originally developed at the insistence . . . or was it the 
idea of the Legal Aid Commission, and the government acquiesced to see how their experiment would work. 
And we are satisfied that their experiment worked reasonably well, and they should be given the legal 
authority to continue with this experiment,. As it turned out, on a technical point, the Court of Appeal of 
Saskatchewan ruled that they did not have the jurisdiction to collect the fees, and this amendment will bring 
into place what we felt was always the intention of the legislature. And if it wasn’t the intention at the time, it 
certainly should have been, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second item is the role of the private bar. Section 28 of the existing Act limited the private bar, to 
members of the private bar, to situations where it was impossible or improper for employees of the 
commission to act for a client. The repeal of this section will allow for more participation by the private bar. 
You might say it is, yes, a contracting out, but it will allow legal aid to contract out in some cases. We have 
already tried this on a pilot project basis, and we find that it gives the client more choice. 
 
The uptake is not great as great as we had anticipated; however, we will leave that to the choice of the client. 
And it has instilled a little bit of competition in the legal aid clinics in that they now have to, to some extent, 
compete with the private bar to provide adequate services to the clientele, who has some choice in not taking 
or accepting a legal aid lawyer if they cold local a layer in a private bar. 
 
As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, the uptake on this has not been great. We do not press this matter as a 
matter of ideology, but we only do it as matter of allowing the clientele an opportunity for some choice. 
 
The third element or the third major part of this amendment is the establishment of an appeal committee, Mr. 
Speaker, at Social Services, through which legal aid is funded under the Canada assistance plan. The 
requirement under that Act is that you have a method of appeal so that if you’re turned down in applying for 
benefits at Social Services, you can appeal to a local appeals committee and then to the provincial appeals 
board. This has not existed under the current legal aid plan since it was started in 1974. And technically we 
may be in breach over the last 15 years of the Canada Assistance Plan At for now having an appeal 
committee. 
 
While we are amending the Act, we are prepared in this Act to establish appeal committees so that any 
clientele who are turned down for legal aid or are given a contribution assessment that they feel is unfair, they 
may appeal to the Social Services appeal board and there will be a process similar to when you’re turned 
down for assistance under the welfare plan. 
 
For that reason we think this is a lot fairer method. It was probably only an oversight on the former 
government when they invoked the plan, and we’ve noticed that this was an injustice and we intend to correct 
it in this amendment. 
 
The other elements in the amendments, Mr. Speaker, are more of a housekeeping nature and can probably 
best be further described in the committee. So with that brief introduction of the amendments, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Prebble: – Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter in to this debate. I 
want to leave no doubt in the minister'’ mind and in the minds of the member so the Assembly where the 
opposition stands on this Bill. We are against Bill 90, and we are against it primarily because this Bill, first of 
all, reinstitutes user fees for legal aid services targeted at collecting money from poor people in this province 
who can’t afford it. 
 



And secondly, we oppose this Bill, Mr. Speaker, because we believe that the minister’s proposed amendment 
that will allow contracting out of legal aid services is the first step towards privatization of the legal aid 
system in the province of Saskatchewan. And for those two reasons, Mr. Speaker, we are against this Bill. 
 
Now the minister gave a little history about the legal aid system in the province, Mr. Speaker, so I think I’d 
like to make a few historical comments as well to put the current legislation in context. The minister will 
recall, Mr. Speaker, that when the PC government inherited the legal aid system in this province from the 
New Democratic Party in 1972, we had a legal aid system that provided legal services to poor people in the 
province of Saskatchewan for all legal services, Mr. Speaker, except legal services that would generate 
revenue for the clients involved. In other words, Mr. Speaker, we had a comprehensive legal aid plan in the 
province that basically covered virtually al aspects of civil law as well as criminal law. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we saw with the election of the PC government was that the following year, in the 
1983-84 budget, there was a major reduction in all areas of civil law services provided under the Legal Aid 
Commission. There was a major reduction, and basically all areas of legal aid that were to cover civil law, 
with the exception of family law, were cancelled by the PC government. So that in effect, Mr. Speaker, what 
we saw was a very significant cut in legal aid services at the expense of lower income people in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was the first major cut that we saw. And then, of course, because this government have 
never really been supporters of the principle and the philosophies of legal aid, Mr. Speaker, we saw in major 
budget cuts to the legal aid system under this Minister of Social Services, we saw, Mr. Speaker . . . For 
instance, just as one example in the 1986-87 fiscal year, the budget for legal aid in this province was 
6,264,000. By 1988-89, two years later, Mr. Speaker, that budget had been cut from 6.26 million down to 
$5,832,000. Mr. Speaker, inflation during that period, well in excess of 10 per cent, Mr. Minister, and yet a 
budget cut, Mr. Speaker, in excess of $400,000 not taking into account inflation. So that’s the second thing 
this government has done, it’s cut back the funding available for legal aid, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, what we have is a government that says that it wants to collect revenue from low 
income people to finance, Mr. Speaker, legal aid services, in effect, Mr. Speaker, constitution another cut in 
the legal aid budget in real terms, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’ve got here now, a government that says that 
because it can’t afford to finance the currently greatly reduced legal aid services in the province of 
Saskatchewan through simply public moneys, that it wants to collect an additional $150,000, Mr. Speaker, 
from low income people in this province to finance those services. And we say, shame on the government, 
Mr. Speaker. Shame on the government. 
 
(2215) 
 
This is the same government, Mr. Speaker, I would remind members who two years ago decided that the 
native court worker program in the province wasn’t required any more, Mr. Speaker. And the services that 
were available to native people to help them understand the court system and what their legal rights were, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide them with advice on how they should plea before the court system, Mr. Speaker, this 
government took those kind of services away as well. 
 
We should have no doubt about what the motivation of this government is, Mr. Speaker. Time and time again 
this government attacks low income people in the province of Saskatchewan, and this is just another example, 
Mr. Speaker, just another example. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what we have before us now then is a Bill that among other things attempts to reinstitute 
user fees in the legal aid system. And we saw a government, Mr. Speaker, that initially implemented this 
collection of user fees in violation of the law. And, of course, the Elizabeth Fry Society, Mr. Speaker, happily 
on behalf o f lower income people in this province, took the government to court, took the Legal Aid 
Commission to court, Mr. Speaker, and argued before the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal that the Legal Aid 
Commission had no authority to charge user fees. And happily, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal ruled in favour of the Elizabeth Fry Society and struck down the ability of the commission to collect 
user fees, Mr. Speaker, from low income people in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that was a 
decision that members on this side of the House applauded. 
 



Mr. Speaker, now this government is trying to reverse that decision, Mr. Speaker, and do what it was initially 
afraid to do. It was afraid to come before the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, back in 1987 and get approval for the 
collection of user fees. Now it’s been forced to do that by virtue of losing the case before the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House believe that forcing poor people to pay a fee for the right to 
access legal services is contrary to the whole purpose of legal aid, which is intended to ensure that low 
income people in Saskatchewan have access to good legal representation in the same that all other citizens in 
the province of Saskatchewan do, Mr. Speaker. That is what we believe. 
 
I want to point out to the Minister of Social Services and to all members of the Assembly that in our view, 
Mr. Speaker, the principle that is involved here is the same kind of principle that is involved in the provision 
of medicare services in the province. 
 
We believe, Mr. Speaker, that all people in this province have the right to legal services. That is a basic 
democratic right, Mr. Speaker. It’s a basic democratic right because we are a society that is governed by laws, 
and it is an essential democratic right of every person in this province, Mr. Speaker, to have proper access to 
legal counsel, Mr. Speaker. And when they cannot afford to hire that legal counsel, they have the right, Mr. 
Speaker, to benefit from legal aid services in the province, and they should have that right without having to 
pay user fees for the service. 
 
Now I want to deal with the argument that the Minister of Social Services puts forward, Mr. Speaker, that 
somehow people at the upper income level range of lower income people in this province who are eligible for 
legal aid, that people at the upper income . . . at the upper range of the eligible group, Mr. Speaker, somehow 
should e able to afford to pay these user fees. That’s his argument, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what his argument ignores, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this government for many years now has not 
changed the income levels at which people are eligible for legal aid. In this province, Mr. Speaker, eligibility 
for legal aid roughly runs along the same lines as the income guild-lines for the family income plan in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I just want to give one example, Mr. Speaker, of the problems that a family has been eligible for legal 
aid. For instance, let’s take a family of five, Mr. Speaker: two parents and three children, with an income of . . 
. say in the range of $17,000 a year. Now that family right now, Mr. Speaker, that family of five – say they’re 
in my home city of Saskatoon – they are living more than $10,000 a year below the poverty line, Mr. Speaker. 
The Statistics Canada poverty line for that family is in excess of $27,000; their income, Mr. Speaker, is 
$17,000. Mr. Speaker, do you know that that family is not eligible for the family income plan and therefore 
not eligible for legal aid? And yet they’re living $10,000 below the poverty line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker, is conveniently ignoring the fact that last year, in 1988, in 
the summer of 1988, a joint study, a joint evaluation study of the legal aid system in this province was 
prepared by officials from his department and by officials from the federal Department of Justice -- a joint 
evaluation study. And that joint evaluation study, Mr. Speaker, recommended, it recommended that the 
government should follow in terms of eligibility for legal aid in this province, that all those residents in this 
province who were living below the poverty line should be eligible for legal aid services. That was the 
recommendations of that study. The minister says he contracted it out. He would well to accept some of the 
recommendations in that joint evaluation, Mr. Speaker, but he’s chosen not to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, he is suggesting, the Minister of Social Services is suggesting that this family of five, if they 
don’t qualify for social assistance, in other words if their income is 14 or 15 or $16,000 a year, that they ought 
to pay a user fee for the legal aid system. And he ignores the fact, Mr. Speaker, that this family living more 
than $10,000 below the poverty line. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the legal aid system in this province and eligibility for legal aid was available to all 
those below the poverty line, and we were talking about this family and they were in the income range of 24 
or $25,000 a year, just below the poverty line, perhaps there would be a little bit of merit to his argument, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



But what he is proposing, Mr. Speaker, what the Minister of Social Services is proposing in this bill is tat 
people whose incomes are 50 to 65 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of the poverty line, well, well below the poverty lie 
in this province, should have to pay user fees to use the legal aid system in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And members on this side of the House cannot support such a proposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment for a moment on what this fee structure has been, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind all members of the House that it was the policy of the Minister of Social 
services when this fee was last introduced to deny people access to legal aid, Mr. Speaker, if they couldn’t 
come up with at leas a $20 down payment to the legal aid system. In other words, Mr. Speaker, it was the 
policy of his government by way of the regulations that the commission adopted, that the right to access legal 
service in this province could be denied, Mr. Speaker, to a citizen who was eligible for legal aid but who did 
not have the $20 down payment to make, Mr. Speaker. And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
insisted on levying a minimum charge of $60 to access legal aid services in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we found that to be very disappointing. 
 
But the reason I raise this minimum $20 levy, Mr. Speaker, that a client who wanted to use the legal aid 
system had to place up front before being able to access any legal aid services at all, the reason I mention that, 
Mr. Speaker, is twofold. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I raise it because the Minister of social Services would do 
well to look at the figures in this joint evaluation study done last year that I mention with respect to the 
number of people in this province who are going before the courts unrepresented by a lawyer, Mr. Speaker – 
unrepresented by a lawyer. 
 
And do you know what the joint Department of Social Services, federal Department of Justice study found in 
surveying the court system in this province? It found, Mr. Speaker, that 49 per cent of defendants and litigates 
in the court system are going unrepresented by a lawyer in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they also found that for most major legal cases of a very serious matter, that the large 
majority of people did have legal representation. But the fact remains, -ms, that when you have a situation 
where 49 per cent of the people in this province are going before the courts unrepresented, albeit in many 
cases on relatively small matter, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to presume that there are some people who 
ought to be getting assistance from legal aid who are not. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is also fair to assume that if you have a user fee in place, that people must 
pay before they’re eligible to receive legal aid services, that that will reduce the number of people, the number 
of low income people who can access legal aid, and it will increase the number of low income people who 
can access legal aid, and it will increase the number of low income people, Mr. Speaker, that will go before 
the courts unrepresented by a lawyer, and that is indeed very, very unfortunate. 
 
Now second, Mr. Speaker, the second point I want to make is that the Minister of Social Services would do 
well to ask himself the question, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this legislation will be in violation of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the Minister of Health, the member for Meadow Lake is making light of 
this debate, Mr. Speaker. If he didn’t want to have a one-hour debate on this, he shouldn’t have brought in the 
Bill, Mr. Speaker; he shouldn’t have brought in the Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: – Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: – Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s very important about this legislation, Mr. Speaker, one 
of the things that’s very important about this legislation is that it may well be in violation of the Canadian 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And I would refer the Minister of Social Services to the judgement that was 
brought down by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, Mr. Speaker, when the question of charging user fees 
for the legal aid system was examined by the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal last year. And I refer the 
minister to page 4 of the judgement, Mr. Speaker, where the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal says the 
following, and I quote: 
 

As a threshold matter it is useful to set forth what is not at issue in this litigation. We are not required 
to consider the right of an accused person to counsel under section 10 of the Canadian Charter of 



Rights and freedoms, or the common law. However, we do not want to be taken as in any way 
overlooking or minimizing the heavy responsibility of the trial judge to ensure that an accused person 
receives a fair trial. 

 
And then they cite, Mr. Speaker, one of the prominent cases that the Ontario Court of Appeal recently dealt 
with, and they sum up that case as follows: 
 

To sum up, where the trial judge finds that representation of an accused by counsel is essential to a fair 
trial the accused, as previously indicated, has a constitutional right to be provided with counsel at the 
expense of the state if he or she lacks the means to employ one, citing R. v. Rowbotham. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this . . . I think that this is a very, very interesting citation from the Saskatchewan 
Court of Appeal judgement that came down last year. It is in effect, Mr. Speaker, a warning to the Minister of 
Social Services that if he reinstituted this user fee, Mr. Speaker, he may well be in violation of the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. That’s basically what the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, Mr. Speaker, has done. 
 
In a polite way, but in a rather unusual way for the courts, they’ve issued the minister a warning about the fact 
that this user fee may well be in violation of the charter. And, Mr. Speaker, clearly the Minister of Social 
Services has chosen not to heed that warning, Mr. Speaker. He’s a minister that doesn’t have – despite the fact 
that he’s a lawyer – he doesn’t have much respect for the law, Mr. Speaker, I’ve found. 
 
(2230) 
 
I found him to be a minister, Mr. Speaker, who doesn’t hesitate to violate the laws of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it be violating various sections of the Canada assistance plan, or whether it’s been violating 
his own legislation governing the Department of Social Services, or whether in this case, Mr. Speaker, it 
appears to be a perspective violation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I say that the Minister of Social Services – and we’ll be asking him some questions 
about this when the bill gets into committee – would do well, Mr. Speaker, to ask himself whether he is not, 
by way of this legislation in Bill 90, violating the rights of low income people in this province to be 
guaranteed access to counsel, Mr. Speaker, despite their ability to pay. And I say, Mr. Speaker, that her 
borders on violating that right. 
 
And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, may very well face the same fat as his previous attempt to have the Legal aid 
Commission levy user fees, and that is, Mr. Speaker, that he may well find that this legislation will end up 
before the court sin a challenge as well, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I hope it does. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the minister that many organizations in this province and outside of 
this province have gone on record as opposing the levying of user fees. And I point out to the minister that 
among other organizations that have done that is the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Bar Association, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister knows full well that there is very substantial body of legal opinion in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, not just among legal aid lawyers, but among all practising lawyers in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
among many of the lawyers in the private bar who fundamentally believe that the institution of user fees for 
poor people in this province which may well deny them access to the legal system in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, which may well deny them access to a fair trial in this province, Mr. Speaker, goes contrary to basic 
fairness, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the Minister of Social Services has support from either the public or the legal 
community with respect to the levying of user fees in this province. He knows, Mr. Speaker, that he faces that 
opposition and he chooses to proceed despite it, Mr. Speaker, and I say, shame on the minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve dealt with the question of the inappropriateness of this levy, Mr. Speaker. We on this 
side of the Assembly believe that it is unnecessary for user fees to be implemented, Mr. Speaker, and that it’s 
also inappropriate. 
 



And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I find rather unusual about this piece of legislation is that on the one 
hand, Mr. Speaker, the minister is claiming that he is going to raise another $150,000 to operate the legal aid 
system in the province of Saskatchewan, and argues, Mr. Speaker, that he needs that source of revenue to 
finance legal aid in this province. And on the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services is 
proposing a course of privatization with respect to legal aid that will clearly cost taxpayers a great deal more 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to comment at more length on that next day when I continue my remarks, but I want 
to say now to the Minister of Social Services and to members of the Assembly before I adjourn the debate on 
this Bill, that one of the things, Mr. Speaker, that is truly ironic is that the minister is proposing to contract out 
more legal aid work in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He’s proposing to contract out more legal 
aid work. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing is a proposal here to begin to privatize the legal aid system in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And at the same time, Mr. Speaker, he has an evaluation study which I made 
reference to earlier, published last year, Mr. Speaker, by the federal Department of Justice and his own 
Department of Social Services which tells him, Mr. Speaker, that if he chooses to go this route of 
privatization, the cost of offering legal aid services in the province of Saskatchewan is going to increase. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, we have seen, Mr. Speaker, as a follow-up to this joint evaluation rather detailed 
cost estimates, Mr. Speaker, that were leaked to the New Democratic Party in December of 1988, which 
showed, Mr. Speaker, that if the Minister of Social Services choose to take this privatization course and 
implement it fully, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: – Order, order. It certainly seems to be another debate that’s developed on its own. Let’s allow 
the member for Saskatoon University to continue. 
 
Mr. Prebble: – Mr. Speaker, what that joint evaluation study shows is that if privatization of the legal aid 
system is implemented with any degree of significance, that the cost of offering legal aid in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the cost to taxpayers could go up by as much as 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So here we have a minister, Mr. Speaker, who on one hand says that he needs this legislation to save himself 
$150,000 a year, and in the very same piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, he proposes a course to increase 
contracting out and privatization of the legal aid system, which his own joint evaluation study of last year tells 
him, Mr. Speaker, will increase costs for legal aid in this province by as much as 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
What a contradiction, Mr. Speaker, what a contradiction. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Social Services, in wrapping up my initial comments on this 
Bill, that he would do well, Mr. Speaker, he would do well instead of worrying about user fees for legal aid, 
or instead of worrying about privatizing the legal aid system in this province when he has a joint evaluation 
study that says that the current system is being delivered well by the people who are working full time for the 
legal aid system, he would do well, Mr. Speaker, to concentrate on addressing some of the real needs of the 
legal aid system in this province. 
 
He would do well, Mr. Speaker, for instance, to reinstate some of the civil services, Mr. Speaker, that were 
being provided through legal aid under the New Democratic Party government. Mr. Speaker, he would do 
well to reinstate some of those services, providing legal aid services for things like landlord-tenant disputes, 
Mr. Speaker, or for wills, Mr. Speaker, or for many other areas of civil law that are currently not being 
addressed by the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He would do well, Mr. Speaker, to do something about the heavy case loads that legal aid staff in this 
province face, Mr. Speaker, exceedingly heavy case loads that regularly run to more than 300 client cases per 
year, Mr. Speaker, per legal aid worker in this province. He would do well to address that, Mr. Speaker. 
Those are the kinds of issues, Mr. Speaker, that he would do well to address. 
 
The Speaker: – Order, order. My, my, will those two members please allow this member to continue; that’s 
the second time. 
 



Mr. Prebble: – Mr. Speaker, he would do well to address the question of eligibility for legal aid services in 
this province and set up a legal aid system that ensures that anybody who’s living under the poverty line in the 
province of Saskatchewan is entitled to legal aid services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He would do well, Mr. Speaker, to pull this bill, drop his plans for user fees, drop his plans for privatization, 
and concentrate instead, Mr. Speaker, on rebuilding the legal aid system, a system, Mr. Speaker, that under 
the New Democratic party genuinely met the needs of lower income people in this province, and a system, 
Mr. Speaker, that he has steadily eroded since becoming Minister of Social Services. I beg leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon Mr. Andrew that Bill No. 80 
– An Act to amend The Department of Justice Act be now read a second time. 

 
Mr. Mitchell: – I simply want to say, Mr. Speaker, I simply want to say that we’ll be supporting this Bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Hepworth that Bill No. 
70 – An Act to amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 

 
Mr. Rolfes: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that I only have 20 minutes left to speak 
on this Bill. I had a number of things that I wanted to say this evening but in 20 minutes I won’t be able to 
cover them all, but I’m sure that we can do that on another day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin tonight I want to begin with my few comments on this particular issue. On July 6, 
Mr. Speaker, the minister gave second reading of bill No. 70 and he indicated that there were a number of 
amendments that he was making to the Bill – some of them were technical or housekeeping, some referred to 
the minutes of the boards – and we have certainly no objection to those. 
 
He referred to in camera meetings that there will be times when boards will need to have in camera meetings 
and we certainly have no objection to that; and the establishment of committees, and the power of committees 
will have the effect as thought they were a complete board. There’s no particular differences that we have 
with that. 
 
He also, Mr. Speaker, is bringing in some changes to suspension and expulsion of pupils, and I, here again, 
Mr. Speaker, I will have to agree with the minister; I think we needed to have an overhaul of those. Having 
been a practising educator myself, I know there were some difficulties and we needed to have some changes 
in that regard. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, tonight I want to address my remarks to an area where I do have come concern, and that is 
the concern of private schools. The minister did not make it very clear and did not give this House the 
assurances that I think we need in regards to private schools. And the minister’s record, by the way, of private 
schools is not very good. When he regulate private schools, then it concerns me, particular if he wants to do it 
by regulation. We have seen what he has done with Bridge City College; we have seen what he’s done to a 
number of other private schools, and we’ve received absolutely no assurances from this minister in that 
regard. 
 
So it bothers me when he says that a lot of the things that he wants to do in regards to what he now calls 
independent schools is going to be done by regulation. So what if, Mr. Speaker, what the minister has in mind 
is the proliferation of private schools in this province. And I will be questioning, or we will be questioning 
him in committee on this, then yes, we have serious concerns. 
 



If what he is referring to in the registration of independent schools is the present nine private schools that 
exist who are abiding by the provincial curriculum, who have certified teachers, and who are doing an 
excellent job, then we don’t have any concerns. But if what the minister is attempting to do is to implement 
many of the recommendations of the Dirks report where he is going to exempt private religious schools from 
property taxes. And if he’s going to say to those private religious schools that they can now or they will be 
accepted in Saskatchewan – they don’t have to abide by a provincial curriculum, they don’t have to have 
certified teachers - -then we have some concerns, some very serious concerns. 
 
And I want to say to the minister that in committee we want answers to those areas that pertain to the 
independent schools. What exactly do you mean by a registered independent school and a non-registered 
independent school? Are you opening the door for, as I indicated, a proliferation of private schools that don’t 
have to adhere to a provincial curriculum, that don’t have to have certified teachers, and that really breed 
intolerance in this province? 
 
(2245) 
 
And so those are some of the question that we will be asking you in Committee of the Whole. And if we get 
satisfactory answers, then we will be prepared possibly to support this Bill. But I will keep that decision in 
abeyance until we get some answers from the minister, and, Mr. Speaker, with those words, I will be prepared 
to let the Bill go. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:46 p.m. 
 


