


















































March 15, 1989 Hansard


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 15, 1989 
 

141 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 17 
individuals who are here as participants in the Western Career 
Assignment Program. They are here in their capacity as civil 
servants in the provincial governments of western Canada and 
the federal Government of Canada, and also the Territories of 
Canada. These 17 individuals seated in the Speaker’s gallery, 
are participating in a 10-week course that enhances their skills 
as professional civil servants. 
 
I have had the opportunity of meeting with them, discussing 
with them the role of provincial cabinet ministers and the role 
of politicians in general. I’ve tried to give them some advice in 
trying to outlast and outsurvive those of us who are politicians 
who come and go. They are like the land and the trees — they 
will be here for ever. And they must give some continuity to the 
government of this country. They are a very enthusiastic group 
of individuals, very capable, very intelligent, and very diligent. 
 
They are here with their program co-ordinators, Mr. Ted 
Reddekopp and Mr. Ron Harris. They have had the occasion of 
having lunch with Her Honour at Government House. And their 
program this year is being hosted and based in Saskatoon for 
the duration of the 10-week course. So I ask the members here 
to welcome and show respect to these civil servants from 
western Canada and the Government of Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Population Loss in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is to the Premier, and it has to do with the 
statistics prepared by his own bureau of statistics which reveal, 
shockingly so, Mr. Premier, today, that in the month of 
February of 1989 Saskatchewan suffered a net population loss, 
Mr. Speaker, a net population loss of 6,261 people, all in one 
month. Now this is the worst exodus in any one month since the 
Dirty Thirties, since the last time that we had a PC government 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier is as follows: in the light of this 
massive hemorrhage, in the light of what is obviously a very 
serious situation, does he agree with me that this requires 
emergency action by the government? Do you have such an 
emergency game plan to stem this out-migration, and if you do, 
will you please provide the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan with the details of this plan today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows that 
the population of the province of Saskatchewan increased over 
a million people for the first time in history during our 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Now it had never done that in the history 
of Saskatchewan. It did it, Mr. Speaker, particularly as a result 
of the programs initiated by the province of Saskatchewan and a 
buoyant agriculture and some buoyant commodities. 
 
I also say to the hon. member, as he knows, that we have had 
some severe and significant financial problems in rural 
Saskatchewan. As a result of that, we find that net farm income 
in Saskatchewan has almost collapsed as a result of drought, $2 
wheat, and high interest rates. And he knows that the population 
of rural Saskatchewan is suffering as a result of those 
conditions. The city of Saskatoon is growing; the city of Regina 
is growing; the city of Moose Jaw is growing. The cities are 
increasing, Mr. Speaker, but the problem is rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Also notice that the statistics point out that net income in the 
province of Saskatchewan is low compared to other provinces. 
Well when you have zero farm income, it has quite an impact 
on the net and on the average, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we have 
gone to the federal government and gone to the provincial 
government and gone to our treasuries so in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we can provide cash, literally billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
to the people of Saskatchewan, particularly in the rural, because 
those are the people that have been suffering. 
 
Now we step in, in terms of high interest rates; we step in, in 
terms of cash; we provide low interest loans; we have a 
combination of things that we’re doing to support agriculture 
because it is the rural people that are having trouble finding the 
jobs. In urban Saskatchewan we see the growth continue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier, 
and I find it passing strange that the members of the cabinet and 
the back-benchers would actually applaud that kind of an 
answer in the light of this serious statistical situation, because 
what the Premier has done is he has admitted to this House and 
to the province of Saskatchewan the total and abject failure of 
his department’s agricultural policies, given those statistics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that this is 
not the first time that the province of Saskatchewan experiences 
this kind of cyclical up and down, that there have been droughts 
in the past and difficulties in the past, and in view of the fact 
that this has happened in previous occasions; also in view of the 
fact that nearly 40 to 50 per cent of that 6,000 group that has 
left the province are young men and women, the future of our 
province, between the ages of 15 and 29, can the Premier stop 
the  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

142 
 

rhetoric, and I’m asking you sincerely, get up and tell us a 
specific game plan as to what he’s got in mind as a government 
— you’re the government — to keep these jobs and these young 
people at home and have the people of Saskatchewan stay here 
at home? What’s your game plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition has admitted that he doesn’t have an agricultural 
policy; he knows that land bank didn’t work; he knows that 
foreclosures on farmers haven’t worked; and he knows that the 
people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg just sent him a message that 
says the NDP don’t have an agricultural policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have put literally billions of dollars of 
taxpayers’ money into rural Saskatchewan — rural gas 
distribution system, interest rate protection programs, individual 
line service, community development corporations, cash 
advances, Mr. Speaker; feeder associations, livestock 
combinations, Mr. Speaker, as well as the complete 
infrastructure in education and health care — new integrated 
units, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition stands up and says he doesn’t 
have an agriculture policy. He admits that he hasn’t had one. 
Let me say, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to rural 
Saskatchewan, we hold most of the seats in rural Saskatchewan 
and just got another one, just got another one in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg on the basis of agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. I say to the hon. member, he could at least, to be fair, 
acknowledge the drought, acknowledge high interest rates, and 
I certainly wouldn’t be encouraging banks to be foreclosing on 
people because of high interest rates. That hurts rural people; 20 
per cent interest rates hurt them. He didn’t do anything; we will, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a new question, 
because I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that answer by the 
Premier is actually a pathetic message of no hope. That answer 
by the Premier is a political polemic which is cold comfort for 
the 6,300 people who have left this province in the month of 
February alone. Mr. Premier, that is equal the size of the 
population of the city of Melfort in one month. 
 
Now look, I’m going to ask you again. Stop the political 
rhetoric. You tell this legislature and the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan in the face of a crisis what it is that your 
government plans to introduce by way of emergency programs 
for the young and for those who are forced to leave this 
province because of your policies. What are your answers? 
What game plan do you have? Don’t give us the speeches, give 
us results. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Conference Board 
of Canada has said that with the diversification going on in 
Saskatchewan and with reasonable moisture, we’re looking at 
leading the nation in economic growth  

across Canada, 8 or 9 per cent economic growth for 1989-1990. 
The conference board predicts . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The conference 
board says, with any reasonable crop so that we have a base in 
agriculture, we will create 13,000 new jobs in 1989 and 15,000 
brand-new jobs in 1990. Now I say to the hon. member, I am 
not, I am not, Mr. Speaker, against upgraders; I’m not against 
Weyerhaeuser; I not against trade; I’m not against business. I 
am for diversification, processing, and manufacturing. I want to 
see new meat packing, Mr. Speaker; I want to see new pulp 
mills; I want to see new paper mills, and we’re encouraging 
them; fertilizer plants, manufacturing and processing in food, 
Mr. Speaker — all of those things that the opposition member’s 
against. 
 
So let me point out, Mr. Speaker, with the diversification, 
processing, and manufacturing plan that we have, the 
Conference Board of Canada says that we can lead the nation 
with any reasonable co-operation from the weatherman in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. 
I’m sorry to say to the Premier that it comes as no news to us or 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan that you’re for 
Weyerhaeuser, and that you’re for Pocklington, that you’re for 
Intercontinental Packers, and that you’re all for all the big 
business corporations. We know that, but we also know that 
that policy has resulted in 6,200 people leaving in February 
alone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s what you’ve been doing for seven 
long years. You’ve been giving the money to your big business 
friends. You’ve been privatizing, you’ve bankrupted the 
province, and still 6,000 have left in February alone. Why don’t 
you ’fess up that you and your Minister of Finance have failed 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. You do not know 
where you’re going, and this is a crisis which requires action. 
Admit that you failed in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s fair to say 
the hon. member must have been hurting as a result of the 
debate the last few days. He is the only leader we know in 
Canada whose law firm has a contract with a multinational bank 
to foreclose on people. Nobody else that I know of in this 
nation, no other leader in the past, nor their leader today will 
take on farmers and actually make money foreclosing on them, 
and his law firm is doing it. No wonder he’s bringing it up, Mr. 
Speaker. High interest rates, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I say to the hon. 
member that when we have difficult times because of drought 
and high interest rates, we shouldn’t take  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

143 
 

advantage of farmers, and we certainly shouldn’t, Mr. Speaker, 
not stand in the way of protecting them. We should, Mr. 
Speaker, make sure that we provide them with interest rate 
relief, that we provide them with help, that we provide them 
with cash, Mr. Speaker, and all the programs we can design — 
all of that should be done. 
 
And the hon. member knows and he says, well, because of an 
upgrader, because of Intercontinental Packers — maybe he’s 
against them, too — because of a new paper mill, we lose jobs. 
It doesn’t make any sense. It’s not logical. We are employing 
new people. This new upgrader, the new one in Lloydminster, 
the new paper mill, the expansion in Intercontinental Packers, 
Flexi-Coil in Saskatoon, in his own city — those are new jobs. 
And he says, oh, it’s nothing to do with drought; it’s because 
you’re creating new processing and manufacturing. Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t follow. He’s hurting because he has no 
agriculture policy. He’s embarrassed by the fact that his law 
firm has taken them on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier of 
the province of Saskatchewan, this great defender of the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. How many foreclosures has ACS 
(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) under your 
leadership conducted is the question . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Order, 
order. We’re having a little problem hearing the Leader of the 
Opposition ask the question, and I’d ask the co-operation of the 
members to allow him to ask the question in an environment 
where he can be heard. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. I refer to him as the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, although I must 
confess that by his deeds and actions that’s a tough title to 
attach sometimes. Mr. Premier, my question is this to you: 
according to Statistics Canada, in February of 1989 
Saskatchewan’s population is 1,007,000. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — October ’88. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That, for all of the PCs applauding, was in 
October of 1988. That was in October of 1988. And as a result 
of your privatizations, as a result of your bankrupt farming 
policies, with 6,000 having left in the month of February, we 
are now below a million people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — We are below a million people. I say to the 
Premier of Saskatchewan that that’s a condemnation of your 
records and your bankrupt policies. Can the Premier tell me is 
he so committed to privatization; is he so committed to giving 
his sweetheart deals to Weyerhaeuser that he’s going to allow 
this thing to continue to run down, so that all the young men 
and women leave this province because they have no  

opportunity? Is that your policy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will say to the hon. 
member, and we will agree to disagree with respect to his 
policies of the past of nationalizing and taking over, versus ours 
of replacing high interest rate and international debt with equity 
to encourage people to build and manufacture here. We are 
creating jobs as a result of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just say to the hon. member it can be difficult in 
rural communities, and I represent a rural riding, as a result of 
low oil prices or low agriculture prices or drought. We are 
trying to build and will build more irrigation and more water 
projects. The NDP is against that. We try to build 
diversification in energy; they’re against that. We try to build 
paper mills; they’re against that. We try to build increase in 
packing and processing and food manufacturing, and they’re 
against that. They’re against business or against trade. 
 
We heard the other night they’re against Americans; they’re 
against International Pacific Rim, Mr. Speaker, and they’re 
even against the farmers of Saskatchewan because the only 
leader we know, the only leader we know has a contract with a 
bank to foreclose on farmers. Well if that’s their agriculture 
policy, I’ll go into a by-election in rural Saskatchewan any day 
of the week, Mr. Speaker, because farmers want somebody 
that’ll stick up for them, not take their farm. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. members, of course, are in an 
enthusiastic mood. Perhaps part of it is that perhaps what we 
see is good questions and good answers. But I believe it’s more 
debate than question period, and perhaps if the questions got a 
little shorter, and the answers got a little shorter, it would help. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have new question. And you 
will note, Mr. Speaker, I make these questions as specific as I 
can. The new question to the Premier is very simple. I’m 
against a lot of things that this government has done . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Everything. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Well almost everything, you’re right. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. I don’t like to intervene, 
but I’m going to ask the hon. members once more to please 
allow a situation where questions can be answered and answers 
can be given. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, my question is going to be 
specific to the Premier. In the light of this crisis of a million 
people less now in our population; in the light of his bankrupt 
policies; in the light of the fact that he is the biggest forecloser 
in the province of Saskatchewan — that man over there has 
pulled the trigger on more farmers than any premier in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan — in the light of the 
fact that his privatization is taking us back to the Dirty Thirties, 
I’m  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

144 
 

asking this question specifically of the Premier. In the light of 
this crisis, will you at least show the province that you’ve got 
something more by way of policy than a $9 million birthday 
party in 1990. Cancel that and get a job creation program for the 
young people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is trying to say, well if we had the government 
involved in foreclosures, it’s all right that his law firm 
forecloses. That’s what the opposition members say. Well 
somebody over here foreclosed, therefore it’s okay if the Leader 
of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order, order. I don’t 
think we’re going to accomplish a great deal if hon. members 
spend half of question period hurling . . . Order! I wonder if 
hon. members, after being asked several times, would have the 
courtesy on both sides of the House to please refrain from 
talking constantly when the Speaker is on his feet, and I ask the 
courtesy of your attention. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I just say again to the 
Leader of the Opposition, it’s not good enough for you to stand 
there and say, well there’s been foreclosures in government 
programs, or law firms have been involved, and saying that 
you’re okay then to do that. It’s your firm that has a contract 
with a bank to do this ongoing. And here is the big socialist 
leader who says that he will protect you against multinationals, 
protect you against banks, and his firm, his firm, the firm of 
Mitchell, Ching, Romanow and others, forecloses on farmers 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I must remind the 
Premier that the use of names in the chambers, according to our 
rules is . . . Order. Order. Order. We’ve been over this several 
times. We’ve been over this several times. As a matter of fact, 
we had a discussion of it last night, and it was agreed that the 
names of members will not be used and we’ll all try to adhere to 
that. 
 

Employment of Former MLAs and Others 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice of 
a question from the member from Saskatoon Eastview with 
regard to one Jack Cennon and the question is: does Jack 
Cennon work for the Premier’s office in Prince Albert and what 
is his salaries and what is his duties. I would like to inform the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Cennon is not employed at the 
Premier’s office; in fact, is not employed by the government at 
all. Mr. Cennon’s only connection with any . . . Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Cennon’s involvement with any government over his many 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Cennon’s only 
connection with any government activity in the past or today 
has been a member of the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Commission. Mr. Cennon has been actively involved in 
AA (Alcoholics Anonymous) for 25 to 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
He has been active in that. 
 

I simply say to the members opposite, when they stand up, 
make allegations in the House, the least they could do is check 
out the validity of that particular statement that they are making, 
Mr. Speaker, rather than to bring in to this House false 
statements about people. It comes out in the media, Mr. 
Speaker, and falsely accuses a citizen of this province. I think 
that is improper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All I can is, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be darned. 
They missed one. They missed one. In about 60 defeated 
candidates, you missed one. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: what on earth is wrong 
with Jack Cennon? He’s the only candidate you missed. What is 
wrong with the man? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I hardly think that is the case, Mr. 
Speaker. But let me respond to the hon. member from Regina 
Centre. And I would refer, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member of 
Regina Centre who, in his previous life, worked as a political 
person within the previous NDP government, and so he’s the 
guy that’s criticizing this. But I go back, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think it’s proper to read to the Assembly a resolution passed at 
the NDP convention, 1987, the resolution read as follows, and I 
think it’s important to hear this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

 Whereas it is necessary to have civil servants and board 
members of provincial bodies who are dedicated to 
promoting the New Democratic program of democratic 
socialism, be it resolved that when the New Democratic 
Party is elected, a careful screening take place to ensure 
such people are in place (Mr. Speaker). 
 

That is their resolution; that is their policy. How be it for them 
to criticize us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the 
minister has the information with respect to all the others that 
he took notice of. The answer’s going to be no because all the 
others we asked about, and of which you took notice, do work 
for the government. 
 
Let’s have the answer on Myles Morin, Myles Morin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I also was asked a question 
with regard to Mr. Birkbeck. I can inform the Assembly that 
Mr. Birkbeck . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, order. The 
question of the hon. member was not Mr. Birkbeck, it was Mr. 
Morin. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the name was Myles Morin. 
Have you got the information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member, I 
say to the hon. member from Regina Centre, you were a 
defeated candidate in your previous life.  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

145 
 

Following your defeat at the polls, you went to work . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. The 
minister can answer the question if he can relate what he is 
saying to the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Certainly I can relate to thee what he’s 
asking, Mr. Speaker. What I again would say to the House is 
this: the hon. member that posed that question stood as an NDP 
candidate in a provincial election, at which time he was 
defeated, Mr. Speaker — defeated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I believe it’s spelled 
M-o-r-i-n. Have you got the answer for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, if I could continue with 
my answer. Following his defeat, I think it was in the 1964 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, he went on to take a political position, 
a political position with the government of the day, which 
happened to be an NDP government — a political position, Mr. 
Speaker — something that he now criticizes some other person 
that stood for public office who now takes a particular job. He 
then says, that is wrong; that is naughty, naughty. But what did 
he do 10 and 15 years before? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. By way of 
background, I might have asked about the Minister of Finance 
whose job I took when I went to work for the government. He 
went on to a distinguished career in politics; you went on to a 
distinguished career in politics; and so did I. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I asked, Mr. Minister, about Myles Morin. 
And I say to you, Mr. Minister, you picked one name out of a 
very lengthy list and you say he doesn’t work for the 
government. What about the rest you took notice for? What 
about Myles Morin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the reason I had the 
information today is because I was passed, before I came in 
here, a news release that was put out by Mr. Cennon, asking the 
Leader of the Opposition if he would please apologize for his 
members making a false accusation against him. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. The member 
from Regina Centre asked a specific question. I don’t believe it 
dealt with Mr. Cennon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member was 
asking me how it was that I was so quick to have a response 
back on one, but not have to bring all the other information 
back. The other information, I’m still trying to get firmly put in 
place. The reason I’m answering on Mr. Cennon is because 
there was a press release. That press release, put out not by us 
but by Mr. Cennon, asked the Leader of the Opposition to 
apologize on behalf of his members for making a false 
accusation against . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. That is not 
on the specific question. Order, order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to establish the Public Participation 
Program 

 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to establish the Public Participation Program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, could I revert to 
ministerial statements, please? 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I believe I had asked for leave, Mr. 
Speaker, to revert to ministerial statements. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. We’re getting ahead of 
ourselves a bit. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly that the Bill 
be read a second time? 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — The hon. member asked for leave just 
moments ago and leave was not granted by the House. 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act respecting Railways in Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting Railways in Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the enactment 

of The Railway Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill respecting the Consequential Amendment to Certain Acts 
resulting from the enactment of The Railway Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend The Residential Services Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Residential Services Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Line Fence Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 
Bill to amend The Line Fence Act. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

146 
 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 
at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
evening before we recessed at 10 o’clock, I was talking about a 
number of issues. Some of them were the strange double 
standards that the opposition party seems to hold towards the 
hiring practices of governments. Another was the fact that the 
member from Elphinstone admitted that the former premier, in 
all the years that he was the MLA for that constituency and 
premier of the province, did nothing for the people of that 
constituency, and they’re still suffering today. 
 
And thirdly, I was pointing out the fact that it’s very, very 
passing strange that the member for Elphinstone would be 
standing up and defending his leader, the member for 
Riversdale, on the question of foreclosures on farmers, when 
only a week or 10 days ago, he was one of the people who were 
seeking to overthrow that leadership. And I think the play Julius 
Caesar, et tu Brute, is the line I used to describe it. And it’s 
quite true, Mr. Speaker, those things are going on; those things 
are happening. And we saw today in question period the total 
lack of control that that leader has of the members of the 
opposition. 
 
I also spoke last night, Mr. Speaker, of a number of firsts in the 
province of Saskatchewan, how Saskatchewan was a leader in a 
number of things. And I talked about a primary steel 
production, fine paper mill and . . . the only, the largest, pardon 
me, fine paper mill in western Canada; the first protein oil 
starch plant in western Canada; and so on and so forth. 
 
And I travel down the list through Agribition, and oh, the 
potash situation, mines, the uranium production, and the heavy 
oil upgrader, much to the consternation of the members 
opposite who do not like to hear about positive things. 
 
Last night they were rather vocal in their comments on my 
speech. Today I see they are very quiet and are sitting there 
attentively, and I hope they learn something. 
 
I also went through a list of some people who had been hired by 
a previous administration who had political connections, and I 
find again the double standard of the opposition, once again 
displayed today, most interesting. 
 
But getting back to firsts. We have another first in 
Saskatchewan. We have the first Progressive Conservative 
MLA for the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in the 
history of our province. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Good member. Good member. 
 
Now I think, Mr. Speaker, that sends a clear message to the 
opposition. During that by-election, they used every dirty trick 
in the book. They used everything there was. They even had the 
leader send out a letter. Now I don’t know what good that did 
them, but they tried it. We really appreciate that by the way, 
Roy. 
 
The interesting part about the fact that we have a PC MLA in 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Speaker, is that members of the 
opposition insist on saying that the Progressive Conservative 
Party is losing touch with rural Saskatchewan; losing touch with 
our base. Well I think not, Mr. Speaker. I think not. 
 
I think members of the opposition are living in a dream world. I 
think they like to preach doom and gloom and are beginning to 
believe their own rhetoric. There’s dissension in their ranks; 
there’s consternation at not having a policy on agriculture. The 
best that they can do is stand up in this Assembly and try to 
attack everything that this Conservative government has done to 
try to help the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When you talk about firsts that they like to attack, we have the 
first home-makers’ pension plan in North America, Mr. 
Speaker, the first pension plan for people who do not have a 
formal pension plan in place for them by their employers — 
provincially run, provincially operated. We have over 40,000 
people enrolled in that plan. And I’m waiting to hear members 
of the opposition stand up and say their usual lines of too little, 
too late, not enough, run improperly, we would have done it 
differently. 
 
We’ve heard other speakers talk about how they would have 
done it differently had they been in power. They probably 
wouldn’t have done anything because they’re long on rhetoric 
and short on action. And we’ve seen that time after time after 
time. Time and again they stood up and said, we’re the 
protectors of medicare; we’re the protectors of the old; we are 
the protectors of the poor; we are the protectors of the people 
who are least able to look after themselves. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that political party did nothing to back up 
their rhetoric. Moratoriums on nursing homes. That’s what they 
did to help old people. That’s their rhetoric, Mr. Speaker. I went 
into that last evening. 
 
But we have another first in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’re the first government to get rid of extra billing — extra 
billing. Now for the party opposite to sit over there and 
sanctimoniously say that they are the defenders of medicare and 
the protectors of the poor and the disadvantaged is ludicrous to 
say the least, Mr. Speaker. Because they allowed extra billing 
all those years that they were in power, that they like to talk 
about as the good times. Let the good times roll, whoopee-ding! 
 
Except, Mr. Speaker, they did nothing — they did nothing for 
people who had to pay extra bills on their medical care. 
Nothing. Absolutely nothing. They did nothing to provide 
nursing homes for people who needed it. They  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

147 
 

did nothing, absolutely nothing to alleviate interest rates that 
were killing the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 
1980 and ’81. 
 
In 1982 the Conservative government came in and we took 
interest rates on. We said we’d go to the wall for farmers, and 
we have. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . pardon me, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. 
I’m glad to see you in the chair, sir. Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker, we have got a situation where once again they are 
trying to claim that they are going to do good for the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan; they are going to do wonderful 
things; they are going to do all sorts of wonderful things. And 
we ask them where their policy is and they say, oh it’s coming, 
it’s coming; yes, sir, we’re going to have it; there’s no two ways 
about it; government should own everything, run everything, 
and look after everybody from cradle to grave; and maybe they 
even want to go further. But, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, the 
members opposite know full well that their rhetoric is exactly 
that — only empty rhetoric, nothing more. 
 
When you look at all of the firsts in the province of 
Saskatchewan that have happened under governments that 
sought to build, not nationalize . . . build, Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker, that’s the important word. 
 
And they go back and they talk about their roots in the CCF 
(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) party. Well the CCF 
party, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, is not the NDP Party, was 
never the NDP Party. And I’ll tell you, the NDP Party sure 
doesn’t hold a candle to the old CCF party. They built; they 
built things. They didn’t take over from people who had worked 
hard to put something together and say, it’s in the public good 
that we do this. 
 
But oh, the NDP say, oh yes, we’re going to nationalize 
everything. As a matter of fact, in response to a number of our 
programs that we put in place, public participation, they claim 
that should they ever come to power, God forbid, they will 
nationalize everything; they will expropriate everything for a 
dollar. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, if you are one of the people 
who have been working in one of the areas that have been 
opened up for public participation and you have a share or two 
or three or four in a company that’s been opened up for you to 
participate in, doesn’t that strike fear into your heart? It 
certainly does. They are going to come out and take your 
company that you now own as an employee-owner of that 
company and expropriate it from you for a dollar. And they’re 
on record as saying it; they are on record as saying it. 
 
We, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, have insisted on working 
towards better things, on building on our strengths, and while 
we have tough times in the province, while we have difficult 
economic times, we have done our best to alleviate the burden 
on people as best we can and still provide the services that they 
require and want. 
 
But you can’t just sit here and say, well we’re going to provide 
these services. The government’s got lots of money, right? Well 
that’s not exactly true, because  

government only has the money that they can bring in from the 
economy of their province in this case. 
 
And we’ve sought to expand our markets and get new markets, 
different products, diversify and innovate. And every time that 
one of these projects is announced, the members of the 
opposition sit there and say, ah, it’s no good; it’s a dream; it’s a 
pipe dream. They laugh and they chuckle and heap derision 
upon it. And we’ve see it time after time. 
 
They are trying their level best to keep people from investing in 
the province of Saskatchewan, to keep investor confidence low. 
They are trying to undermine what this government is trying to 
do in regards to building the province, because they don’t want 
to see people prosperous. They are the people of the poor and 
the downtrodden. They are the defenders of the poor and the 
downtrodden. If those people aren’t poor, if those people aren’t 
disadvantaged, if those people do have money to spend and do 
have opportunities, they won’t represent them any more, and 
they won’t have any votes. 
 
(1445) 
 
So they have a vested interest in keeping people poor and 
downtrodden. They have a vested interest, and it’s exemplified 
by the fact that the member from Elphinstone yesterday stood in 
his place in the Assembly and admitted that nothing had been 
done in that constituency by the former premier of this province 
in all the years that he was there. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Shame! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — It is a shame. It really is a shame. Former 
premier Blakeney, a very good man, an astute statesman. 
Perhaps he should have looked at his own constituency first. 
Perhaps he should have looked at his own constituency and saw 
what he could do for those people that the member, the now 
member for Elphinstone say are downtrodden and 
disadvantaged. 
 
What did they do? They did nothing. Are there nursing homes 
there? I don’t know. Is there a liquor board store there? I think 
there probably was; I think there probably was. I think they had 
a liquor board store, if I’m not mistaken, over around McKnight 
Crescent. It was just wonderful; it was just wonderful. 
 
And a member opposite, a member opposite, a good friend of 
mine, is pointing towards the press gallery and he’s saying 
there’s no one in the press gallery to hear my speech. But that’s 
fine, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, because I’m speaking to the 
people of this province, the members of the opposition, and I’m 
trying to show members of the opposition the folly of their 
ways. They look at the press gallery, and that is who they play 
to every day. They play to the press gallery, and if there is no 
one there, why they just clam up and sit down and be quiet. 
 
If you’ve ever noticed, members of the opposition, how many 
of you folks that aren’t exactly in the front bank, the front row, 
ever get to speak during prime time. Think about it. How come 
there are members who are sitting at the back row there who 
never get to speak during prime  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

148 
 

time? 
 
I can tell you there’s a leadership race going on in your group. 
There’s a power struggle going on in your group. And you play 
to the gallery all the time to see how many headlines you get. 
And that’s interesting because you forgot about people. You’re 
playing to the gallery for your own purposes, for your own 
purposes. 
 
And the member for Humboldt says he has it in the bag. I hope 
so; I hope so. I certainly hope so. The old adage about buying a 
pig in a poke is a lot like the member from Humboldt having it 
in the bag. 
 
But let’s talk about a few more firsts, Mr. Deputy Deputy 
Speaker. Saskatchewan pioneered electrical power to rural 
people, and it was done under a CCF administration, and I think 
it was a good thing. They brought power into the province of 
Saskatchewan; they brought in single phased power, the 
cheapest way of installing it that they could, and we had lights; 
we had our radios playing. It was something whose time had 
come and it was needed, and it provided much needed 
employment for the province at that time. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, when we came to office we 
saw other needs. We saw that people in rural Saskatchewan 
were saying, why can’t I have cheap fuel to heat my home, to 
heat my businesses, to heat my shop? In some cases, chicken 
barns, hog barns, so on and so forth. 
 
Members of the opposition said, oh no, you can’t have natural 
gas. Oh no, you’ve got to pay for diesel fuel at four times the 
cost because we don’t know how to build. We don’t know how 
to provide that service to you, and we’re going to keep you out 
there burning diesel fuel, which is not exactly as clean burning 
as natural gas, for time to come. We’re just going to leave you 
out there. 
 
Well, we thought that wasn’t such a good idea, and we provided 
a rural gasification network at a cost that people could afford. 
And people all across this province said, I want to be in on it; I 
want to be first; I want to be in on it; I want to be part of it. And 
we see demand for that rising all the time. And thousands and 
thousands of miles of line have been laid — thousands of miles. 
And many farm families have achieved a cost-saving from that. 
And when you work in an agricultural situation on a farm, your 
input costs are very, very important to your bottom line, as they 
are in any business. And when we were paying four and five 
times what it costs for natural gas, it was hurting us — it was 
hurting us. 
 
Back to electrification. It was nice to have the lights on and the 
radio playing. But we also have a problem of overhead lines. 
We said, you know, where it’s possible we’re going to get rid of 
some of those potential hazards with some overhead lines; 
we’re going to bury those power lines for you. And we’ve 
started a program burying power lines where it’s feasible to do 
so, putting them underground, again creating employment, 
again diversification, manufacturing, jobs for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What did the opposition do when they were in power? Nothing 
— nothing. The NDP is bankrupt of new ideas.  

The CCF at least did some thinking about it and built. The NDP 
never did, the NDP never did. They thought of nationalizing, 
taking over, borrowing money in New York to buy the potash 
mines. It made a lot of sense; we already had the holes in the 
ground; people were producing potash. Why don’t we buy the 
potash mine? Sounds like a good idea. We’ll pay 17 per cent. 
Great, great! That’s the legacy that we inherited from the NDP 
— piles of potash. Piles of potash that we were paying 17 per 
cent on. It was disgusting. 
 
And what bothers me most is they borrowed the money from 
the same people they bought the mines from. They could have 
charged them royalties, they could have put taxes against them, 
but oh, no, the NDP philosophy is state ownership, no matter 
what the cost, no matter how much it harms the people; state 
ownership, because they believe that only government can do 
things the right way. 
 
Well, we saw 11 years of doing things the right way, and we 
saw what it did for this province. It was really amazing, really 
amazing. We ended up paying 24 per cent interest rates, 22 and 
24 per cent interest rates. That was doing things the right way. 
And when they were questioned about their interest rates they 
said the equivalent of: let them eat cake. Their answer was, well 
do the best you can under tough times, boys and girls, because 
it’s not a provincial matter. We don’t get involved in interest 
rates. 
 
That was the answer of the leader of that party who then 
became the leader of the opposition in 1982, the former premier 
Blakeney. He said, we don’t get involved in that; we don’t get 
involved in that. And so farmers like myself, small-business 
men like people all over Saskatchewan paid over 20 per cent 
interest, over 20 per cent interest. And you don’t have to look 
very far, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, to see the hardship that 
that created, not just in 1980 and ’81, but onwards. 
 
Because you will find, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, that in 
many cases people, in an attempt to keep going, consolidated 
their loans, did their best to keep rolling and keep a cash flow 
up. But they had to consolidate loans. They had to consolidate 
and they had to borrow money just to pay their interest costs 
off. And today they’re trying to pay those loans off with ever 
increasing interest rates again, ever increasing interest rates 
again. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen things in this 
province that are firsts for a number of years. And once again in 
Canada we pioneered the first mandatory mediation service 
which allows farmers and creditors to sit down with one another 
in a situation other than that of confrontation and litigation and 
foreclosure, that the Leader of the Opposition is so fond of 
doing, and work out their differences. And it may not work in 
every case. It may not. And I admit it will not work in every 
case. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, it works in the majority of 
cases. It allows people that forum in which they can sit down 
across the table from one another and with some help from the 
mediator work out a plan of repayment or debt adjustment, or 
what have you. And the members of the opposition said, too 
little, too late, not enough, it isn’t good enough. But it’s 
working elsewhere in Canada and  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

149 
 

elsewhere in North America. 
 
The federal government instituted a farm debt review board 
based on our prototype, and it seems to be working. It’s most 
interesting when you hear members of the opposition saying 
that they are the only ones in step; they are the only people who 
know how to do things; land bank’s the answer. Yes sir, there 
you go, land bank’s the answer. We’ll just buy all the farm land 
and then everybody can work for the government and we’ll be 
in great shape, won’t we, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, which 
was why they went out of office in 1982, because their plans in 
1982 were not acceptable to the people of the province. 
 
In 1982, members of the opposition went around the province 
saying that farmers were in deep trouble if the Conservative 
government was going to be . . . (inaudible) . . . Well who put in 
8 per cent interest for farmers when the interest rates were 12, 
14, 16, 18, 20 per cent? Conservatives. Right? Conservatives. 
Conservatives did that. Did you ever hear of an NDP 
government doing that? No. 
 
Who provided nine and three-quarter interest rates for home 
owners? Conservatives. Conservative government of the 
province of Saskatchewan. The NDP never did that. Who 
provided 6 per cent money for home owners to renovate their 
homes? A 6 per cent loan. Think about it. Who did it? Does 
anyone in the opposition benches know who put that program in 
place? Let me hear it from you; let me hear it from you. It was a 
Conservative government. And I see members of the opposition 
nodding in agreement. 
 
Who was it, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, who put in 6 per cent 
money for farmers for a production loan? It was a Conservative 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when times got tough, 
who was it who extended the repayment period from three years 
to ten years in response to farm groups asking for it? A 
Conservative government. A Conservative government. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, we keep our word. We keep 
our word to farmers. We keep our word to business people. 
We’re trying to build for the future. Yesterday my colleague 
from Morse constituency was speaking on building for the 
future, diversifying, looking for new markets, new ways to do 
things, enhancing that which we already have to make it better. 
The members of the opposition laughed, chuckled, snickered 
and said, get on with your speech; come on and get on with 
your speech, because they don’t want to hear those things. They 
want to talk about land banks. They want to talk about things in 
generalities, of how the government will do things better. 
 
Well it’s one thing to talk about operating a farm or operating a 
business, but you’ve got to know that you have to open the door 
on Monday morning. You got to know that the cows need to be 
fed — I mean these details, these details. Anyone can sit behind 
a desk, read a book, and say, hey, it’s easy to farm. Hey, it’s 
easy to run a business. You have to know the details. You have 
to know what makes it operate in the long run, and it isn’t just 
marketing wheat to the rest of the world. It just isn’t  

marketing wheat to the rest of the world. It is not that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have a number of people, a number of people in this 
province who are trying to do things on their own for 
themselves, without government assistance, and those people 
are involved in a number of the projects the member from 
Morse talked about. The members opposite said it’s not 
important, but it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Every person, every 
idea in the province of Saskatchewan is important. 
 
I just want to say that the Speech from the Throne that Her 
Honour delivered, speaks to every person in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and has something to offer for them. I will be 
supporting that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say what a 
pleasure it is, and what an honour it is, to join this throne speech 
debate as a representative for the constituents of Regina North. I 
want to start by congratulating Her Honour, the Lieutenant 
Governor, for her part in delivering the throne speech, but I also 
like to take this first opportunity I have had to welcome the new 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. That member has the trust 
of the people, and I’m sure he understands what a great honour 
that is. But I just remind him, his constituents trust him to speak 
out on their behalf at every occasion, and I sincerely hope he is 
up to that trust. 
 
Before the body of my speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
compliment the member for Morse for trying to defend the 
throne speech, and he was speaking out as he sees it. I want to 
mention that I disagree with parts of his speech, and not to take 
too much time . . . I just want to mention just one portion of his 
speech that I think was not fairly represented. 
 
The member was pleased with the program for deep wells and 
dug-outs. The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that that’s where it 
stopped. The member did not go on to say that the deadline for 
applications for deep wells and dug-outs ends only 12 working 
days from today. 
 
(1500) 
 
He didn’t explain that all of his constituency, the constituency 
of Morris, is again expected to have lower than normal run-off, 
and that according to the Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
planned map published in the March 14 Leader-Post showing 
very clearly the portion of Saskatchewan that is expecting less 
than normal run-off. So they’ve cut off a program that was 
helping some farmers with their much needed water for 
household and cattle use and they’ve cut it off — the 
application date — ending 12 short working days from now. 
 
The reason I mention it, Mr. Speaker, is simply that it is 
symptomatic of what is going on with this government’s "on 
again-off again" agricultural policy. Farmers need, and farmers 
want, and farmers deserve to have the predictability to know 
that when a program is introduced  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

150 
 

today it’s going to be in place for an extended period of time, 
certainly as long as it’s needed. Not like this program that 
clearly runs out very shortly, despite the fact that according to 
the Saskatchewan Water Corporation there is going to be, or 
there appears that there will be, a high likelihood of yet another 
drought in particularly south-western Saskatchewan. 
 
So farmers don’t need a promise of a billion dollars that later 
turns into $450 million some six months later. Family farmers 
need a full-time agricultural minister to protect them from farm 
closures, not one that protects the banks and goes about 
initiating farm foreclosures at the rate of three a day, as the 
present part-time Agriculture minister is doing. 
 
Family farmers need a government that will maintain and 
improve revenue sharing so that it can reduce the property 
taxes, improve roads and highways, and to help to provide a 
rural infrastructure — a rural infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, that 
will allow the sons and daughters of not only farmers but of 
people residing in small towns and villages and hamlets of 
Saskatchewan, a rural infrastructure that will allow those 
people, those young people in particular, to have meaningful 
work job opportunities close to home so they don’t have to flee 
the province of Saskatchewan, so they don’t have to join the 
more than 6,200 people that left Saskatchewan in the very short 
month of February alone. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, fails the test, fails it desperately. 
This government fails the test, and I want to turn to the Brian 
Mulroney government just briefly. It too failed the test. It was 
found to be corrupt and devoid and full of patronage, devoid of 
help, devoid of ideas. And the voters passed their judgement. 
Ten out of 14 Saskatchewan seats are held by New Democrats; 
only four are held by Tories. And that, Mr. Speaker, is going to 
happen again just as soon as the voters get an opportunity. 
 
They are going to elect the member for Riversdale as the new 
premier. The member for Riversdale will be premier of a New 
Democratic government bringing a new tomorrow to the people 
of Saskatchewan, and we can’t wait. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is going to be my honour later in 
the speech to move an amendment to the motion. I’m very 
pleased to have been asked to perform that task. I’m pleased as 
a back-bencher, if you like; I’m pleased as a member of Regina; 
and I’m pleased because this motion outlines and portrays the 
betrayal the Saskatchewan people in all walks of life are feeling 
about this government. 
 
I want to deal now with a betrayal that the present government 
has perpetrated on the co-ops, on the credit union system. In 
1985, Mr. Speaker, this government, the Conservative 
government, changed The Credit Union Act, and at that time 
they gave verbal assurances to the credit union system that the 
credit unions of Saskatchewan would be able to continue selling 
term insurance on loans and on deposits as they had been  

doing since the early 1950s. A verbal assurance was given to 
the credit unions in 1985, and yet today we have the registrar of 
companies telling credit unions in no uncertain terms to cease 
and desist. What a betrayal of the co-operative system. What a 
betrayal of credit unions around this province. 
 
What it shows, Mr. Speaker, is a government whose word is 
absolutely worthless — worthless. Credit union members, credit 
union board members, credit union staff all across this province 
understand what is being done. I have received letters from all 
corners of this province, including Regina, but also including 
places like Lashburn. I’ve received letters from the constituency 
of Arm River, from the constituency of Saltcoats, all dealing 
with this one betrayal — the betrayal of the credit union system. 
And yet the throne speech mentions nothing about making any 
changes, any amendments to The Credit Union Act, 
amendments that are obviously needed because the government 
opposite gave its word, and the word has proved to be 
absolutely worthless. And that’s a real shame for credit union 
members all across this province. 
 
The member for Kelvington-Wadena in his speech last night 
was very brashly attacking a former member of this legislature, 
the former member for Elphinstone, and said he didn’t do 
anything for his constituents. I want to just touch on some of the 
things that Allan Blakeney did. I want to remind the House that 
the former member for Elphinstone was the minister of Health 
when medicare was introduced — a time of the utmost 
importance to the people of this province. It was a time when 
free and accessible, universal health care was being introduced, 
not just to the constituents of Elphinstone, but to the 
constituents all around this great province of ours. 
 
At that time, where were the Conservatives and where were the 
Liberals? They were fighting it. They were standing out front of 
this legislature, and when they weren’t trying to kick the doors 
down, they were organizing the KOD committee, the Keep Our 
Doctors committee, the "fight medicare" committee. And the 
member for Elphinstone, the former member for Elphinstone, 
stood up to that. He was a man equal to the time, and more than 
equal to the time, I might add. The legacy that Allan Blakeney 
has left is a legacy of medicare for all Saskatchewan people, 
including the constituents in Cut Knife-Lloydminster and the 
constituents in Regina North. 
 
One of the other things that Allan Blakeney was part of was 
passing the most progressive health and safety labour 
legislation North America had seen at that time. The most 
forward-looking legislation — legislation that gave workers the 
right to know what dangers there were in their jobs; the right to 
know how to perform their given tasks safely. And the other 
part of what they were given in that legislation was the right to 
refuse, Mr. Speaker, the right to turn down unsafe employment, 
employment that was immediately injurious to their health or 
safety or the health and safety of a co-worker or anyone else. 
That right was given. At that time, where were the 
Conservatives? They were leading the charge saying oh, this is 
terrible legislation. We’re going to have workers walking off 
the job en masse. Workers won’t do a day’s work any more  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

151 
 

because now they’ve got the right to refuse. Well I defy anyone 
on the government side to point to one instance where someone 
has done that — has abused the right-to-refuse legislation. Not 
one instance in many, many years. 
 
The other part of that health and safety and forward-looking 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, was the legislation was enforced, 
something that was sadly lacking in this government’s term of 
office. Today we see health standards that are written, look 
good, sound good, but absolutely nothing being done to enforce 
it. Workers throughout this province are just left to their own 
devices. They know now that if they exercise any of the 
legislative rights that this Assembly has passed for them, it 
won’t get any support, it won’t get any backing, and they’re 
literally standing on their own. We have an anti-worker 
government, we have an anti-union government, we have an 
anti-people government, and that’s the legacy this government 
is leaving. 
 
We’re going to change it. The member for Elphinstone is going 
to be the Premier after the next election. We are going to form 
the government, and we are going to help show the people — 
not just the working men and women of Saskatchewan — we’re 
going to show the people of Saskatchewan how proud we can 
be of our province, how proud we can all be of our 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The member for Riversdale, not 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Trew: — My colleague points out that it’s the member for 
Riversdale, not Elphinstone, who will be the next premier. I 
make that correction, and so noted. Thank you, colleague. 
 
There’s one other area that the former member for Elphinstone 
who was being attacked last night, Allan Blakeney, was a part 
of that I just want to touch on. 
 
In 1971, when the NDP took office, the minimum wage in this 
province was a dollar an hour — 90 cents in rural 
Saskatchewan, dollar in the cities. But a two-tier minimum 
wage in 1971, the maximum was a dollar; the maximum 
minimum wage was a dollar for urban people. By 1982 that 
minimum wage had steadily progressed to the point that it was 
$4.25 an hour, the highest minimum wage in all of Canada. The 
working men and women of Regina Elphinstone certainly 
appreciated it, and they showed their gratitude by re-electing 
and re-electing Allan Blakeney. The members, the working men 
and women of Saskatchewan, appreciated that ever-growing 
minimum wage. 
 
And what have we seen, what have we seen since 1982? Here it 
is 1989, seven years later — seven years later, and those 
Scrooges over there have only given 25-cent increase, one 
two-bit increase to people on minimum wage in seven years, 
seven sorry years for the working men and women of this 
province. That’s why members on this side of the House are 
opposed to anything this government is claiming to do and 
claiming to be helping people. Actions speak far louder than 
words. Two bits an hour over seven years is just nothing short 
of an insult. 
 

Mr. Speaker, government member after government member 
stood up in debate, and have they defended their throne speech? 
No, they haven’t. Instead, what we have witnessed here in this 
legislature is government member after government member 
attacking the Leader of the Opposition, the member for 
Riversdale, using untruths, using innuendo and their own 
rumours. If there isn’t a good rumour going by 2 o’clock, they 
do their darnedest to start one — matters not about truth, 
matters not a bit. 
 
In their vain attempts to blight the Leader of the Opposition’s 
good name, they’re really making a mockery out of this whole 
Legislative Assembly, and they’re making fools out of 
themselves. And why are they doing it, Mr. Speaker? They 
know why. They’re doing it because the member for Riversdale 
is the only game in town. They know, one of them has even 
admitted in his speech, the member who will be premier, he 
said in his speech in the last couple of days, the member who 
will be leader. And it’s a desperate attempt by a desperate 
government, a desperate attempt, Mr. Speaker, to discredit our 
leader, the man who indeed will be premier, as they so aptly 
stated. 
 
The throne speech, Mr. Speaker, is disappointing for a number 
of reasons. It’s disappointing for its silence regarding urban 
affairs, regarding urban revenue sharing, particularly as it 
relates to capital funding. Capital funding for urban 
municipalities has been eliminated, gone completely under this 
government, under this Conservative government — $18 
million lost in one program alone, $18 million. It’s kind of . . . I 
don’t know whether it’s coincidental, the hand-out to one man, 
Peter Pocklington, was 20 million. I guess all they had to do 
was pony up an extra $2 million; take $18 million from people 
who reside in cities, take $18 million out of their pockets and 
give it to one man, Peter Pocklington. 
 
(1515) 
 
Small wonder, small wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the people are 
fed up. Small wonder they’re already asking me: when is the 
next election? I tell them when the next legislation has to be and 
they say, oh no, do we have to wait that long? And there’s 
genuine disappointment. 
 
I want to just bring one person . . . I want to name just one 
person who is joining the exodus of Saskatchewan people. A 
former civil servant, a gentleman who had toiled 25 years on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, toiled 25 years at 
progressively better and better or more difficult jobs — in other 
words, he wasn’t stagnant, he was progressing through his 
career — that man, John, this very day, this very day is on the 
road to Alberta. He has gone. He is joining the exodus. 
 
Now I hadn’t met John until just yesterday. I didn’t seek him 
out, he came to see me. He came to me with a couple of 
problems, a couple of concerns. But the sad part of John’s story, 
Mr. Speaker, is that John was 53 years old when this 
government gave him the boot — gave him the boot after 25 
years, gave him the boot. What John is forced to do . . . his 
government pension, as you can understand, at 53 years is 
reduced. He’s still a fairly young man, still fairly young, 
middle-aged man, needs employment. His pension cheque is 
something a little  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

152 
 

more than what he would receive if he were on social services, 
so he doesn’t qualify for any help there. But at 53 years old it is 
difficult to find an employer. 
 
In this day and age when employers can pick from thousands 
and thousands of unemployed people, when employers can 
name the price they are going to pay, and employees or 
prospective employees can either take that $5 an hour or they 
can leave it, that’s the prospect that John was faced with. As a 
result, John has left for Alberta this very day. He’s left for 
Alberta; some of his family remains here. 
 
But the good news — there is some good news in that. As he 
was leaving my office, John indicated to me his desire. He says, 
I am hoping that the election, when it is called in Saskatchewan, 
comes at a time when I’m not busy at my new-found job in 
Alberta, because if I can, I am going to come back and I am 
going to help you elect a New Democratic government. John is 
going to come back and canvass door to door telling people 
about what members opposite have done and reminding people 
we need the member for Riversdale to be the premier; we need 
a New Democratic government that will care for working men 
and women. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I was talking a little bit earlier about revenue 
sharing to urban municipalities, using just one program to 
illustrate, Mr. Speaker, how the province of Saskatchewan has 
reduced its revenue sharing to urban municipalities. 
 
But what does that really mean for my constituents? What does 
it mean for men and women living in Saskatchewan, living in 
urban Saskatchewan in particular, as it relates to the urban 
capital expenditure program? 
 
What it means is that the burden of taxation is shifting from the 
provincial government, which used to do some extra revenue 
sharing over what it does now — the burden of taxation is 
shifting onto property owners. And it’s not just exclusive to 
property owners, Mr. Speaker. Renters also pay those taxes 
through their landlord. It’s included in their rent. We would 
expect it to be no other way. That’s the only way a landlord can 
recoup his extra costs, is increasing the rent. So we have renters 
and property owners paying increased taxes because of this 
callous provincial government decision to cut off the cities, to 
reduce the revenue sharing. 
 
So our taxes are going up. Our property taxes are going up. 
 
The alternative to that is we sit, and we could sit and watch our 
streets decay. Many people in Regina, in particular, will tell you 
our streets are already decaying, and we certainly can’t afford to 
stop them from patching them up. So we really need an 
injection of cash from the province. I’m hoping that the 
Minister of Finance will get that message and will include a 
cash injection for the urban municipalities when he introduces 
his budget in the coming weeks. 
 
Education funding has fallen by whatever measure you  

choose to use. Education funding has fallen. As a percentage of 
provincial spending, education funding has fallen from 16 per 
cent in 1975; that is, 16 per cent of all provincial moneys spent 
were on education. By 1980, that had slipped to 15 per cent. 
From 16 per cent to 15 per cent of a growing pie. But by 1988 
we see the amount of money spent on education slipping much, 
much faster; it’s now about 10 per cent of the provincial 
expenditures. Ten per cent in 1988, down from 16 per cent in 
1975. 
 
We see the University of Regina, which is projecting this year 
to have an accumulated debt load of $7 million. The U of R, 
which, Mr. Speaker, your government promised in 1986, 
leading up to the election, promised a new students’ union 
building — just one small example — promised it in the heat of 
the election, a brand-new students’ union building we could all 
be proud of. 
 
Well what are they doing? Right after the election was safely 
out of the way — no! The Finance minister says, whoops, it’s 
not $389 million, our deficit; it’s now $1.2 billion for this year 
alone. Whoops, he says, we’ve got to cut, we got to hack, we 
got to slash. 
 
Isn’t it amazing what changes can take place in 28 short days. 
 
At the start of the election we were assured in our first term of 
office, we were assured by the Conservative government that in 
their first term of office they had undone all the dastardly deeds 
those socialists had done, had created — solved all those 
problems. Now we were on the smooth sailing, they said then. 
 
Well the smooth sailing is awfully choppy. The smooth sailing 
has cost the students at the University of Regina a students’ 
union building. The University of Regina has a $7 million debt. 
Funding for education is at a crisis level all across the province, 
and very little mention of that in the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech there was mention of a tax on 
environmentally unsafe products. I just want to share with you 
that my constituents, a good number of them, are concerned that 
styrofoam cups may indeed be causing problems for the ozone 
layer, may be depleting the ozone layer, and my constituents, 
those who have that concern, and I, would like to see alternate 
cups available, if you like, non-styrofoam cups. Perhaps they’d 
be paper. 
 
That is a concern, and I welcome what brief mention was made 
of the environment in the throne speech. But what’s of a much 
greater concern is the environment in the Uplands area of my 
constituency, the Uplands area that borders adjacent to the 
NewGrade upgrader. We were told, before the upgrader was 
being built, that sulphur dioxide, hydrogen sulphide emissions 
would be drastically reduced after the upgrader came on stream. 
That’s what we were told. 
 
I raised the matter as early as in my maiden speech. I also raised 
the matter in environmental estimates, which you will recall, 
Mr. Speaker, in the very first year environmental estimates took 
a considerable length of this Assembly’s time. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

153 
 

I raised the matter with the Minister of Environment and was 
told, yes, it’s a serious problem you’re raising; yes, people’s 
lives could be in jeopardy if there ever is an accident, but not to 
worry, we’re doing everything we humanly can to see that that 
upgrader is safe, to see there is no leak of hydrogen sulphide, 
but what’s happened? February 28 this year, February 28 we 
had a leak of the deadly gas, hydrogen sulphide, leaked from 
the NewGrade upgrader, not reported for some two hours, 
despite the fact this is potentially a deadly gas; only reported 
after inquiries were made — gee, what’s going on at the 
upgrader? 
 
Well, we had words in the throne speech, we heard words about 
tough, new environmental legislation, and I was encouraged by 
it. But the sad news is just days after this spill we see the 
Minister of the Environment backing away and saying, well, 
gee, maybe we don’t need a thorough investigation into this 
situation at the upgrader. Maybe, well maybe they will have 
learned and will not have another accidental spill. 
 
I wonder if the people in Bhopal, India, were told the same 
thing, Mr. Speaker. I wonder, and it scares me. It scares me; it 
terrifies me to think that we have all of that potential right next 
to a residential area, and the government does nothing about it; 
the government makes jokes about it. It is just too serious to 
ignore that issue. 
 
As a positive suggestion, we New Democrats have called for an 
investigation to determine what has happened at that upgrader 
in the past. We called for that investigation in a positive manner 
so they could find out what’s happened there in the past; take 
steps to see that any chance of an accident was removed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’re against the upgrader. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Cut Knife tells me that I’m 
against the upgrader. I’m on record four or five times in this 
legislature speaking in favour of the upgrader. I’m not saying 
I’m against the upgrader; I’m saying I’m against killing people. 
That’s what I’m against. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need this investigation. We need it to assure 
the people of Uplands and the people of Regina, because we 
never know what direction the wind is going to come from. We 
need to know that a repeat of the hydrogen sulphide accident of 
February 28, this year, will not happen. We also need to know 
that a worse accident cannot happen. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, the people of my constituency, 
certainly are telling me, Mr. Speaker: we need a government 
that’s committed to the environment, a government that’s 
willing to stand up for the people, not a weak-kneed 
environmental minister that will not stand up to this NewGrade 
upgrader. We need, we need some action on this. 
 
I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company. There are some areas of concern 
there. As you may or may not know, Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company is the bus  

company owned by the people of Saskatchewan. But I want to 
tell you some of the things that have happened to this bus 
company under the Conservative administration. 
 
In 1982 there were 81 bus coaches whose average age was 4.8 
years — 81 buses, less than five years old on average. In 1987 
they were not at 81 buses but down to 62. The sell-off was 
taking place. Down to 62 buses and the average age of the fleet 
was 10.1 years — that in 1987. 
 
There’s been no trade since then. Today, Mr. Speaker, the 
average age of buses, of the Saskatchewan transportation buses, 
is eleven and a half years old — eleven and a half years old. 
Buses in the industry . . . 
 
(1530) 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s not old for a bus. 
 
Mr. Trew: — Member of the government says, that’s not old 
for a bus. The industry average is just over seven years. But I 
guess if you say eleven and a half years age on average isn’t 
old, that that maybe is why you’ve allowed that bus company to 
go downhill to the point that it is today. 
 
The oldest buses, Mr. Speaker, are of course the most expensive 
to repair. The oldest buses, we have been told in Crown 
Corporations Committee, cost 30 cents a mile to maintain and 
to run. New buses, we’re told, are running about 12.4 cents. 
That information comes from the members opposite. 
 
The members are saying you have to have money to buy a bus, 
and of course you do. But when you ignore the rejuvenation of 
a fleet, when you ignore the rejuvenation of your farm 
equipment, that’s the first step to you not continuing in 
business. If you ignore your farm equipment and don’t replace 
it on a fairly regular basis, you’re going out the back end. The 
same thing happens with the bus company. 
 
This bus company that the government members have driven 
into the ground, starting in 1982 with a $936,000 accumulated 
surplus, a virtually brand-new fleet of 82 buses — now we see a 
corporation that has total debt of $14 million, over $14 million 
debt; a fleet that has shrunk to 62 buses; a fleet that is very aged 
by any standards; a fleet that I defy any government member to 
find an older fleet of buses owned by any bus company in North 
America. I think you can’t do it. 
 
So why has STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) lost 
so much money under the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker? Is it the 
unions? Is it the union’s staff and the drivers? Is it because 
they’re being paid too much? My colleague from Regina North 
West says no. 
 
And I wanted to just look briefly at it. The number of coach 
operators is down, lower than it was in 1982; the maintenance 
staff, there’s fewer maintenance staff employed today than there 
was in 1982; the terminal staff is down from 1982; but lo and 
behold, administration and management is up. Management, 
including the hacks brought in by this government from Ontario 
to turn our bus company around is what we were told at the 
time,  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

154 
 

well they’ve sure turned it around from nearly a $1 million 
accumulated surplus to a $14.25 million debt. 
 
And I want to just make mention of the collective agreement, 
Mr. Speaker, because there has not been a collective agreement 
at Saskatchewan Transportation Company since June of 1986 
— June 1986. Very soon it’s going to be three years. The 
workers at Sask Transportation Company will have been 
without a union contract three whole years. Small wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, that those employees at STC applied for and got 
removed from provincial labour legislation and got put into 
federal labour legislation at their request. 
 
I want to turn briefly to SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel has 
embarked on a privatization scheme that is just hemorrhaging 
money from SaskTel. Computer services of SaskTel and 
Saskatchewan computers, SaskCOMP, were put together to 
form WESTBRIDGE. SaskTel loses the new company under 
the new scheme and the private WESTBRIDGE gains. SaskTel 
now has to pay for all those computer services. And who does it 
pay? WESTBRIDGE. And WESTBRIDGE builds into it its 
profit motive. 
 
SaskTel now pays for those services. SaskTel’s income base 
shrinks. Who pays? The consumers who rent their monthly 
phones are going to be paying through increased charges. 
SaskTel also sold its cable TV network. Again, again, Mr. 
Speaker, the revenue base for SaskTel shrinks. Who pays? The 
monthly subscribers of SaskTel. 
 
Then we see the directory services privatized. That’s the latest 
move; directory services that have made SaskTel literally 
millions of dollars — millions of dollars. And where will that 
profit go under the new privatized directory services? Only 10 
per cent of that profit is now going to go to SaskTel, because 
that’s the equity that SaskTel maintains in that new directory 
services — 10 per cent. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel’s income base shrinks. Again it 
shrinks. Again the consumers are going to be hit with bigger 
monthly telephone bills — bigger monthly bills. Just as sure as 
I’m standing here addressing this Assembly, our telephone bills 
are going to go up. Individual customers are going to pay for 
the privatization, the piratization that’s going on from 
government members opposite. 
 
Probably later this year, later this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
probably going to see the opening announcements about 
deregulation of long distance telephone service. It’s going to be 
deregulated by the Mulroney government, the friends of the 
Conservative government opposite me here. The Mulroney 
government is going to open up the deregulation of long 
distance telephones, and what’s going to happen? Who’s going 
to speak up? Who’s going to stand up against that? Do you 
think the minister responsible for telephones has any credibility 
opposing privatization, opposing deregulation? 
 
But mark my words, the member responsible for SaskTel is 
going to get on his high horse, after it’s too late to do anything 
about it, and he’s going to say, oh gee, we’re opposed to 
privatization, we’re opposed to deregulation. After the horse is 
at the far end of the pasture, long gone  

from the barn, he’s going to shut the barn door. No credibility 
there at all. And who’s going to pay? SaskTel subscribers are 
going to be left footing the bill. 
 
Members opposite were suggesting that I refer to agriculture for 
a little while, and indeed it is my intention, Mr. Speaker, to do 
so, to address that very important issue in Saskatchewan. We 
need — I’ve mentioned it earlier in this speech — we need not 
just a part-time Minister of Agriculture, we need a full-time 
Minister of Agriculture. And we need a Minister of Agriculture 
that will stand up to Brian Mulroney and make him deliver on 
his pre-election promise — the election of just last fall, the 
election promise of hundreds of millions of dollars for farmers 
in Saskatchewan that is now being chipped away at, being 
reduced, reduced, reduced; payments that farmers were told 
they were going to get last fall and they’re still waiting. They’re 
not even being told the cheques are in the mail yet. Why not? 
Because the cheques aren’t in the mail. 
 
The farmers of Saskatchewan want some help. They want it, 
and they want it when they need it. There are three farmers a 
day leaving the farms, leaving the farms because that Minister 
of Agriculture, the Premier, is not standing up to the banks, not 
standing up to the federal government, is helping out the banks, 
and is initiating farm foreclosures, foreclosures on 
Saskatchewan family farms. He’s initiating it. That government 
is the one totally devoid of agricultural policies, and that’s the 
reality. 
 
Farmers now see what’s going on. They now know. You ask 
any farmer who’s been farming for 15 years: when was it that 
you made money? When was it? Was it under the Tories or was 
it under the NDP? Ask any farmer. They’ll tell you. Ask any 
business man. Ask business men and business women across 
this province: when was it you were making money? Is it under 
the Tories or was it when the NDP was in power? Any small 
business. I see there’s now some silence because the 
government members recognize it. 
 
Bankruptcies this past year escalated to the highest rate. 
Bankruptcies in Saskatchewan were at the highest rate they had 
been since 1971, the last of the Thatcher, Liberal Thatcher days 
— highest rate of bankruptcy. What an Achilles heel — 1,236 
bankruptcies in Saskatchewan last year. 
 
You know, when I stood up and addressed the New Democratic 
Party in, what was it, February 20, 1985 — that was the night I 
was nominated — I used the provincial bankruptcy figures in 
my address to the members of Regina North. I explained how 
they had just mushroomed all out of proportion. But this latest 
figure just makes those 1985 figures look like nothing — three 
a day. 
 
So what have we got, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got a government 
that is allowing farmers to leave the farm — three a day — 
foreclosing on farmers. We have a government that cuts off 
programs that are going to help farmers. It’s on again, off again. 
Promise a billion, deliver something eight months later, 
something much less than a billion. On again, off again. Not 
one farmer in this province can take a government program or 
the  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

155 
 

government agricultural policy to the lending institution and 
say, here’s what’s going to happen this year; here’s the bottom 
line. They can’t do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is really interesting to see the lack of attention 
that farmers are getting by this government — and I see the 
government members are a little bit touchy about it; the lack of 
attention that agriculture gets; the part-time Minister of 
Agriculture, who has been taking a beating in question period, 
who has been taking a beating in this legislative session, and 
what do we have on the other hand? 
 
On the other hand we have Peter Pocklington getting a gift of 
$20 million. We have Weyerhaeuser of Tacoma, Washington, 
getting a quarter of a billion dollars. We see highways 
equipment valued at over $40 million given away for $6 
million. We see more than 500 highway employees gone. We 
see a highway system deteriorating. We see a billion dollar 
boondoggle in the Premier’s riding — a billion dollar shafferty 
program — a billion dollars spent in the Premier’s riding for a 
program that may be illegal, but certainly is not universally 
accepted, not universally accepted. And that billion dollars 
cannot be spent on hospitals; it cannot be spent on education; it 
cannot be spent on the children’s dental plan; it can’t be spent 
on highways; it can’t be spent on revenue sharing to urban and 
rural municipalities. So we see, we see in this legislature, we 
see all kinds of give-aways, all kinds of patronage, all kinds of 
help for friends of the Tories, and we see farmers in trouble. 
 
(1545) 
 
But what does it do, Mr. Speaker, for Irene, my constituent 
Irene — Irene who I brought up to the Minister of Health. I 
brought up the problems Irene was having, and the Minister of 
Health passed it on to the minister responsible for Social 
Services. But the facts of the matter were Irene was 59 years of 
age; Irene had a total monthly income of some $490 a month. 
That was a Canada disability income. She had prescription drug 
bills that amounted to over $350 a month, and not one lick of 
help, not one bit of encouragement came from members 
opposite. 
 
The Minister of Health said, sorry, not my department. And the 
Minister of Social Services responded that, well gee, sorry, 
there’s nothing we can do. Irene makes $8 a month too much, 
so nothing we can do — for $8 a month. 
 
So what’s this government done for Irene? It’s forced Irene to 
make a choice every day between her much needed medication 
and between food. That’s the choice that’s going on every day. 
Government members opposite may choose to blame Irene for 
the fact that she has diabetes, or heart condition, or high blood 
pressure, or arthritis. I fail to understand how any of those 
things can be directly Irene’s responsibility. Certainly there are 
things that Irene could do, and I’m sure does, to look after her 
health. 
 
But this government puts the blame on the sick and the 
innocent; that’s what this government does. 
 
And what does this government do for Bob, another constituent 
of mine — Bob, who phoned me up less than a week ago? Bob 
was telling me that when Allan Blakeney  

was the premier, he had a job in the construction field and he 
was making over $16 an hour. He was raising his family and 
providing them the educational opportunities they needed. 
 
His family had moved here from Ontario in the mid-1970s and 
he liked Saskatchewan. He liked Saskatchewan because people 
were treated equally here. Everyone had access to hospital care; 
everyone had access to educational services. There was no such 
thing as second-class citizens, as far as he knew, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But what’s happened now? Bob’s health has deteriorated. The 
jobs dried up, and about that time his health started to 
deteriorate, so Bob no longer has employment. Bob now is 
living on a very, very meagre pension, and Bob no longer works 
in the construction industry. So we’ve got the situation where 
Manalta coal of Calgary got the mine, and Bob got the shaft. 
 
Bob was asking me . . . he said: will things get better? Will 
things get better in Saskatchewan, or should I just pack up and 
leave right now? Should I just give up on it? 
 
Well I talked to Bob at some length. I talked to Bob about what 
was going on in Saskatchewan. We talked about when Tommy 
Douglas formed the government in 1944, and how, at that time, 
the province was essentially broke. Civil servants didn’t know 
from one pay cheque to the next whether they dared take their 
cheque to the bank to get it cashed. They’d go to the bank 
manager and the bank manager would say yes, or no; I can cash 
it, or I can’t. If he said no, they’d take the cheque home and 
come back in a couple of days and hope that the answer was 
different. 
 
Three years later the CCF introduced hospitalization — not full 
bore medicare as we know it today, but the hospital was paid 
for. The individuals were still responsible for paying for the 
doctor, but at least the hospital charges were all covered at that 
time. And it wasn’t . . . it was 16, 17 years after that when 
medicare, as we understand it today, was introduced by the 
CCF in Saskatchewan, funded 100 per cent by the province of 
Saskatchewan, by the people, the businesses, all of the taxes of 
Saskatchewan, funded medicare 100 per cent. It was some time 
after that, the federal government got involved and started 
sharing the cost of medicare, and indeed they introduced 
medicare right across Canada. 
 
I also talked then, Mr. Speaker, to Bob further about the 
Blakeney years, and those he knew first hand, so I didn’t have 
to spend a great deal of time talking to him about the health and 
safety legislation that he had enjoyed working under. I didn’t 
have to tell him about the full employment there was under the 
Blakeney New Democrats. I didn’t have to tell Bob any of those 
things. Bob knew it. Bob lived through it. Bob appreciated what 
was going on. That’s why he moved, he and his family, to 
Saskatchewan from Ontario. 
 
And I assured Bob that once we get the next election called 
we’re going to have a new premier; we’re going to have a new 
government; we’re going to see some fairness and some dignity 
return to the people of Saskatchewan; we’re going to see the 
member for Riversdale as the  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

156 
 

premier, and we’re going to have a New Democratic 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Trew: — I was talking a little bit about labour legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, and that leads me into . . . I was listening to a 
radio talk show the other day. The Minister of Labour was one 
of two guests, and he was talking about his new legislation. The 
other guest was Barb Byers. 
 
And I notice, from the reaction of the government members 
opposite, they are just as touchy as the Minister of Labour was 
in that radio interview and in that call-in show. Caller after 
caller after caller was abused by the Minister of Labour and told 
they were nothing but NDP hacks. The working men and 
women of this province understand labour legislation well 
enough to know who it is they trust. They know they don’t trust 
the member for Melville. They know, from past history, just 
what it is he will do when it comes to working men and women. 
 
You know, many of us, Mr. Speaker, remember James Dean as 
being a young actor who was really best known for his acting as 
a somewhat disturbed young man in the show Rebel Without a 
Cause. The Minister of Labour has shown us that he’s a cross 
between the actor James Dean and the Premier. He’s a "rebel 
without a clue." Bad employers under this legislation get more 
approval to attack the workers, the working men and women 
and their rights in this province. Under this proposed 
legislation, the workers are being attacked and they know it. 
They’re being abandoned and attacked, Mr. Speaker, by this 
labour legislation. They know it; they don’t like it. They’re 
going to fight this legislation all the way, and I’m glad for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many more concerns that I would like to 
address in this throne speech debate, but I will be taking my 
place shortly, after I move an amendment. That is to allow other 
MLAs to take their place and join in this debate. But I’m going 
to be taking my place after moving the amendment knowing, in 
the firm knowledge, that there is a new tomorrow coming. 
There is a new government-in-waiting. There is a new premier 
elect — that man, the member for Riversdale. 
 
And we are very much looking forward to the next election on 
this side of the House. We’re not looking forward to the next 
election nearly as much as the people across this province are. 
They want an election, we welcome it any time you screw up 
the courage to call it. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

 That the following words be added to the motion: 
 

This will be seconded by my colleague, the member from 
Moose Jaw South. 
 

but regrets that the provincial government has failed to 
provide business and job opportunities and security for 
Saskatchewan people, has failed to protect and improve 
critical public services like health care and education, has 
mismanaged the province’s finances, has betrayed 
Saskatchewan’s  

farm families, has failed and misplaced its priorities by 
putting privatization for the few ahead of the public 
interest for all, resulting in the out-migration of thousands 
of Saskatchewan families. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would ask the member for Regina 
North to find another seconder. The member from Moose Jaw 
South has already spoken. 
 
Mr. Trew: — The member for Prince Albert. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate continues on the main motion and the amendment 
concurrently. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d just like 
to mention right off the bat that I will not be supporting the said 
amendment, but that I do support the main motion. 
 
I’d like to start off, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by saying how much I 
enjoyed the presentation made by Her Honour a week ago 
today. I know that all members would join with me in knowing 
that she did a magnificent job for her first throne speech, and 
that I’m sure that Her Honour, as she has indicated in her 
previous public and private life, will only get better and better 
as she grows with the job. Her Honour has exhibited a driving 
ability to excel at whatever she has undertaken in her life. And I 
just know that it was a very wise decision to have her as the 
Queen’s representative in our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I’d also like this opportunity, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to officially welcome our new member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And I know that the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg had some butterflies and a little bit of 
apprehension as he got up to make his first speech in this 
House, because I went through those same feelings some four 
years ago this March, or rather April — I guess it would be 
April 12, 1985, because I too came in in a mid-term by-election. 
I too was in a race which was hard fought, another rural riding 
which the members of the NDP Party had great hopes for. 
 
And it’s kind of ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I heard 
some of the same rhetoric, the same scare tactics used on the 
constituents of Thunder Creek as the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg had used in his constituency. 
 
And I really have to commend him because, unlike myself — 
and I thought I had done a passable job in my first speech — 
the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg grabbed the attention 
of the members opposite. And it was nice to see that the 
member from Riversdale actually had to come in and give our 
new lad a bit of a tongue lashing. And so I just congratulate 
him. If he keeps up that type of progress, he’s really going to 
rile the members opposite many times over in the next couple of 
years. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

157 
 

(1600) 
 
And I’d also like to welcome him to what I consider to be sort 
of a unique club, and that’s the back bench on the government 
side. Because this back bench on this side, irregardless of what 
you might hear from across the way, are achievers. They’re 
achievers for their ridings, and they’re particularly achievers for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some people like to degradate the people over here by calling 
us the Hallelujah Chorus. Well I say, member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that it’s one of the best choruses in 
Canada, because we sing the message of development and 
diversification for our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — And no matter what the members opposite 
say, we’ll continue to sing that song as a group of achievers, of 
individuals who are respected in their ridings, and who are 
delivering the message that the people that elected them wanted 
them to bring to this House. 
 
And in contrast I look at the hypocrisy that comes from the 
members opposite. Over the years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve 
had a passing interest in politics in this province, you might say. 
It’s a bit of a family tradition, and it’s something that we enjoy 
talking about around the kitchen table. And I remember well, 
visiting this House on many occasions through the late 1960s 
and 1970s and, indeed, up to the time that I was elected to this 
legislature. 
 
I remember sitting up there, as the gentleman is today, and 
watching the debate in this House. I remember the potash 
debate after the 1975 election, the decision to get into uranium 
mining, many of the controversial subjects which arose when 
the members opposite were government. 
 
And I remember well who led the chorus on this side of the 
House at that time. And I must say that I miss the member from 
Elphinstone, or the former member from Elphinstone, the 
former premier, Mr. Blakeney. Because at least, when that 
member was in this legislature as part of that government, there 
were original thoughts arising from the government benches. 
Those thoughts may be have been misguided in the opinions of 
some in this province, but they were original thoughts. 
 
But beside that member at that time sat an individual who is 
now once again a member of this House, a member from 
Riversdale, who is probably best remembered on the public 
stage of Canada for the little dog and pony show — called the 
Uke and toque show, or something like that; I don’t know. It 
had something to do with our constitution. And he preened and 
strutted on that public stage and was the cheer-leader for the 
then premier. 
 
And I guess the thing that it reminded me most, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I sat in the gallery and watched these events was of 
a popular comedy act that was around some time, I think, before 
I was born. But it was Mr. Edgar Bergen — I’ve seen the reruns 
— and Charlie McCarthy. And I don’t think I need to tell you 
who was Edgar and who was Charlie in the arrangement that 
was in the  

House here in the 1970s. 
 
It’s the kind of hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that even 
surfaces in the NDP newspaper, the Commonwealth. And I 
think that this article was written by the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, I believe, in the Commonwealth, 
January, 1989 edition. And I think this sums up the problems 
that the members opposite have and definitely their leader has, 
and I quote. It says: 
 

In spite of our relative electoral success in the October 
1986 provincial election, Saskatchewan New Democrats 
are still searching for a bullet-proof vest every time they 
advance public policy or comment. 
 

And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what you get from a 
cheer-leader and someone who never had an original thought. 
 
Surprisingly enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s in a bit of a 
contrast to some revelations which have come to light about the 
member for Regina North East lately. 
 
I’d like to read a quotation from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of 
March 2, 1989. And these things have been dealt with before in 
the last few days, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think it’s important 
that we do put it in context. When you just think about who 
possibly could be saying these words and what group you might 
imagine that would be bringing forth these thoughts — and I 
quote. It says: 
 

Fortunately, not being hidebound by philosophy, the men 
at the table hit on what was then a rather novel scheme. 
(And in quotation marks it says) Let’s allow individuals 
and private corporations to buy up to 50 per cent of the 
(province’s) Crown (corporations.) They even thought up 
a nifty name for the new holding company, Saskatchewan 
Holdings and Re-Investment Inc. Neatly shortened to 
SHAR . . . 
 

And it indicated that people were going to share in the 
ownership of the Crowns. 
 
Now I imagine all kinds of people with those thoughts. People 
sitting around the table, I suppose, at the Assiniboia Club or, 
Heaven forbid, people in a Tory meeting; people that have an 
interest in business in this province; people that would like to 
see their province grow and prosper. Those are the kind of 
people I imagine that might think these things. 
 
And it goes on later though in the article to identify the people 
that were thinking these thoughts. And I quote again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. These were: 
 

. . .the minutes of the Saskatchewan Crown Investment 
Corporation directors meeting for January 14, 1982." 
 

The cabinet ministers stamping their seal of approval on 
privatization were the elite of the then premier Allan 
Blakeney’s NDP government. The current member for Regina 
North East, who was Finance minister; one Urban  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

158 
 

Affairs minister, Walter Smishek; one Environment minister, 
Ted Bowerman, who I think the Deputy Speaker is fairly 
familiar with; one minister of co-operation and co-operatives, 
Don Cody; and ex-Highway’s minister Eiling Kramer. And this 
group of gentlemen actually gave their nod of approval to this 
idea that I brought forward a few minutes ago. 
 
And I guess I underestimated the member from Regina North 
East. I didn’t know that he had that kind of foresight, and I’m 
glad that he does. I await the day that he will stand on his hind 
legs in this legislature and come clean with his thoughts and 
support a notion which obviously had a great deal of thought 
and attention and bookwork and everything else done to it, in 
order to put his stamp of approval on such an idea. 
 
And I guess if he doesn’t do that, then as we go down further in 
the particular article we would have to apply this particular 
sentence. It says: 
 

In office, NDPers secretly plan to launch a massive 
privatization program; out of office, they savage their own 
ideas. 
 

So I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s up to the member for 
Regina North East to tell us whether he believed in what he was 
doing or if he is willing to savage his own ideas. Once again I 
say, how much hypocrisy can we stand? 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the throne speech which was 
presented by Her Honour, I think did have some vision. It did 
have a blueprint for the 1990s. Irregardless of what the 
members opposite say, the throne speech, which I am sure all of 
you have read, and it goes on to a number of pages here in 
Hansard, goes through a number of topics and titles — did 
clearly identify sectors of the Saskatchewan economy, the 
Saskatchewan fabric, the Saskatchewan way of life, and gave a 
blueprint for ideas and thoughts which we can carry on as a 
government and as a legislature. 
 
And they were clearly identified as health and education and 
agriculture, environment, the quality of life in our province. 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that anyone who took the 
time to read that document as presented by Her Honour, knows 
that there is substance and value, and that this government is 
prepared to act on that substance and value. 
 
I’d like to touch on a number of the topics briefly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I walk through the throne speech, and make a few 
comments on some of the things that arise thereof. 
 
I’d like to touch on the topic of health because health is 
something that seems to arise in this legislature on a fairly 
regular occasion. Health is debated quite heatedly in our 
province, and it’s always been a large political issue, if you 
will. It’s something that the members opposite continue to fall 
back on. And once again, as we get into the topic of health, I 
would just like to quote once more from The Commonwealth, 
because I think it does indicate where the members opposite 
stand here. And once again, this is the article by the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland, and he says about his own party,  

he says: 
 

Give us health care as an issue, and because of our history 
we feel relatively safe. Give us almost any other issue, and 
we’d rather retreat to health care. 
 

So I guess that’s why in the speech presented by Her Honour, 
that health naturally would be number one because it’s been a 
priority of this government over the last seven years. We have 
done many of the things that needed to be done in the field, and 
I don’t need to go back over the things that other members have 
mentioned so eloquently here. 
 
The issue of extra billing came up today in this debate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I think it’s well recognized who kept extra 
billing on and who took it off. And my seat mate talked about 
nursing homes, and moratoriums of nursing homes, and who 
has built them, who has built the hospitals in rural 
Saskatchewan. So I think those things have already been 
covered in this debate, and I won’t belabour the point. 
 
But the throne speech does talk about the Saskatchewan health 
care card. And I think I join with other members on my side in 
taking a tremendous amount of pleasure in seeing this new 
technology, this new way of delivering service to the people of 
Saskatchewan brought forward. And it was nice to see it 
mentioned in the throne speech as something that will be 
continued upon, improved upon, as a method of delivery of 
service. 
 
And once again I also take a great deal of pleasure in it because 
the members of the Hallelujah Chorus had a lot to do with the 
Saskatchewan plastic health card. Our chairman of our health 
committee is the member from Rosthern. And I know the long 
hours that that member spent in developing ideas from within 
this caucus, both cabinet and back bench, so that we in 
Saskatchewan would be a leader in world technology, so that 
we in Saskatchewan indeed, I feel, will be copied by many 
other jurisdictions in North America and around the world. 
 
And I just say congratulations to the member from Rosthern, a 
member of that chorus who was shouted down when he made 
his speech the other day, by members of the opposition — tried 
to shout him down as he talked about these important issues. 
 
I’d also like to comment in the area of health, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, about the undertaking and the initiative to enhance the 
breast cancer identification problem in our province. And that is 
in conjunction with the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation, who 
I personally, and my family, owe a great deal of gratitude to for 
the experiences of 1987 which all of you know about, and I 
guess because my feelings are so strong in this issue in that 
breast cancer is today one of the, if not greatest killers of 
females in our province. 
 
(1615) 
 
I think it’s appropriate that it should be mentioned in the throne 
speech, that it should be talked about in the context of health in 
our province, and that no one, no one  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

159 
 

in this province could possibly vote against the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Foundation and an initiative which we hope will save 
lives in the early identification of breast cancer in our female 
population. And I think that any member in this House that 
would seriously consider voting against that has got misplaced 
priorities. 
 
I’d also, in the area of health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like to talk 
about an item in there that spoke about integrated health 
facilities. And some members may not understand what is 
talked about, but I believe that this may be the wave of the 
future, and in particularly in my city of Moose Jaw which, 
although I don’t represent it, I consider to be my home town. 
Because an old-age care facility, a private hospital, and a union 
hospital have worked together over the last two years to come 
up with a plan to enhance the care giving and the health 
facilities for Moose Jaw and region. 
 
And I don’t know if it’s going to come to pass, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I think when three separate entities like that can 
get together, bury their differences that they’ve had in the past, 
and talk about integration, of providing service, of using 
common services to cut costs, and yet come up with what I feel 
to be one of the finest facilities in our province, I think that 
deserves recognition. And it may not work that way in every 
community. There may be other needs, may be other wants. 
 
But I think you’ll see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people in 
our province are willing to work together, to work at integration 
to improve the lot of all. And I look forward to working with 
these people in Moose Jaw. It involves rural R.M.s, city 
council, people all through the health system as they work on 
this particular plan. And I look forward over the next couple of 
years of working with them. And I’m just glad that recognition 
was given in the throne speech to this type of initiative, because 
I think it’ll pay large dividends in the future in our province. 
 
I’d now like to go on to the area of education, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because once again it’s something that derives a lot of 
debate in this particular legislature. It’s something that we all 
feel is important in our society. We pride ourselves in the fact 
that we have so many bright, intelligent people from this 
province who are achieving many things inside our province 
and around our country and indeed around the world. Our 
children are some of the brightest and best educated people in 
the world, and I don’t think anybody can argue with that. 
 
And what particularly caught me in the throne speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as we talk about advancing the areas of 
education, was the Saskatchewan Communications Advanced 
Network or SCAN. And I like this, because in a throne speech 
we attempt as government to be looking into the future. We 
want to be new, you want to be innovative, and you want to be 
forward looking. You want to provide the public with ideas 
which they can grab hold of and grasp in their hand, and then 
implement down the road. 
 
And I find it curious, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that all through this 
throne speech debate the members opposite have knocked this 
government and knocked this throne speech for being devoid of 
new, innovative, forward-looking  

ideas. And obviously, they don’t know what an idea is, as the 
member from Swift Current says, or they don’t know what 
innovation is, and they definitely aren’t forward looking. 
 
And that’s sad, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the members opposite 
would continue to look in the past — back seven, eight, nine 
years ago — when here, staring them in the face in the field of 
education, is a forward, innovative-looking idea. 
 
And it is that way because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you realize 
in your riding, as many members on this side of the House do, 
is that we have large sprawling rural areas in our province, areas 
like Thunder Creek, which I represent. And sometimes the 
opportunity for people to further their education isn’t there, to 
perhaps people that have gone through their high school years, 
they didn’t have the opportunity at the time for post-secondary 
education, or they took some post-secondary education either in 
a university or a technical school or one of the other institutions 
around our province, and they would like to further that 
education. But because of work commitments, because of 
family commitments, indeed, perhaps financial commitments, 
they don’t feel at this time that they’re prepared to drop what 
they’re doing and seek that education elsewhere. 
 
And if we can provide some of those opportunities through this 
particular initiative, then we will provide equity to the 
population of this province. And I can only think, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, particularly of the words of the member from 
Cumberland last night as he spoke about northern 
Saskatchewan. He spoke about people up there wishing to 
further their opportunities. He spoke about the member from 
Maple Creek being in northern Saskatchewan and advancing 
new ideas, and advancing the ability of Northerners to work 
within their own area and to work for the new mines and the 
construction which is going on up there. 
 
And if we can help those people enter that work-force through 
this new technology, then I believe that we as the government 
have been new, innovative, and forward looking. And I can’t 
understand how any member opposite could vote against such 
an initiative. 
 
So I’m going to look with great interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
upon the member from Cumberland as he stands in his place 
and votes on the main motion. It will be very interesting what 
he thinks about this initiative. 
 
And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to move on to an area 
which is near and dear to me. It’s an area that is so important to 
our province. And that’s the area of agriculture in our economy. 
 
It says in the address by Her Honour that the Department of 
Agriculture will now become the Department of Agriculture 
and food. I think that’s an important identification as this 
province moves into the 1990s, because when we talk about 
agriculture and food, I believe there are some windows of 
opportunity which have been opened up to the province of 
Saskatchewan with recent world events. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

160 
 

And I think about the dramatic shift in the world economy, the 
dramatic shift of dollars to the Pacific Rim. And I am told that 
40 per cent of the world’s capital now resides in that area of the 
world — that part of the Pacific Ocean which is opposite 
Canada and the United States. 
 
And I think of those dollars, of that economic wealth and 
power. I think of the large populations which reside there — 
populations that are obviously aggressive, industrious; people 
who are moving up the economic scale, moving up the ladder, 
bettering themselves. And I think, what better opportunity for a 
province which is steeped in agricultural history, which has the 
best cost producers in the world, bar none. And I think, what an 
opportunity, when you talk about agriculture and food, with a 
market like that. 
 
We’ve sold these people our raw products, our potash, our 
uranium. And I believe in the type of societies that are evolving 
there, the type of dollars that will be available, that the area of 
food will also become very important, and we should take 
advantage of those opportunities. 
 
And I think also of the recently signed Canada-U.S. free trade 
arrangement. And you and I both know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
even though it may be a bit of a mystery to the members 
opposite, that Canada and the United States, particularly 
western Canadians, do a tremendous amount of trade in the area 
of food. And be that beef on the hoof or somebody’s steak on 
the barbecue in California, it’s been big business for western 
Canada and big business for Saskatchewan. 
 
And it would be absolutely ludicrous for us, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, not to look at that agreement in depth and not to do 
everything that we possibly could as a province in the area of 
trade to take advantage of the opportunities that are there before 
us. And these are opportunities in processing and packaging; 
opportunities for producers in this province to get into the value 
added sector; and indeed, opportunities for people in our towns 
and villages and cities to participate in the agricultural strength 
of our province, and the agricultural strength of the things that 
we produce, and the things that we will produce down the road 
to meet those markets. 
 
And it means that there are opportunities for our trading 
partners in other parts of the world — Pacific Rim, Europe, and 
elsewhere — to look at Saskatchewan and look at Canada as a 
place to come and build and develop things related particularly 
to the food area, because under that agreement, with a certain 
percentage of Canadian content, if you will, those products can 
then move freely across the 49th parallel into that huge 
American consumer market. 
 
And this is a market, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that runs into the 
absolute hundreds of billions of dollars — just the grocery 
market, just the consumer down there who goes to the 
supermarket once a week and fills his grocery cart. And it’s an 
ideal opportunity for us to take advantage of whatever is offered 
under that agreement. 
 
And we as legislators, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would not be 
fulfilling our mandate to the voters of this province if we did 
not pursue that agreement with all the vigour and  

strength that we possibly can muster as a government, because 
to do otherwise, as the members opposite would suggest, could 
stagnate this province and the western part of our country for 
decades to come. 
 
I want to give you an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of an area 
that is near and dear to me which I think would have significant 
economic returns for our province. It means the Pacific Rim. It 
means something which we can do to provide jobs. And 
currently we don’t, at least we don’t do very much of it. We’ve 
allowed our American neighbours to the south to monopolize 
the market, and that’s in the area of long-fibre alfalfa. 
 
Now I know that’s perhaps going to go over the heads of some 
members in the legislature, and I’m sorry if I don’t explain 
myself well, but I hope the members opposite listen because 
they might learn something about agriculture in our province. 
 
Long-fibre alfalfa is the process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, whereby 
alfalfa is baled in the field, is then taken and protein tested. And 
if it’s up to specification, it is then put into a compactor and 
squeezed down and dehydrated into a manageable size and then 
it is shipped by rail or truck to a container facility and is 
exported. 
 
Now there’s two big markets in the world right now for 
long-fibre alfalfa. One is in the southern United States, in dairy 
farms, and the other one is the Pacific Rim. Last year, the 
figures which I was able to obtain, said that this market was $70 
million U.S., and it primarily came out of the north-west 
American states in the irrigation blocs in those states. 
 
(1630) 
 
That market — and that primarily went to Japan — that market 
is expected to double within two years, double because, as the 
dairy industry is becoming more acceptable, as the beef 
industry is becoming more acceptable in the Pacific Rim, they 
are finding that they need this particular product to achieve the 
type of production that is desired. Now that’s $140 million U.S. 
And the product that is grown in Saskatchewan, the product that 
is grown in Alberta, is just as good, if not better, in most years 
than that what is grown in the United States. 
 
We have an opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to access that 
market, to develop it and trade with our partners in the Pacific 
Rim who, quite frankly, when it comes to balance of trade 
deficits, we don’t do very well with. And it’s something which 
we do naturally well here, it’s a strength and it’s something that 
can be expanded. And it has ramifications for places like Moose 
Jaw and Swift Current, the nearest urban areas, the nearest 
centres of transportation. Moose Jaw is a rail hub. 
 
There’s no reason that the product can’t be grown in the new 
irrigation districts, moved to Moose Jaw or Swift Current and 
shipped to the West Coast as well as it is being done in the 
United States of America. And I’d say we’d be remiss if we 
didn’t take care of those opportunities. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

161 
 

We have opportunities in packaging — things like oriental 
noodles — where we presently ship the soft white wheats to 
Asia, manufacture them, package them, and ship them back. 
Those are opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which we must 
grab hold of. They’re opportunities that allow us to access the 
American market because we can produce the product cheaper 
than anyone in the world. The figures are there, and it’s just a 
matter of the will to move forward in those areas. And I’m sure 
that red meat has just as many areas to move in. That’s why I’m 
glad that this area of the throne speech was identified clearly. 
That’s why it was changed from the Department of Agriculture 
to agriculture and food so that those windows of opportunity are 
not lost to us, and I just commend the people in that department 
for moving in this particular direction. 
 
But I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we always have to contrast 
that. I know, I hate to have to come back and be negative all the 
time, but we hear so much negative comment from the members 
opposite that you have to set the record straight. And I think 
about the comments of the — I think he was the member for 
Touchwood or, no not Touchwood — the Hon. Gordon 
MacMurchy, the guru of NDP agriculture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can take the word "honourable" off. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Well I know he isn’t any more, but Gordon 
MacMurchy, anyway, who . . . long-standing member of this 
legislature and long-standing agricultural minister, and I’m told 
the person who the members opposite continually run to 
whenever they need some insight into rural Saskatchewan. And 
I must say that it’s a misguided insight because this same 
gentleman, when he was minister of Agriculture of this 
province, came out with a statement in 1980 about how we 
should sow this province wall to wall with wheat. Now can you 
imagine a minister of Agriculture whose policy statement to the 
farmers of this province was to sow this province wall to wall 
with wheat. Can you imagine putting all your eggs in the one 
proverbial basket, if you will — a monoculture, for those of you 
that understand rotational cropping and a few other things, and 
what you need for soil conservation. 
 
But he advised the farmer of this province to put all his eggs in 
one basket in a period of rising interest rates, knowing full well 
that the economics of continual grain farming, the input costs 
attached to 22 per cent interest rates, made it one of the most 
ludicrous policy statements ever made in this province. 
 
And we are reaping the benefits of that statement to this very 
day. And it’s sad to say that the party opposite hasn’t gone 
much further in their agricultural policy than the statements 
made by Gordon MacMurchy in 1980 when he told the farmers 
in this province to grow only one crop — wheat. Now that kind 
of foresight the land can’t stand, and that kind of foresight the 
farmer can’t stand. 
 
And we contrast that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to some of the 
things mentioned in the throne speech. It talks about the 
agricultural credit corporation. And the Agricultural Credit 
Corporation of Saskatchewan is not perfect, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but at least they try; at least they’re  

forward-looking; and they are planning on implementing some 
financing arrangements for the farmers of this province — 
arrangements that were talked about by farmers the fall of 1987 
as members toured the province listening to the wants and 
wishes — expanded opportunities to finance their home 
quarters; expanded opportunities to vendor mortgages; 
expanded opportunities to continue farming and prospering in 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as this government 
diversifies and provides them with new opportunities and new 
markets to take advantage. 
 
And I think it’s important also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
this government does not walk away from those responsibilities, 
it goes out and talks to the farming public of this province; it 
comes back and presents alternatives, opportunities, and gives 
direction in the throne speech. 
 
And I contrast that to the members opposite, who talk about 
state ownership, who have hypocrisy through their ranks. And I 
don’t want to get into this in a way that will make the members 
opposite bay and howl, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I’m going to 
say this, that the members opposite have made a big thing about 
members on this side of the House talking about the member 
from Riversdale and the predicament in which he’s found 
himself. 
 
And I’m not going to cast aspersions or reflect on the 
gentleman’s personality. I’m just going to say this to the 
members opposite: if you are going to get yourself in the 
situation, as a leader of a political party in Canada in a 
province, of being connected with a multinational financial 
institution which is making money from foreclosing on farmers, 
you should have had the foresight and the aptitude of removing 
yourself from that situation before you undertook your duties as 
the leader of a political party; and that if a portion of your salary 
was derived from these actions, then you have no one to blame 
but yourself. And don’t try and put that blame on members of 
the government side, because he knew full well the situation 
upon which he was entering and the ramifications thereof. And 
the responsibility, the responsibility for those actions rides 
directly with the member from Riversdale, not members on the 
government side of the House. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
talk about another section that was highlighted, and that’s the 
environment. And even though I don’t know a lot about aerosol 
sprays and some of the other things which are deeply 
concerning people today, I know I did sit on my farm last 
summer in that 40-degree heat and I saw my crops burn up to 
nothing. On my farm I did not harvest one bushel of dry land 
grain. 
 
And I don’t know if the greenhouse effect is real or if it’s 
imagined or if it’s something that’s going to affect our climate 
in the years to come, but I do know that it is essential for people 
in Canada, and indeed worldwide, to think seriously about this 
situation. 
 
And I congratulate our government for putting environment into 
the throne speech with so much profile, talking about the issue 
and raising the awareness of the public of Saskatchewan, 
because we all have to think  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

162 
 

about it. 
 
Let’s face it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if this greenhouse effect 
is for real and we had to deal with it on an ongoing situation, we 
might all have to move to Shellbrook in order to farm. And I’ve 
kind of got used to the old homestead and I’m not looking 
forward to moving. So I think that’s the importance of it for our 
province because so much of our province relies upon climate 
to function properly, and it’s imperative that we treat these 
environmental things with the utmost respect. 
 
An area that I was pleased was mentioned in there under the 
environment, because I think it fits together and it fits with 
drought, is the fact that this government has been front and 
centre with irrigation development in our province. We haven’t 
backed off on it as the members opposite did when they were 
government. We’ve gone full steam ahead. 
 
And I know that causes some problems for people in our 
province, because they feel that perhaps the investment isn’t 
worthwhile. But when I look at those 30,000 acres of irrigation 
which are coming on stream this year at Luck Lake on the west 
side of Lake Diefenbaker, I think of 30,000 acres of green, lush, 
crops, pastures, hay fields. I think about 30,000 acres of good 
environment for wildlife in this province — food, water. And I 
think about 30,000 acres that will be supplying feed to 
thousands of other producers in the southern half of this 
province. I think about Riverhurst, which is mentioned in the 
throne speech, on my side of Lake Diefenbaker, and about the 
approximately 30,000 acres which will be developed there over 
the next three to five years. And I have the same thoughts. I 
think about taking a very arid, dry part of Saskatchewan and 
making it green, making it bloom, and making it prosper. 
 
And that goes back to what the throne speech is all about, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, being new, innovative, and development 
orientated. And I don’t know how the members opposite could 
disagree, how they could come to that area north of Central 
Butte and look at those sections and sections of very 
unproductive land, look at the producers who have been trying 
to make a living — and I know you’ve been there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — and just know that this is good for Saskatchewan. 
 
This is going to supply the feed stock for the south-west corner 
of our province. This puts a major feed producing area within 
120 miles of the United States border, and that is so very 
important for the beef industry, hog industry, the whole entire 
red meat industry in our province. 
 
And once again I think to centres like Swift Current and Moose 
Jaw. Moose Jaw recently, between its two packing plants, has 
had over 50 jobs announced. That may not seem like a lot of 
jobs in the context of our province, but believe me, for a city 
like Moose Jaw those are big numbers. Moose Jaw, unlike 
many other cities in our province, doesn’t have natural 
resources in abundance close by. It doesn’t have many of the 
advantages that other centres have. What it relies upon is a large 
agricultural trading area and the fact that the people in those 
packing plants — with, I might add, some help from  

the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Canada — have decided that because of our commitment, our 
vision with this irrigation project and others, that they have 
decided to expand those packing plants and add 50 jobs, fairly 
high-paying jobs, to the city of Moose Jaw. And that’s in 
contrast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the period for 1971 to 1982 
when none of that occurred in the city of Moose Jaw, even 
though it was represented at that time by members of the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
(1645) 
 
And I just say to the member for Moose Jaw South, who’s in 
the Legislature this afternoon, I want you to think real hard 
about the numbers of jobs that have occurred in the city of 
Moose Jaw through development and projects over the last 
seven years as compared to the number of jobs in that other 
11-year period; think about Canada Packers; think about Moose 
Jaw Packers which resides in his riding and is expanding to this 
day because of some of these things. And I believe there are 
more developments which can take place in the city of Moose 
Jaw if that city has the initiative and the will to go out and grasp 
them, because there are going to be many side benefits come 
out of this irrigation project and others like it which can provide 
jobs and opportunities for people in those larger urban centres. 
And I just hope they have the wisdom and the foresight to move 
on those initiatives. 
 
Another area I think that’s very important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in the life of Saskatchewan and the quality of life, some of the 
areas that this government has done in the way of pensions and 
pension reform. And I think particularly about the 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan, undoubtedly one of the best 
pension programs ever provided for in this country. Once again, 
it’s highlighted in the throne speech and is going to be 
expanded upon. And I would think that any member of the New 
Democratic Party would be proud to stand in his place and vote 
on a pension plan that was so good. 
 
We have 47,000 members in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
already in this province. Eighty per cent of them are women — 
80 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Forty per cent of those are 
home-makers. Obviously those numbers tell us that there was a 
crying need out there, that there were people in our province — 
home-makers, part-time workers, self-employed people — who 
didn’t have access to a pension plan. 
 
The NDP have always prided themselves in representing these 
groups, but for 11 long years they sat in this House and did not 
address those people. Today, 47,000 Saskatchewan citizens are 
involved in a program which will go to insuring their futures as 
they reach the age of retirement. And I for the life of me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, cannot envision any member of the New 
Democratic Party standing and voting against such a measure. 
 
I guess finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to get on to the 
area of public participation. It seems an area that causes a 
tremendous amount of trouble for the members opposite. Not 
for the member for Regina North East because he’s brought his 
deepest, darkest secrets out in the public and we appreciate that. 
But the rest of the members opposite  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

163 
 

have a great deal of problem with this particular topic. I guess 
the problem is, everybody’s doing it. I think there was a song 
sort of like that some time past, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
everybody’s doing it, you know. We got socialists all over the 
world joining with Margaret Thatcher, and it’s kind of ironical, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’d have that little combination — 
but they’re tangoing out there. 
 
We’ve got people in France, socialist President; people in 
Australia, socialist Prime Minister; people in New Zealand, 
socialist Prime Minister. We’ve even got communists, you 
know, those people that built Berlin walls and that sort of stuff. 
These people are waltzing with Margaret Thatcher — China, 
Soviet Union, Hungary. Everybody says public participation’s 
the way to go, everybody except the people sitting opposite in 
the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
In every instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where public 
participation has gone forward in our province, or indeed 
around the world, we’ve seen the jobs are added, not deleted. 
Why would you want to be out of step with the rest of the 
world? 
 
And I would like to quote an article, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
March 6, 1989, from the Star-Phoenix, and I guess it sums up 
the hypocrisy which we’ve heard in this legislature from the 
members opposite. And I think it’ll sum up the feeling of the 
people in this province. And it says: 
 

The only criticism due the NDP is in allowing MLAs like 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana and the member from 
Regina Rosemont to make fools both of themselves and of 
opposition leader, Roy Romanow, by attacking 
privatization and uranium development . . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Members are not 
allowed to use other members’ names. I would ask the member 
to refrain from that. 
 
Mr. Swenson: — I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I do 
apologize for that slip of the tongue, and I will say: 
 

. . . (the member from Riversdale), by attacking 
privatization and uranium development, both once 
admirable, if unpublicized, initiatives. 
 

And that is the hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which resides 
on that side of the House. It is hypocrisy which will be exposed 
to the public of Saskatchewan. And I guess it is why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that they are so critical of a throne speech 
which is new, it’s innovative, and it is forward looking, as I 
have identified in my speech today. 
 
And I cannot believe that the members opposite can stand in 
their places with a clear conscience and vote against this 
initiative or the other ones I’ve identified today in the throne 
speech presented by this government. 
 
So it will be a pleasure for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to support 
the motion presented by the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, and hope that the members  

opposite look into their consciences when we vote on the 
presentation made by Her Honour last Wednesday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the few minutes 
that remain here before 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
outline a few of the things that I want to talk about in my 
address in reply to the throne speech. 
 
But before I do, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this 
opportunity to congratulate, along with other members, the 
work that our Lieutenant Governor — our new Lieutenant 
Governor, Her Honour Sylvia Fedoruk — has been doing, not 
only with her delivery of the throne speech here, right here in 
this Assembly, but also the work that she’s been doing around 
the province. 
 
I had the pleasure, Mr. Speaker, of welcoming Her Honour to 
Prince Albert for her first official visit this winter. She was 
there to open the winter festival officially, on behalf of the city 
and on behalf of the winter festival committee. And the way 
that Her Honour approached the job, and the enthusiasm with 
which she sawed the logs and cut the ribbons and went to 
different locations where the winter festival activities were 
taking place, she was very well received by the people of Prince 
Albert, and I want to pass that message on through you, Mr. 
Speaker, to our Lieutenant Governor. 
 
I want to say also that it was good to hear the Lieutenant 
Governor read the Speech from the Throne in a manner which 
is befitting of the office. When a person is in a position of 
Lieutenant Governor, I think it’s very important that you do 
these things in a manner which is acceptable to the government 
side members and to the opposition side members, because after 
all, you’re representing the entire population of Saskatchewan, 
and she did that with dispatch, and for that I would congratulate 
her as well. 
 
In addition to that, I would like just to wish Her Honour the best 
for achieving her goals during her term of office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — In this address to my reply to the throne 
speech debate, Mr. Speaker, I intend on touching on three areas. 
I want to talk about some education and health policies of the 
government, and some of the problems created in the province 
of Saskatchewan. I want to talk for a while about the taxation 
policy. And last of all, I want to turn to what I consider to be a 
real travesty on democracy in this province, and that is the 
gerrymander that this government is now perpetrating on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But before I address those issues, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
mention what a pleasure it has been for me over the last year to 
listen to people in my constituency and other parts of the 
province, and to hear the enthusiasm that they are greeting our 
leader, the member from Riversdale, wherever he goes in this 
province. 
 
And everywhere I go they tell me, and of course I know this 
because I see him more often than most people in the  
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

164 
 

legislature; he’s in the province. I know that he’s working hard 
and I know that he’s going around the province and meeting 
with small groups and meeting with large groups and meeting 
with individuals, and he’s listening. He’s listening to the 
requests of organizations and he’s listening to delegations. He’s 
listening in the small towns. He’s listening to business people. 
He’s listening to farmers. He’s listening in the city. 
 
And I get the feedback from these people and they tell me that 
they like him. They like him because he’s sincere, because he 
listens, and because he consults, and because he displays a 
belief in a system in which every group and every individual 
counts, which is markedly and starkedly in contrast with what 
the Premier of this province is showing. 
 
They appreciate, Mr. Speaker, his ability to assess, to assess a 
situation. Farmers are talking to him right this week about the 
problems that they’re having with interest rates, and they want 
to see action on it; problems that they’re having with the 
drought payments, they’re waiting for it. The lack of defence, 
the lack of defence that the Premier has shown when the oats 
was taken off the wheat board system. And they like the way he 
responds because he responds, as I mentioned again, with the 
concept that every person’s ideas and everybody’s ideas counts. 
 
Well that’s my leader, Mr. Speaker, that’s my leader, the 
member from Riversdale, a leader with a proven track record; a 
proven track record in a previous government, proven track 
record in Saskatchewan, proven track record nationally. And 
he’s proving himself again, and he’s going to become the next 
premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go directly, 
because there’s only a couple of minutes left, I’m going to go 
directly to the problem that is being created for the electors of 
Saskatchewan with respect to the Electoral Boundaries 
Commission. And the idea here is . . . I’m looking at some 
numbers here, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking and comparing what’s 
happening to the voting pattern as a result of the gerrymander 
that’s been perpetrated by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we live in a democracy. There’s a good reason for 
that. A democracy, a representative democracy, is a place where 
there’s supposed to be a balance with the capitalist system, 
which we use, in a democracy where one person is supposed to 
represent one vote. And that’s a very important balance. And 
the members opposite ought to know that, and they ought to 
guard that. They ought to know that, and they ought to guard 
that. 
 
But exactly the opposite thing is happening now with this 
redistribution, Mr. Speaker — exactly the opposite is 
happening. Instead of the Electoral Boundaries Commission 
coming up and balancing off the votes so that we get a more 
representative system where one person equals one vote, we’ve 
got exactly the opposite happening. We’ve got areas of the 
province whose votes are counting more than people in other 
areas of the  

province. And that is undemocratic, and that is a threat to our 
way of life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want, Mr. Speaker, to just get back to, for us, and just to think 
for a minute about how our system works here in our country, 
and how it’s worked in Great Britain, for example. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands adjourned until 2 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 
 
  



 
March 15, 1989 

 

165 
 

CORRIGENDA 
 
Please note the following in the Hansard No. 4B Monday 
March 13, 1989, 7 p.m.: Page 68, last paragraph — for “bored,” 
please read “buoyed.” Page 73, second and third paragraphs, 
left-hand column and fourth paragraph, right-hand column — 
for “drifter(s),” please read “grifter(s).” 
 
[NOTE: The online version has been corrected.] 


