


















































May 15, 1989 Hansard


 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

May 15, 1989 
 

1125 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Acting Clerk: — It is my duty to advise the Assembly that Mr. 
Speaker will not be present to open this sitting. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to introduce to you, and through you to the 
Assembly, some distinguished guests that we have in the 
Speaker’s gallery. I had the opportunity to have lunch with these 
individuals, and it is the Premier’s round table on the 
environment. The National Task Force on the Environment and 
the Economy recommended the formation of provincial and 
national round tables to facilitate a co-operative effort among 
governments, industry, non-government organizations, and the 
public, so that we might have a national strategy on the 
environment and sustained economic growth. 
 
It is my pleasure today to introduce the members of the round 
table to the Speaker and to the legislature. And perhaps they 
would stand and be recognized when I call out their name. 
 
Miss Beverly Brennan, vice-president, finance and 
administration, Philom Bios, is not with us but she’s one of the 
members on the committee. 
 
Mr. Frank Arnie, past president of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Association and past director of the Canadian Wildlife 
Federation. 
 
Doug Chekay, provincial manager, Ducks Unlimited 
Canada-Saskatchewan, and member of the Canadian Association 
of Resource Managers, and the director of the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation Habitat Trust Fund. 
 
Chief Roland Crowe, chief of the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations. 
 
Another member that’s on it that is not present is Mr. Bill Duke, 
past president of the Western Canadian Grain Growers. 
 
Bill Gayner, vice-president and general manager of 
Saskatchewan division of Weyerhaeuser Canada Ltd. 
 
Jon Gilles, associate professor of agricultural engineering, 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. David Henry, associate professor of science, Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College. 
 
Another member that is not with us is Dr. Steuart Houston, 
professor of radiology, University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Darla Hunter, an attorney and a lawyer with MacPherson, Leslie 
and Tyerman. 
 
Rev. Austin Jagoe, minister, Meewasin Valley United

Church. 
 
Sister Phyllis Kapuscinski, professor of education, University of 
Regina. 
 
Lindsay Milne, vice-president, exploration and production, 
western Canada, Husky Oil Operations Ltd. 
 
Another member that’s not with us, Mr. Speaker, is Ken Naber, 
president of Focus on Inputs, and past president of the Canola 
Growers Association, reeve of R.M. 428. 
 
John Nightingale, president, Key Lake Mining Corporation. 
 
And finally, a special guest, Mr. Speaker, an individual that came 
to Saskatchewan to tell us about round tables and how they are 
to function and operate and was a member of the original task 
force — Mr. Clifford Lincoln, former minister of the 
environment of the province of Quebec and currently an MLA in 
the province of Quebec. Please welcome those guests. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to 
introduce some students on behalf of my seat mate, the member 
for Lumsden-Qu’Appelle who is not able to be present today. I’d 
like to introduce 45 grade 5 students. They’re situated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re from the Lumsden Elementary 
School. They’re accompanied by Sandy White, Peter Wiebe, and 
Ray Tourney as their teachers. I welcome them here and I’ll look 
forward to meeting you after question period. I hope you enjoy 
the deliberations of the House, and meet you for pictures and 
refreshments. Welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Swenson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you to the 
members of the legislature, 35 grade 8 students from Lindale 
School. Lindale School is a rural school in the city of Moose Jaw. 
It’s all rural students who are bused into that particular learning 
institution. They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Bob 
McLarty and Bev McIntyre, and I understand they’ve had a tour 
of the building and met with my colleague, the member from 
Canora. 
 
My apologies to the students for not being here. We had a little 
mix-up with my office and the guide service. I hope the visit was 
enjoyable. I hope that question period will be informative. And 
if possible, I’ll pop out for a few minutes and have a short visit 
with you. Please help me welcome the students from Lindale. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Public Hearings on SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
address a question to the minister in charge of the 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1126 
 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Mr. Minister, we see that 
you’re planning some 80 meetings across the province of 
Saskatchewan to sell your Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
privatization to the people of Saskatchewan who have clearly 
told you in recent weeks that they are against it. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you have commissioned the Barber Panel at 
a cost of over $1,100 a day in salaries, and Heaven knows what 
in expenses, why do you need this other set of hearings running 
almost concurrently, in fact running before even that panel begins 
to do its work? Is it that you realize now, Mr. Minister, that the 
Barber Panel is not going to hear what you want it to hear, so 
you’re setting up stacked meetings to give your point of view the 
image of credibility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t know how they can call them 
stacked meetings, Mr. Speaker. The meetings are public 
meetings. The meetings are designed to provide information to 
the people of Saskatchewan relative to the public participation 
opportunity that will exist at SaskEnergy. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s paying for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And the hon. member says, who’s 
paying for them. I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker, they will cost a 
whole lot less than members’ opposite cost the people of 
Saskatchewan by walking out of this place for 17 days — literally 
taken, hijacking the legislature, Mr. Speaker. It will cost a whole 
lot less than that. 
 
Now the Barber commission is something altogether different. 
While SaskEnergy people will give their story, it’s providing 
information, Mr. Speaker; the Barber commission, on the other 
hand, will be receiving public input, doing their own economic 
analysis and making recommendations to government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Minister, obviously you’re not 
interested in knowing the opinion of the public. Your only 
interest is to try to tell them what you want them to hear. And 
that’s why you’ve got these 80 meetings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Now, Mr. Minister, I see also that now 
you’ve started a massive television propaganda machine out 
there to try to sell your opinion, to try to tell the public what 
they’re supposed to think of all this. Would you care to tell this 
House what you intend to spend on this advertising campaign to 
sell Saskatchewan people on an idea that they have already in 
large numbers rejected, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m interested in these 
large numbers that the member opposite talks about. I think he 
tabled something like 60,000 names . . .

An Hon. Member: — Less than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Less than that? Less than 60,000? I 
thought you had more than that in your membership. Couldn’t 
you even get your own membership to sign this petition, Mr. 
Speaker? That’s number one. 
 
Number two, I think the people of Saskatchewan are interested, 
Mr. Speaker, in things like discount on electricity rates; discount, 
assignable discount on gas rates; long-term protection through 
regulation; security of supply — all of those things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What the people are interested in knowing, Mr. Speaker, is the 
other side, the truth of the distorted story that those folks — those 
folks, Mr. Speaker — tried to take to the people during their 
two-week strike. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — New question to the minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Minister, I think 73 per cent of the people who in 
the polling have shown that they oppose what you are doing, 
should be a pretty convincing argument to tell you what they 
think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Can I ask you, Mr. Minister, going back 
to my original question: how much are you spending on these 
public meetings? Is it $80,000, is it $100,000, or what is it? 
You’re saying through your Minister of Finance that there isn’t 
any additional money for municipalities, so you freeze their 
revenue sharing. You’re saying to hungry children in 
Saskatchewan, there isn’t enough money to put in programs to 
help them. 
 
How much then are willing to spend to try and sell to the people 
of Saskatchewan an idea which they don’t want, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, let me . . . I was going to 
say that was the same pollster that said, go in April . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And go on the Crow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . and go on the Crow, but I won’t. I 
won’t, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact of the matter is, the poll tells me one thing. Had they phoned 
me and said: Mr. Speaker, would you . . . or Mr. Berntson — 
that’s me — Mr. Berntson, would you support privatizing 
SaskPower, I would have said no. I think 73 per cent of the people 
in the province said no to that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to answer the question, I am . . . I have a high degree of 
confidence, Mr. Speaker, a high degree of confidence, that when 
the people of Saskatchewan get the truth as it relates to the 
opportunity that exists through public participation in 
SaskEnergy, they will endorse it in large measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1127 
 

Speaker. My question is to the Deputy Premier, and it’s along the 
same lines as the questions that my colleague, the deputy leader, 
has been directing. 
 
I notice that the Deputy Premier talked about 73 per cent who 
would be opposed to the privatization of SaskPower, and tried to 
draw a distinction between SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Of 
course he neatly overlooked the fact that the question asked by 
Mr. Angus Reid was whether the people of Saskatchewan 
favoured the privatization of SaskEnergy, and nearly 70 per cent 
said no to that, which still means you’re flying in the face of 
public opinion. But my question to you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — But my question to you, Mr. Deputy Premier, 
is this: forgetting about your shell game, the business of 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower, surely you must admit that what 
you’re doing by spending thousands, if not millions of dollars, in 
a combined public hearings/advertising campaign by 
SaskEnergy in advance of the Barber commission, surely you 
must admit that what you’re doing is making a total farce and 
mockery of the Barber commission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, on the one hand he says 
people don’t have enough information; people don’t understand 
what it is that SaskEnergy and this government’s trying to do 
with public participation thrust. On the other hand, he says that 
people haven’t had their input into this public participation thrust. 
And then again he says, and the cost, the cost of this; and it’s a 
whitewash — why would you do it in any event? This from a 
person who took his caucus out of here for two weeks — 17 days 
— at the cost of something like $300,000, went on strike, took 
the legislature as hostage, Mr. Speaker. I think, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan won’t forget that for a very long 
time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Deputy 
Premier. I agree with one thing that he said in his answer: the 
people of Saskatchewan will not forget what you tried to do, and 
what we did. You’re dead right about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — And I’ll tell you something else, if it costs 
this legislature $300,000, which I do not agree, but if it did in the 
fact of the bell-ringing episode, that is a drop in the bucket of the 
money that we saved by virtue of your attempt to privatize 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the 
Deputy Premier comes at it from another way. Notwithstanding 
the fact that you’ve made a total mockery and a farce out of the 
Barber commission, my question to you, sir, is: how in the world 
do you justify a civil servant, Mr. Oscar Hanson, getting out there 
with his

officials, obviously propagandizing a highly politicized position 
— one which no civil servant can decide? 
 
This is a policy decision which only the electorate and the voters 
of Saskatchewan can decide in election. What is the propriety, 
and how is it that you direct your civil servant to get into the 
political arena on an issue which he ought to be out of? This is 
no room for civil servants to be politicized. How do you justify 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve known Oscar Hanson 
for about eight years, give or take. Oscar Hanson is a long-time 
servant of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, and, more recently, president 
of SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. At all times — at all times — Mr. 
Hanson has behaved in a very professional manner. I believe that 
Mr. Hanson today is behaving in a very professional and 
objective manner and, Mr. Speaker, just because what he’s 
saying isn’t in accord with what members opposite think doesn’t 
mean that he is not professional. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a new question 
for the Deputy Premier. I make it clear that my argument for the 
moment is not against Mr. Oscar Hanson. My argument is against 
your government forcing Mr. Oscar Hanson to get out there into 
a highly political area. Your government was forced to withdraw 
this legislation because the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan said no to the privatization of SaskEnergy, and 
you’re sending Oscar Hanson and the hard-working people of 
SaskEnergy out there, on an 80-town, or more, tour paid at my 
expense, when I don’t agree with that policy or philosophy — 
paid at the expense of thousands of taxpayers who don’t agree. 
That is a misuse of the civil servant, a respected civil servant. 
 
And I say it’s an abuse of the Barber commission, and it shows 
to me that you people can’t be trusted at all to keep your word on 
this issue. You’ve simply given up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, 
the legislation has not been withdrawn and that should be made 
clear, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition obviously has 
mistaken on that particular point. The legislation . . . In fact, if 
you look at the blues today, they’re sitting under second readings. 
 
And we fully expect, Mr. Speaker, subject to the 
recommendations coming from the Barber commission, that we 
will, in due course, proceed with that legislation. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, but I sure hope you do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And now he’s supporting me, Mr. 
Speaker. Now he says I sure hope you do. Which side of the 
argument are you on, anyway? 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have been against almost everything we’ve 
ever done in terms of economic diversification. They’re against 
Weyerhaeuser; they’re against Gainers; 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1128 
 

they’re against Saskoil; they’re against Rafferty. 
 
And I mean, in my part of the world, Mr. Speaker, over 75, 80 
per cent of the people down there support the Rafferty project. 
They’re against it, they’re all opposed to it. Now I’ll tell you 
what, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what. I will . . . No, I won’t; no, I 
won’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is he 
comes in here today talking about spending all of this taxpayers’ 
money, spending all of this taxpayers’ money to get the truth out 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Well the truth is, Mr. Speaker, 
whether he agrees with it or not, the truth is that what we’re 
talking about is diversification through rate protection, job 
creation through lower rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of the greatest opportunities that has ever 
been presented to Saskatchewan, and members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, either refuse to understand it or take their own narrow, 
partisan view of it and are playing politics with the whole issue. 
They’re not interested in the development or diversification for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the 
Deputy Premier. My new question to the Deputy Premier is this: 
if there is a philosophical or a political dispute between your side 
and your Premier, and my side and this side — and there is, on 
this issue — then surely that’s a contest between the Progressive 
Conservative Party and the New Democratic Party. And the 
people ultimately will decide in an election, which is exactly 
what we’re calling for. 
 
But my question to you, sir, is this: how in the world do you 
justify the following situation? First of all, you have the minister 
of privatization spending millions of dollars in meetings all 
across rural Saskatchewan; then you’ve got the Barber 
commission, if not millions, hundreds of thousands of dollars on 
privatization; now you’ve got the Hanson propagandization on 
privatization, hundreds if not thousands of dollars; now you’ve 
got an advertising campaign which amounts to millions — I say 
that without fear of contradiction, and if I’m wrong show me the 
figures because we’re going to be asking you for the numbers — 
millions of dollars. 
 
Study after study, brainwash after brainwash, TV ad after TV ad 
— you’re doing this at public expense; you’re not doing it at 
party expense. Do you have no shame at all? Is there no decency 
at all and respect for the public purse? People want money for 
food banks and for jobs and for education, and not on this 
propaganda thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I think where we differ . . . 
I’ve heard the member opposite . . . I think the member opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, has on several times been quoted as saying what 
folks opposite — those people, Mr. Speaker — how they would 
diversify our economy is through what they call the mixed 
economy. 
 
Well, we kind of support the mixed economy too, Mr.

Speaker. And our definition, our definition, Mr. Speaker, of 
mixed economy is public and private and co-operative and 
investment and all of those things. Their definition of mixed 
economy, Mr. Speaker, is — and get this mix — 
government-owned pulp mills, government-owned meat packing 
plants, government-owned land bank, government-owned 
whatever. And coal mine, uranium, potash, that’s their idea of a 
mixed economy, Mr. Speaker. We both agree in a mixed 
economy. We think ours will grow and diversify and create jobs. 
That’s the difference. 
 
Now when we get to the cost, when we get to the cost of what we 
are doing in terms of allowing public input and in terms of getting 
the truth out, I’ll take that from a lot of people, Mr. Speaker. But 
it’s that party sitting right over there that is costing us $2 million 
a month because Rafferty is stopped, Mr. Speaker — $2 million 
a month; $300,000 they cost us because they took this place and 
hijacked it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Now we, in spite of those people, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of those people, we are going to diversify 
Saskatchewan; we are going to create economic excitement, jobs, 
and opportunities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Plight of Poor and Hungry People 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister 
of Social Services. The minister in charge of Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation talked about how much better things are. 
Well my question is about how much better things are. 
 
You’ll be aware, Mr. Minister, that a study, done under the 
auspices of the Regina United Way, indicates that the number of 
people who are going hungry, the number of people who rely on 
the food bank, has doubled in just two years. 
 
Mr. Minister, this contrasts sharply with the obscene, lavish 
expenditures which your government is making, trying to sell the 
unsaleable — your privatization. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you 
don’t agree that it’s time you devoted some of your resources to 
feeding the hungry, and a little less to try to selling an idea which 
has already been rejected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would have to 
consider long and seriously whether the study referred to is 
actually scientific. However, leaving politics aside, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are a few children who are hungry, and that few is 
too many. But they are not hungry for lack of money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We must help these children eliminate the cause of the problem. 
By any civilization’s standards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
moral problems in this province that cannot simply be solved by 
throwing money on a difficult situation. This government 
believes that, Mr. Speaker . . .  
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1129 
 

Do I have to start shouting again so that I can at least hear myself? 
 
An Hon. Member: — You aren’t missing anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill 
Lakes would be well to stay in his constituency and shout from 
there because we could hear him at that distance. 
 
When the members opposite are prepared to sit down, listen to 
some sensible discussion, then I will answer the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could step 
outside the callous arrogance with which you answered the last 
question and deal with the poor and the hungry in this city. Mr. 
Minister, I expected you to offer your usual excuse that if it 
weren’t for the opposition, there’d be so much more that you’d 
be. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wanted to deal with unemployment. 
Unemployment, Mr. Minister, has increased in this province. 
Saskatoon has the third highest unemployment rate in the 
province . . . in Canada, rather, and Regina is not far behind; all 
this at a time, Mr. Minister, when you cut back on funding for 
job creation in the recent budget. And these figures have been 
aided, Mr. Speaker, by 10,000 people who have fled the province 
in the first four months of this year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is: don’t you agree that your 
privatization mania should be tempered a bit so you can deal with 
some of these other problems, such as hungry people in the cities 
of the province that was once called the bread 
_basket of the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I was trying to 
point out earlier, yes, we do have problems in this province. We 
have problems with parenting skills; we have problems with 
chemical abuse; we have problems with people dropping out of 
school; we have problems with people who have a lack of pride 
and haven’t developed self-sufficiency. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wisdom cannot be 
purchased at any price. However, this government has spent an 
awful lot of money trying to have people become self-sufficient 
and therefore happier and healthier. As we speak today, this 
government spends $43 million per year in contract services to 
non-governmental organizations to try to help people. The great 
bulk of that is spent in the four largest cities of this province. I 
intend to publish a list of all of the organizations, what they 
receive the money for, and what the $43 million is spent on. If 
money alone could solve this problem, we would solve it 
immediately. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite believe that 
money alone will solve what’s wrong with our society. We have 
to look into our hearts, they have to look

into their hearts, and we have to get into the hearts of those people 
who need the help. Because simply handing them money that is 
sometimes spent on things other than food — and I could list 
them, and if I list them then people say I’m hard-hearted — I say 
there is a difference between reality and the fantasy that the 
members opposite live. We want to help those people. If $43 
million isn’t enough, then we’ll spend $53 million, but we’re 
going to have to be certain that that money helps those people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the 1989 
edition of Marie Antoinette. Mr. Minister, a telephone call to the 
department of piratization confirmed that you were seeking 
sponsors so that you could provide a free lunch to the people who 
attend your piratization meeting. That’s simply symbolic, Mr. 
Minister, of the millions in advertising which you’re spending, 
trying to sell an idea which the public have rejected, money 
which is badly needed elsewhere. 
 
Will you not agree, Mr. Minister, that some of the money which 
you’re lavishing on your piratization’s sales scheme should be 
redirected to feed children who are hungry through no fault of 
their own, your comments notwithstanding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members 
opposite have just about finished shouting from their seats, so I 
will now try to answer the question. 
 
First of all, it is hard to ascertain what the question is. The 
members opposite wish to be government and they can’t even ask 
a sensible question. The members opposite are talking about food 
at a meeting provided by business people out of their own money, 
not out of the money of the people of Saskatchewan. If business 
people want to buy lunch to some bright and aspiring young 
people in this province, that’s their own business. 
 
We have been talking here about feeding the needy, and the 
members opposite say we should give more money to feed the 
needy. I say yes, we will try, but we have to get to the root of the 
problem and that is, why isn’t the money getting to the children? 
That’s the question. 
 
And the members opposite wish to put their heads in the sand and 
say, more money, and it will magically get to the children. I 
thought they didn’t believe in the trickle down theory. Well I tell 
you that the money we pay in social services is not trickling down 
to the children, and I have to figure out ways of getting that 
money directly into food into the stomachs of the children who 
need it and not into more people paid to do more counselling and 
the children still don’t get the food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1130 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 20 — An Act 
respecting the Reorganization of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to continue with my remarks that I started a few days ago. I’m 
pretty well through my introduction to my remarks on the Bill 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — . . . which is Bill 20, an Act to privatize the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things I want to talk about today is the whole myth of 
how this government has stated that the potash sales were poor, 
the performance of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is 
poor, because of there being a glut on the world market. Now this 
is very much a myth, Mr. Speaker. There’s not been a glut on the 
world market, or at least any statistics I can find do not indicate 
a glut on the world market. 
 
In fact, I didn’t go back very far, but I’ll take for example one 
press release from Canpotex Limited. And as you’re aware, Mr. 
Speaker, Canpotex is the marketer for all of the potash that’s 
produced in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
At one time the Government of Saskatchewan, in their wisdom 
under premier Blakeney’s government, wanted to look at potash 
sales international, or potash Saskatchewan international, to do 
the marketing of potash for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And the reason that this move was made at one 
period of time is because it seemed that in the future the 
government of the day had envisaged that a government that was 
not supportive of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan may 
well market private firms’ potash through Canpotex before they 
would market the potash that was produced at the mines owned 
by the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as I say, I didn’t go far back in terms of the press releases 
from Canpotex, but I just want to refer to one press release here 
from January 10, 1989. And it’s not undifferent from other press 
releases in the period of 1982 until the current year, in which it 
shows good sales through Canpotex. The problem is that this 
government chose not to market the potash, or the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan as we had envisaged many years 
earlier. This government chose to promote the private sector 
firms that are involved in the mining and the production of potash 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would just want to quote from this press release, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s dated January 10, 1989. It’s for immediate release, and the 
headline is: New sales record, and I quote: 
 

Erik Ekedahl, president of (the) Canpotex Limited, 
announced today that the offshore marketing

agency for the majority of Saskatchewan’s potash set a new 
sales record for 1988. 

 
“We shipped 4.7 million tonnes of production,” Mr. 
Ekedahl said, “which was about 540,000 tonnes more than 
in 1987 — also a record year.” 
 
“Prices for 1988 averaged about $15.00 CDN per tonne 
higher than in the previous year and Canpotex’s total sales 
value reached a new record of close to $500 million CDN. 
 
To put a sales volume of 4.7 million tonnes in perspective, 
it would take a train of nearly 52,000 railcars stretching 
almost to the half-way point between Saskatoon and 
Vancouver to carry the total tonnage. The tonnage would 
fill more than 150 ships and is equivalent to the total 
production capacities of the Lanigan mine — the world’s 
largest potash mine — and either the Central Canada or 
Cominco mine. 
 
Canpotex sales for 1988 set individual country records in 
China, Korea, Malaysia, Taiwan, Argentina, Chile, and 
Italy. Sales to China totalled 1.25 million tonnes, the first 
time that shipments of Saskatchewan potash to any offshore 
country have exceeded one million tonne level in any 
twelve-month period. 
 
Canpotex is owned by Saskatchewan potash producers and 
sells potash to offshore markets in Asia, Latin America, 
Europe, Oceania, and Africa. 
 
For further information, please contact Rod Heath or 
Howard Cummer at (306) 931-2200. 

 
Now it seems to me what this press release from Canpotex 
indicates, Mr. Speaker, is that there is no glut on the world 
market. There is a very buoyant market throughout the world 
right now for the sale of potash — potash that comes from 
Saskatchewan mines, produced by Saskatchewan peoples, but 
soon not to be produced by Canadian and Saskatchewan potash 
companies because of this government’s move to sell off one of 
the best and most prosperous Crown corporations in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m not using rhetoric, Mr. Speaker, as some of the members 
on the government side have used. I’m using factual statements, 
at least factual as far as Canpotex is concerned. And they should 
know what they’re talking about since they market potash for 
private companies in the province of Saskatchewan that produce 
potash, as well as the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a 
corporation that is 100 per cent owned by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Potash corporation: the employees are from Saskatchewan; the 
profits stay in Saskatchewan; the dividends stay in 
Saskatchewan; the royalties stay in Saskatchewan. It’s truly a 
Saskatchewan company which was a dream in the early ’70s, 
came into reality in 1976, and paid hundreds, I say hundreds of 
millions of dollars to the people of Saskatchewan in royalties and 
taxes and profits, and in later years, dividends to the people in the 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1131 
 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s money that we’ve relied on in the past to make sure that there 
are good programs and good services provided by administrators 
and administrations of government regardless of what their 
political stripe is. 
 
But now we have today Bill 20 in second reading before this 
legislature, the government asking that they be allowed to sell off 
45 per cent of the potash corporation to foreign investors. That 
means outside of Saskatchewan and also outside of Canada. The 
other 55 per cent is sold to residents, and residents is not defined 
in the Bill as Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear 
in Bill 20 that the 55 per cent sold to residents will be sold to 
investors in Canada, not Saskatchewan. 
 
And to me it matters little whether or not it’s some wealthy 
individual or company in Toronto on Bay Street, or whether it’s 
in New York on Wall Street, or whether it’s somebody from 
Tacoma, Washington or Montreal. The fact remains that the 
profits will go away from Saskatchewan people to the investors 
who can afford to buy the shares, the large investors to buy the 
45 per cent foreign ownership, and the wealthiest of the Canadian 
investors who can buy the other 55 per cent of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the picture even gets better for the sale of potash 
into the future. I have here another press release from Canpotex 
Ltd., and the headline is, “New China sale,” and it’s dated March 
10, 1989, a matter of a couple of months after the initial press 
release that I quoted from. And I want to read the press release to 
you and have it on the record so that Saskatchewan people who 
may be watching today, or people who will read in Hansard, 
have a fairly detailed picture of what’s happening with potash in 
the province, with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and 
with this heartless government who has an obsession with 
privatization in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
If it moves, they want to privatize it; and if it has a large debt 
attached to it, they want to retain it so that people in the province 
of Saskatchewan will have to pay through their own taxes for 
many, many years for this government’s give-away of resources 
and resource revenue in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
quote from the press release, Mr. Speaker: 
 
(1445) 
 

Eric Ekedahl, President of Canpotex Limited, announced 
today that a new contract for the supply of potash has been 
concluded with China. 
 
“If Sinochem exercises all the options available under our 
agreement, total January to June shipments could reach as 
much as 700,000 tonnes. If this level is achieved, first 
semester shipments would be about equal to our record 
shipments to China in the first half of last year,” Mr. 
Ekedahl explained. 
 
Shipments from Vancouver will begin at once and are 
planned to average 100,000 to 150,000

tonnes per month. The FOB Vancouver value will be about 
C$80 million. 
 
Since 1972 China has purchased more than six million 
tonnes of Saskatchewan potash from Canpotex. Last year 
purchases exceeded one million tonnes for the first time. 

 
Canpotex is owned by Saskatchewan potash producers and 
sells potash to offshore markets in Asia, Latin America, 
Europe, Oceania, and Africa. 
 
For further information please contact Rod Heath or 
Howard Cummer at (306) 931-2200. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as long as New Democrats were in 
government, with the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan being 
a sound investment, initially, and a good return for Saskatchewan 
people, those that we had in senior management positions from 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan dealt aggressively with 
Canpotex. 
 
Sometimes we didn’t get as much of our potash sold as we 
wanted to. Private sector firms maybe had a bit of an inside hand 
because there were more players involved in the private sector 
firms than there was in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
even though we were the major producer of potash in the 
province. The very structure of Canpotex left it open to a good 
deal of manipulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d want to point out to you that back in the 1980s, 
the early 1980s, before this administration came into place, there 
was a move by the government of the day, by Allan Blakeney’s 
government and the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to 
strike a new marketing firm called PCS International. And the 
reason that the wisdom was there to put PCS International into 
place so that we had our own very aggressive marketing firm to 
market Saskatchewan potash produced by the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, by Saskatchewan management, by 
Saskatchewan people, by Saskatchewan workers, by a 
Saskatchewan head office, that would have the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan first and profits of the private sector 
firms secondarily, because the private sector firms seem to be 
taking care of themselves quite well, thank you very much. 
 
But Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Sales in North 
America, marketing subsidiary of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, during 1981, changes in the organizational 
structure of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and its 
subsidiaries resulted in the appointment of Douglas E. Logsdail 
as president of PCS Sales. Sales are administered from the 
subsidiary’s head office in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker — not 
Chicago, like International Minerals, or in New Mexico for the 
mines there — but in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
Two national account sales managers located in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, were responsible for the sales contracts to large 
fertilizer manufacturing companies in the United States. District 
managers for field accounts in Canada report to the Saskatoon 
office, Mr. Speaker, while 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1132 
 

the 13 American district managers reported to a field sales office 
in Atlanta, Georgia — not the head office, but a field sales office 
— to supply the American market. 
 
And this is what the potash corporation have actually started to 
do in the early 1980s and possibly even the late 1970s. It was 
certainly discussed then. I’m not sure . . . I don’t have the figures 
before me. My memory . . . I wouldn’t want to be in error on the 
exact date it started, but Saskatchewan potash corporation, or the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, was in fact doing a lot of 
their own marketing, and by this they were very successful. 
 
And you can see that as one of the major, major reasons why the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan paid so handsomely in 
terms of taxes and royalties and dividends and made additional 
profit that they weren’t making when the Conservatives came 
into government in 1982. 
 
In 1982 the government seemed to throw up their hands and say, 
well we’ll leave it all up to Canpotex. And the private sector 
firms, Mr. Speaker, ran roughshod over the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, saying me, me, me, me, me, allow me to 
market my potash first. You’re the government, you shouldn’t be 
interfering in the private sector. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, there was no aggressive marketing 
of potash from PCS Sales, which I think only operated in North 
America — the PCS Sales. And there was no aggressive 
marketing to Canpotex. So therefore we found profits dropped 
drastically. 
 
And in my presentations over the past three days that I have 
spoken on this Bill, Mr. Speaker, I have laid out what the profits 
were, so I’m not going to go through that quite yet at this point 
in time again. But those profits were there and they’ve drastically 
declined in the early 1980s . . . I should say from 1982 onward, 
because there was no aggressive marketing of the potash from 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1981, PCS Sales continued as a member of Canpotex Ltd., a 
producer-owner marketing company responsible for offshore 
sales of potash from five Saskatchewan producers. Now you see, 
Canpotex was still doing the international marketing outside of 
the North American continent, but the North American sales 
were done by PCS Sales, and they had done a very good job. 
 
I would say that effective on June 30, 1982, PCS Sales 
membership in Canpotex was to be terminated, and the 
corporation’s new offshore marketing subsidiary, PCS 
International, was to begin selling directly to overseas customers, 
and PCS Sales was to retain sole responsibility for marketing in 
North America. 
 
But what happened? Mr. Speaker, what happened was that before 
June 30, 1982 came along there was a general election. People 
spoke decisively that a Conservative government should be 
elected in the province of Saskatchewan, and they were — 
overwhelmingly; one of the biggest majorities, if not the biggest, 
in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.

Now people since that time have found out this is not a good deal, 
because not only did we lose the PCS Sales as an aggressive 
marketer in North America, the Conservatives decided not to 
proceed with PCS International to do the good job internationally 
that PCS Sales was doing domestically and in the North 
American market, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that it wasn’t 
a glut on the world market; it wasn’t a devastating drop in potash 
prices by the tonne; it was mismanagement and the lack of 
aggressive marketing by the Conservative government. 
 
It was also a removal of top management in the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to replace top management of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan by political cronies from 
the Conservatives, that were put into place to deal with a billion 
dollar company that they knew nothing about. Some of them I’m 
not even sure had business experience. They were moved into a 
billion dollar company to try and aggressively move that 
company into the international market place. 
 
Now I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that during 1981 PCS 
(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) sales marketed a total of 
3.88 million tonnes of potash, 3.88 million tonnes of potash. And 
remember, Mr. Speaker, PCS sales was just the North American 
market — 3.88 million tonnes of production. 
 
Now in May of 1981, PCS sales adopted the generic name Sas-K, 
pronounced Sask, for the purpose of marketing its products. Now 
the products that were offered were Sas-K Granular, Sas-K 
Coarse, Sas-K Standard, Sas-K Suspension, Sas-K Soluble, 
Sas-K Industrial, Sas-K Refined. And so when this government 
talks about diversification, there was a great deal of 
diversification in the potash industry in Saskatchewan because of 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. And the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan had this wide and diverse amount 
of fertilizer, amount of potash, in different . . . in varying forms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to look at North America for a moment. In 
1981 the company sold 2.11 million tonnes in North America, 
compared to 2.45 million tonnes in the year before. The North 
American agricultural sector suffered during 1981. High interest 
rates and continued inflation increased costs of production, 
forcing many farmers to tighten their belts because of the 
cost-price squeeze. Grain and livestock processing fell, due in 
part to the strong U.S. dollar. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there were some tough times there in the 
North American market in the early 1980s, but even then the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan performed at record levels, 
I maintain better and more profitable than any private sector 
company. And if that can be proven wrong, Mr. Speaker, I 
challenge the members to get up opposite and tell us any potash 
company in Saskatchewan that has done better, that has 
out-performed, that out-profited the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. And they can’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because 
there is not a private potash company in Saskatchewan that has 
done better than the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. It’s a 
history of success, and it will be success in the future, but not by 
the current 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1133 
 

government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the offshore market in 1981 
was characterized by strong sales in the first half of the year, 
followed by a decline in shipments in the second half. Economic 
problems in many importing countries caused customers to have 
their inventories used up rather than maintaining import levels. 
For example, Brazil was a major importer of potash and they 
experienced a lot of problems with their exchange rates, inflation, 
and as well there were some severe weather conditions in Brazil 
at the time. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about market development. Within 
PCS sales, service departments provided strong support for the 
sales effort. There was the marketing research department, and it 
played a valuable role in future market planning. 
 
One major development back in 1981 was the computerization 
of sales data for North America. Such data provided shipment 
breakdowns by state and by province, also by grade of production 
level, and it did that on a monthly basis. And this allowed a more 
detailed analysis of the market position, and as this data base was 
expanded, more sophisticated marketing analysis would have 
been able to have been put into place. 
 
But this government didn’t see the wisdom of that. They’re 
obsessed with their privatization move, and I think that if they sat 
down and thought about it or explained the whole story to people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, people wouldn’t want the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan sold because of the 
hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue that’s able to come and 
able to be generated from a very precious Saskatchewan resource 
which, incidentally, we have years of supply — some 4,000 years 
of projected reserves of potash in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1500) 
 
So we’re talking about the future, not just the past, in the history 
of potash and the future of potash in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In the market development department, there is a program that 
was designed to maintain existing markets and to assist in 
development of new potash markets by planning, developing, 
and implementing comprehensive promotional strategies. 
Internal programs had been implemented to increase 
communication and allow for an interchange of information 
between head office and field personnel. 
 
And you see, what was happening there, Mr. Speaker, was that 
they worked in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as a 
team. It wasn’t a few individuals like Chuck Childers, who this 
government had to bring in his daughter as well from the States 
to work for the potash corporation. Why, Mr. Speaker? I maintain 
to set it up for sale to the private sector, possibly to IMC 
(International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) out of 
Chicago.

But in the past, in the past, Mr. Speaker, we had a team of people 
that worked together. People from head office communicated 
with miners, miners communicated back through to head office, 
and they had an operation together that was a team that was 
proud; the esprit de corps was there. There was a lot of pride in 
working for a Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan because they 
were Saskatchewan people. They had Saskatchewan pride. They 
were producing a Saskatchewan product and Saskatchewan was 
competing as a major — the major player in the international 
market — head to head with private potash companies 
throughout the world. And the people of Saskatchewan were 
winning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — There was also, Mr. Speaker, the technical 
services department, and it acted as liaison between mines and 
PCS sales. It was responsible for production, quality 
surveillance, claims adjustments, and ensuring adherence to 
legislation pertaining to product quality and development. 
Technical services was also responsible for the presentation of 
technical reports at external seminars and conferences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that whole market development — the market 
research, market development, technical services department — 
those three areas or those departments made up the market 
development team, you might say. And they had a world-class 
act. 
 
You could send people from the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, born and educated in Saskatchewan, working in 
Saskatchewan on a world stage with a world-class product that 
we had a lot of pride in, and they could go head to head with 
anybody in the world concerning the development, the 
production, the occupational health and safety, the environment, 
the marketing, the sales. Anything you want to think about that 
would enter into mining and the potash industry, Saskatchewan 
was first-class, first-class people with a first-class product on a 
world-class stage with a world-class vision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — A world-class vision. And the reason there was 
a world-class vision there, Mr. Speaker, is because out of all the 
things that are produced in resources and manufacturing in 
Saskatchewan, there’s no other product, there’s no other item, 
there’s no other resource where we can dominate the world 
market. And we can dominate the world market; we can be 
leaders. We have the control to do on the international stage what 
other countries do with products that they sometimes almost have 
a monopoly on. 
 
Now we don’t have a monopoly on potash, but with 4,000 years 
of reserves in the province of Saskatchewan and a production 
capacity where we are able to sell in excess of 4.7 million tonnes 
on the world stage, we are world-class, and we do have the clout 
to influence what happens in potash in the world market, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back to the argument that has been used 
by the Conservatives like the member opposite 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1134 
 

from Weyburn who likes to holler from his seat but doesn’t get 
up in the potash corporation debate. He’ll shout across the floor, 
Mr. Speaker, but he won’t stand on his feet and debate the 
privatization of potash and the privatization of other resources in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He won’t speak on the Crown corporation utilities in the province 
of Saskatchewan because he knows his constituents beat him up 
on that. He had an open line show in his very own constituency 
in Weyburn and the calls were crucifying him — 11 out of 12 
calls against his government’s moves towards privatizing such 
things as our utilities, such things as the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan where we get services and we get revenue for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have members requested from this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, to go out to Weyburn constituency and other 
constituencies around the province to detail the facts as to what’s 
happening in privatization in the province of Saskatchewan, 
because it seems that all they get right now from the government 
members is rhetoric, rhetoric that is old rhetoric, it’s tired 
rhetoric. And when they blame a lot of these on things that 
happened prior to 1982 on the NDP, nobody buys that argument. 
I mean for Heaven’s sake, Mr. Speaker, New Democrats have not 
been government in the province of Saskatchewan since April of 
1982, and this government, when something goes astray, they 
still try and blame it on the NDP. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they don’t give the people of Saskatchewan 
much credit for having good common sense, and I tell you people 
in Saskatchewan have good common sense. That’s why people 
in Saskatchewan are now aware, and they’re aware to the extent 
that this government should be calling an election. And when 
they do, they’ll be removed by a resounding defeat in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — So I want to point out another — I don’t know 
the parliamentary word to use, Mr. Speaker; it’s difficult when 
can’t use all of the words in the English language in this Chamber 
— but the misleading of Saskatchewan people, I suppose that’s 
parliamentary enough, is that this government has said that the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is not doing well because 
of a glut on the world market. 
 
Now I tried to dispel some of that just because of the Canadian 
production, the Canadian sales that have taken place from the 
province of Saskatchewan. But I don’t want to rely on just that 
alone. 
 
I want to look at the period between 1982 and 1988 of new potash 
that came into production during that period of six years. Now 
new production between 1982 and 19 — we might as well say 
1989 — came onto production in larger quantities in at least four 
locations in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One was the province of Saskatchewan because of an expansion 
at the Lanigan potash mine, called Lanigan phase 2. Another 
location was in the province of New

Brunswick which brought a couple of new mines on. In fact, I 
believe it was their first two mines, two new mines that opened 
in New Brunswick. They increased production in Israel and 
they’ve increased production in Jordan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Lanigan phase 2 increased the productive 
capacity of that mine by about 1.9 million metric tonnes of KCl 
per year. And the Conservative government will tell people that, 
oh, it was the NDP that brought that on when there was a glut on 
the world market. 
 
Well there are two betrayals of the truth there, Mr. Speaker. One 
happens to be is that the Conservative government approved to 
proceed with phase 2 of Lanigan. I admit that New Democrats in 
government wanted it. They wanted the expansion. We saw the 
possibilities on the world market, but when the election came in 
April of 1982, this government, especially the cabinet members, 
know very, very well they could have stopped the expansion of 
Lanigan phase 2. 
 
It was their decision to proceed. It was a good decision. But the 
bad decision was, Mr. Speaker, is that this government refused to 
market potash from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
They said to the private companies: look, we’ll give you the 
upper hand; we’ll let you make your profits; we’ll let you 
maximize your profits, and we won’t push very hard to compete 
against you, but we have to have the mines producing a bit 
because we want to keep people working — a less, significantly 
less number of people now than what there was prior to 1982. 
 
But they didn’t market the bloody potash. They gave someone 
else the upper hand, Mr. Speaker. So that’s something about 
Lanigan phase 2: one, the government could have stopped it; and 
there was no glut on the world market, secondly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what about Israel? Israel’s potash company is called 
the Dead Sea Works. It increased capacity during the period ’82 
to 1988 by half a million metric tonnes. And it is planning to 
bring onto stream another 300,000 more metric tonnes this very 
year, if it hasn’t done so already. But the plan is for 1989, another 
300,000 metric tonnes. And incidentally, if I’m not mistaken, I 
believe that the Dead Sea Works, Israel’s potash company, 
exports 90 per cent of its production — 90 per cent of its 
production. 
 
Now if there was a glut on the world market, Mr. Speaker, during 
the period ’82 to 1988, how could a country like Israel, who has 
something like 20 per cent or more of their gross national product 
going into their army and their armed forces — a very serious 
situation there in the Middle East — if there was a glut on the 
world market, how in heaven’s name could they put 90 per cent 
of their potash sales into the export market and at the same time 
increase by 800,000 metric tonnes of potash? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like the members opposite during this debate 
to stand up and answer some of those questions. But when 
they’ve had the opportunity, they don’t answer those types of 
questions; they give their rhetoric. They 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1135 
 

blame all the problems over the past six or eight years on New 
Democrats. None of it’s our fault. Anyone who takes the time to 
study the record will know that this government has a legacy of 
mismanagement, a legacy of waste and patronage, and it’s not 
washing well with people in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It washes so poorly that the salinity off of these 
members opposite is stronger than the salinity that comes out of 
the Kalium chemical solution mine, which is a solution potash 
mine out towards Moose Jaw from Regina. 
 
Now that’s just Israel. What about Jordan? Now we know that 
Jordan and Israel aren’t very close. In fact sometimes they fight 
a lot amongst each other. The Jordan Potash Company is called 
the Arab potash company. And what do you think happened 
between 1982 and 1988, Mr. Speaker? Jordan increased their 
production capacity — 1.3 million metric tonnes. So there you 
have two countries, Israel and Jordan, who spend a large, large 
amount of their gross national product on a war effort, or on 
military defence, however you want to describe it — both 
countries. And together during that period of time they increase 
their capacity by 2.1 million metric tonnes. 
 
(1515) 
 
An Hon. Member: — How does that break down again?. Break 
that down. How much did Jordan do? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Jordan doing 1.3 million metric tonnes; Dead 
Sea Works in Israel, 800,000 metric tonnes, at the same time as 
they’re preoccupied with all kinds of problems to a greater 
magnitude than we’ve ever experienced. 
 
Young people in Saskatchewan are lucky, Mr. Speaker, and I’d 
even include myself into the young people of Saskatchewan. 
People 40 years of age and under have never had to experience 
war in Canada, they’ve never had to go off to an armed conflict 
unless they were part of some UN peace-keeping force. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve had a good life, an easy life in Canada in terms 
of that hardship. 
 
Countries like Jordan and Israel have grown up with war. 
They’ve grown up with deep religious conflicts between them, 
which to . . . The heart of the troubles there seem to be religious 
differences to a large extent, the search for homelands, the want 
for more land, the dispute as to whose land is whose — border 
conflicts. 
 
We haven’t experienced that, Mr. Speaker, but we are in for 
similar experiences in terms of poverty and hunger and lack of 
housing, lack of opportunity, lack of education, lack of health 
care, lack of services. Why? Not because of being preoccupied 
by war, not because of being preoccupied by border conflicts, 
because we have a peaceful neighbour to the South. We’ve never 
had a border conflict in recent history. 
 
Why? It’s because Conservative governments are bent on 
privatizing all the revenue-generating tools that we have at our 
disposal, Mr. Speaker. Except for the

small-business people, the farmer, the wage earner, that’s the 
only taxation base they want to have left. They don’t want to use 
resources to the good and to the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
We are a land that could be so much more, Mr. Speaker. We are 
a province that could be so much more. But this government 
seems to be bent on making us so much less than we are today, 
so much less than we are today. Why do they want to do that? 
 
I guess the government believes in something ideologically 
different, Mr. Speaker. It can’t be religion that causes them to do 
this. It can’t be a lack of education that causes them to do this. It 
seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this government is so far out of 
touch with Saskatchewan people, they don’t know what side of 
the potash mine is up and which side is down. 
 
And I think it bears repeating again, Mr. Speaker, about another 
argument that this government uses, about the NDP buying 
empty holes in the ground. That’s not an argument that washes 
any more, either, Mr. Speaker, not an argument that washes at 
all, because if they were empty holes in the ground, how could 
they have returned hundreds of millions of dollars in profits, 
hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue and taxation accruing 
to the people of the province; how could it have paid hundreds of 
millions of dollars in dividends — and it has. I’ve put those 
specific statistics on the record in previous days, Mr. Speaker. So 
how could people believe that there were empty holes in the 
ground and a waste of money? 
 
The other argument that dispels that rhetoric by the Conservative 
members, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that by this Bill 20, the Act to 
privatize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, they wish to 
sell shares — 55 per cent in Canada, not necessarily 
Saskatchewan, and 45 per cent foreign. Who in their right mind, 
Mr. Speaker, especially investors who study the market, they 
study the productivity, they study the economic evaluation, the 
analysis before they buy . . . They don’t throw their money out 
and hope to get a return. They make wise investments with their 
money because they want to make profit; they want to maximize 
their returns. 
 
Do you really think, Mr. Speaker, that this government would be 
able to bamboozle private investors to the extent that they could 
sell them shares to empty holes in the ground? False, Mr. 
Speaker, they can’t do it. This government, even with their 
rhetoric, does not have the ability to bamboozle investors into 
buying empty holes in the ground, because they’re not empty 
holes in the ground, they are potash mines that are productive, 
that have productive people working there, that have a chance to 
dominate and control the world market. And what does this 
government want to do? They want to give away the controlling 
interest — 45 per cent to foreign investors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just for a moment about New 
Brunswick, because during the period 1982 to 1988, New 
Brunswick had two new potash mines come onto stream. 
Denison built one potash mine and the Potash Company of 
America built the other mine. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think 
that the Government of New Brunswick had to give much 
incentive because those companies, Denison and the Potash 
Company of 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1136 
 

America knew that the long-term outlook for potash is 
increasing, not decreasing. 
 
If there ever is a glut on the world market, it is a very temporary 
glut on the world market and certainly does not affect sales. 
Because when you’re into spending millions of dollars on mines, 
millions in marketing, a billion dollar industry in Saskatchewan 
alone, you don’t look at the short term, you look at the long term. 
Because in the long term, potash will bring handsome rewards 
for Saskatchewan, as it will for New Brunswick, as it will for 
anyone who has a good productive capacity in potash regardless 
of where they are in the world. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Denison and the Potash Company of America, 
in those two new mines that were brought on stream between ’82 
and ’88, they have a capacity of 1.6 million metric tonnes — 1.6 
million metric tonnes of potash. Now would they bring that on if 
it was true what this government said about the potash industry, 
that there was a glut on the world market? That glut on the world 
market, as they call it, brought sales of potash down drastically 
for the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, but not private 
sector companies, Mr. Speaker. Those private sector companies 
did quite well. 
 
And what do we see happening in 1988, Mr. Speaker? In 1988 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan made a fairly good 
profit. They made a profit of $106 million. And the reason they 
made a profit of $106 million is because this government wanted 
to look good again because it had looked bad for so many years 
under their administration that they wouldn’t be able to sell 
shares, likely, because people would start believing that maybe 
they were empty holes in the ground. If you repeat the rhetoric 
long enough, people might start believing the rhetoric and not 
buying the shares. 
 
So they pushed a little sale of potash through the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, through Canpotex. They had a 
record year, and they made a profit of $106 million, Mr. Speaker. 
That just shows something of the value of potash in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just look a bit at the potash sales for the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The period of 
1977 to 1981, the North American sales for potash were 0.8 
million tonnes of KCl; 1978, 2.06 million tonnes of sales in North 
America, of KCl; 1979, 2.75 million tonnes of KCl; 1980, 2.45 
million tonnes of KCl; in 1981, 2.11 million tonnes of KCl sold 
in North America. Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a lot of potash to be 
sold in the North American market. 
 
And you must remember, Mr. Speaker, that potash isn’t sold to 
any large extent in Saskatchewan; farmers here don’t use potash. 
So most of this . . . we’re talking about an export market before 
free trade, but also, more importantly, before a Conservative 
government came into place in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
How about the offshore sales for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan? And now those first figures I gave you, Mr. 
Speaker — I’m not talking about all companies in total, I’m 
talking just about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker.

Offshore sales: 1977, 4.5 million tonnes of KCl sold; 1978, 1.22 
million tonnes of KCl; 1979, 1.45 million tonnes of KCl; 1980, 
1.96 million tonnes of KCl; 1981, 1.76 million tonnes of KCl. 
And you can see those sales, except for the odd glitch, were 
gradually going up, Mr. Speaker, and were gradually going up 
because of PCS Sales, and would have been going up even more 
if PCS International had come into place and not been dismantled 
by the Conservative government allowing Canpotex to give 
preference to private companies’ potash. Unfair, Mr. Speaker. 
Totally unfair. 
 
Now I think we should be aware of how much potash we’re 
talking about in terms of total sales. In terms of Canadian 
producers, and remembering that Saskatchewan was the 
producer during this period of time . . . other mines that have 
come on in different places in the country since. I’ve pointed out 
the two in New Brunswick, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the increased 
capacity. And of course Manitoba has a bit of potash there now 
as well that they’re producing, and they’ve got some capability 
there. 
 
But in 1977 total sales by Canadian producers of potash reached 
9.31 million tonnes of KCl; 1978, 10.6 million tonnes of KCl; 
1979, 11.73 million tonnes of KCl were sold; in 1980, 11.66 
million tonnes; and in 1981, 10.39 million tonnes of KCl. That’s 
total sales for Canadian producers. And during that period of 
time, we’re basically talking about the province of 
Saskatchewan, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
working in harmony with the private companies that were here 
that wished to maintain their own operations. They were taxed 
accordingly; they were happy to remain and are still operating 
here. 
 
And I see articles in the paper about the potash industry in 
Saskatchewan overjoyed with the government bringing in this 
Bill 20, a Bill to privatize the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Well of course they’re overjoyed, Mr. Speaker, 
because the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as a public 
revenue producing Crown was a very tough competitor — tough 
competitor in the North American market, tough competitor in 
the offshore market. And most of all, they had no reason in the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan to deceive the government 
or the people of Saskatchewan, which is one and the same. 
 
(1530) 
 
If there is not publicly owned Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, we go back to the period of the 1960s when we 
don’t know what’s happening in the industry, because the 
industry will not tell the government what their profits are, what 
their production capabilities are, how much they’re going to 
produce, what their plans are to the future. 
 
But as long as we have the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we have, so to speak, a window on the industry so 
that people in Saskatchewan know with honesty and with 
integrity and a sense of value to the province what is happening, 
what is capable of happening in the potash industry in the 
province of 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1137 
 

Saskatchewan. 
 
And for that reason even alone, Mr. Speaker, this government 
should not be selling off the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
to foreign interests to the magnitude of 45 per cent, which would 
be a controlling interest in a company as large as the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I just want to speak a bit more about PCS 
International, Mr. Speaker. In September of 1981, PCS 
International was established as a fourth subsidiary designed to 
meet the needs of offshore customers. Edmond Price was 
appointed vice-president of marketing of the new subsidiary. Mr. 
Price was a well-known person in the industrial fertilizer markets 
and had extensive experience in potash marketing. And he 
worked with a team of people — again I stress that — a team of 
people within the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, discussions were held with all major customers in 
the offshore potash markets. In a period of six months, the PCS 
International would be an active player in the selection and 
appointment of representatives and the finalization of contracts 
with buyers in all established overseas markets. A marketing 
team was being assembled in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and again 
I stress, in Saskatoon. I’m not talking about Chicago or Augusta 
or Atlanta or some other place within the world, I’m talking about 
establish in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was being assembled in Saskatoon to cover the principal 
market regions of Asia, Latin America, Oceania, and Africa. It 
was backed by supplying all grades of potash from the five 
producing divisions of PCS mining. 
 
As well as the PCS transportation delivery system, PCS 
International was to offer to customers a reliable, competitive, 
and comprehensive service, all made in Saskatchewan, done in 
Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan people’s interests, to supply an 
international need to produce more food through the use of 
potash in areas of the world where they require food to feed their 
people. Well the potash will still get there, I’m sure, but I’m not 
sure it will be as competitive and as comprehensive and as sure. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the losers will be the people of Saskatchewan, 
the people of Saskatchewan who relied on the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan to provide a good level of revenue, 
a number of jobs, and pride in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And this government wants to take all of that away, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s unbelievable, unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to talk about a few other things, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of who’s in the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan now. 
When my leader spoke at the initial stages of second reading on 
Bill 20, he thought that there may be a conspiracy between the 
PC government and the private potash companies. If there isn’t, 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like the members of the government side to 
tell us why PCS would be reducing its production levels, why is

it firing workers, and why is it closing down production capacity 
of its mines, while at the same time the private potash companies 
in the province of Saskatchewan have maintained their 
production levels. 
 
The government closes the PCS Cory mine, throwing hundreds 
of workers out of work, and hardship on families and children — 
very, very hard. A hard decision by crass people, and using the 
reason for there being a glut on the world market. We pointed out 
that myth about the glut on the world market. 
 
And at the same this was happening, could you explain, you 
members opposite, why the Potash Company of America invests 
at the same time millions of dollars to convert its Patience Lake 
mine near Saskatoon from a conventional mine to a solution 
processed mine so it can reopen. If there was a glut on the world 
market, the Potash Company of America would be investing its 
money elsewhere, not in Saskatchewan, converting an old shaft 
mine into a solution mine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are facts. Those are also questions that we ask the 
members opposite when they get up to speak. We want those 
members there to address those concerns and explain up front to 
Saskatchewan people why they’re doing what they’re doing. 
 
Our sources in the industry tell us, Mr. Speaker, that in 1988 the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was operating at 67 per cent 
of capacity, while the private potash producers of Saskatchewan 
were operating at 88 per cent capacity. That’s what I talked about 
earlier, Mr. Speaker. There’s a great deal of aggressivity in the 
private sector, but they’re not aggressive at all in terms of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. I guess they don’t believe 
in Saskatchewan people. They think they have to get some 
Americans or somebody from another place in the world that is 
an expert to make things work better. You see private producers 
benefit and the potash corporation people of Saskatchewan lose, 
Mr. Speaker, because of a heartless, ruthless Tory government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about individuals in the potash industry. The 
president of our public potash company, the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan, is Mr. Chuck Childers of the United States. 
Used to be Mr. David Dombowsky, a Saskatchewan person, 
Saskatchewan background, pride in Saskatchewan, pride in his 
team at the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, pride in what 
was happening, with vision to the future in the wealth and the 
resources of this province. But because the New Democrats had 
hired him, this government had to fire him. Just like The Globe 
and Mail reported, it must be revenge of the nerds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what do they do? They hire Chuck Childers of the United 
States. He is a former executive from IMC, International 
Minerals. It’s the biggest private sector competitor in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Now why on earth would someone do 
that? Why on earth would someone bring in a former executive, 
directly from IMC, to run our firm, and they’re the biggest 
private sector competitor in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
I maintain, Mr. Speaker, it’s to keep the publicly owned 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1138 
 

potash sales and production down to allow the private sector 
firms to be more buoyant and more prosperous, increase their 
capacity, and increase their profits at the expense of 
Saskatchewan people and the burden that will be created for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, not International Minerals, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the president of PCS Sales. PCS Sales 
is a man by the name of Mr. Bill Doyle of the United States. And 
guess where he worked before coming to PCS Sales, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where was Bill at? 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well I’ll tell you where Bill was at. Bill was a 
former senior executive of International Minerals, a company out 
of Chicago, our biggest private sector competitor in the potash 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan. Two top executives, 
Mr. Speaker, two top executives from United States of America, 
both from the same company, to run our Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan which used to be run by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Facts, Mr. Speaker — facts of today, facts of yesterday — are 
that it was profitable. It ran by Saskatchewan people, it was the 
pride of Saskatchewan people. It was a Saskatchewan team 
operating on international markets, in international circles, on an 
international stage, as a major, major player, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what do we have? Those Saskatchewan people are gone. 
This government seems intent on bringing into place people from 
International Minerals to run our potash corporation. I maintain 
they’re running it into the ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you know where Mr. Doyle in fact runs PCS Sales out of, Mr. 
Speaker? Do you know the answer to that? Mr. Speaker, Bill 
Doyle runs PCS Sales out of Chicago. Its head office, Mr. 
Speaker, used to be in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan — not Chicago, 
not New York, not Tokyo, not Hong Kong. Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s in Chicago; head office in 
Chicago. 
 
And the sell-off that they want to do of the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan hasn’t even been completed yet — hasn’t been 
completed yet. And we tell you, Mr. Speaker, as long as I have 
anything to do about it, as long as I’m around this province I’ll 
do everything I can to stop the insanity and the obsession of this 
Conservative government with privatization — privatization of 
the SaskEnergy, privatization of SaskPower, privatization of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan say they’ve gone too far 
and they must be stopped. If they’re not stopped, Mr. Speaker, 
there won’t be anything left. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, still on the personnel within the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, I note that the 
vice-president in charge of human resources for PCS is another 
former executive of International Minerals out of Chicago. 
Former executive of IMC is now vice-president

in charge of human resources for the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well human resources, Mr. Speaker, is something that is very 
intricate in dealing with the team, the team of Saskatchewan 
people. Why do we need an executive member from IMC, a 
president, a vice-president from IMC, somebody in charge of 
PCS Sales from IMC — why would we need those people to run 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? Since they’ve been 
running it, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has been 
going downhill. 
 
When Saskatchewan people were in charge of the potash 
corporation, they were a Saskatchewan team. They made money 
every single year when Saskatchewan people ran it. They made 
money and profits for people and services in the Government of 
Saskatchewan. What’s wrong with those Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan people working in a Saskatchewan head office that 
have been sold out and betrayed by a Conservative government 
at our expense, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Now I also understand that it goes on from 
there. The notes that I’ve had researched say that the current head 
of Canpotex, the agency that sells all Saskatchewan potash 
overseas, is Mr. Eric Ekedahl, a former executive of . . . Do you 
want to know where he’s from? A former executive of 
International Minerals out of Chicago — IMC. 
 
(1545) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the members opposite on the 
government side are starting to get a picture of what’s happening. 
I wonder why the back bench members don’t ask the cabinet, just 
wait a minute, what the heck’s going on here? Why are 
Saskatchewan men and women not good enough to run the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Are you ashamed of Saskatchewan people? Are 
you proud of people from Chicago coming in and taking away 
jobs from Saskatchewan people while running down the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we challenge the members opposite to answer 
these questions. We wish to point out other items in this debate 
on Bill 20. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that there is a special order on today at 
3:45, and rather than getting into more items on this debate, I 
would move that we now adjourn the debate on Bill 20 — An 
Act to reorganize the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh you’re not ready to adjourn? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I withdraw that motion. I understood that there was 
a special order on at 3:45, and in a sign of co-operation with the 
House I was going to move for adjournment of this debate. But 
if this debate is still going to continue, I have other things that I 
want to put onto the 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1139 
 

record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people throughout Saskatchewan have asked 
me personally to do whatever we can to stop the obsession and 
the wrongful thrust by the government to privatize everything 
that’s in the public sector that we have relied on in the past. 
They’ve asked me to stop the government, to make them listen. 
And we’ve done that, Mr. Speaker, during the SaskEnergy Bill. 
 
We left this legislature and we went out over a period of two 
weeks, talking to Saskatchewan people. And they gave an 
overwhelming response. By current . . . to date, I believe there is 
in excess of 100,000 names on petitions. There are many people 
who have written letters. There are many people who have made 
phone calls. And I’m sure, sir, that many of the back bench 
members and the cabinet members have also heard from their 
constituents, that there’s something wrong with what they’re 
doing. 
 
Well I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we came back into the 
legislature last Monday for a number of reasons. One was that we 
didn’t want to cause hardship on Saskatchewan people. And this 
government, because of their obsession with privatization, has 
not dealt with the budget for the current year. There’s a procedure 
called interim supply that governments or legislatures use when 
budgets aren’t approved, and we came into the legislature to 
approve an interim supply Bill for a period of spending. 
 
And as of May 12, I believe it was, the government would have 
virtually been broke. They couldn’t have paid bills to hospital 
boards and school boards and others, and we thought it was unfair 
at that point, because we had heard long and clear and loudly 
from Saskatchewan people that privatization in Saskatchewan 
must be stopped. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we came back in to approve the interim 
supply Bill. Some people had asked, well why an interim supply 
Bill? Why don’t we just let them run special warrants like they 
did back in 1987 when they never called the legislature until, I 
believe, it was June 17, well past the end of the fiscal year. The 
end of the fiscal year is March 31, ’87. They never called the 
legislature in till June 17. 
 
But what many people didn’t realize is government can’t operate 
by special warrants. Special warrants are done by cabinet in the 
isolation of the Executive Council. But when the legislature’s in 
session, as it was during the bell-ringing episode, they couldn’t 
pass special warrants because the legislature was in session. So 
firstly we came back in because we did not want hardship to be 
inflicted on Saskatchewan people by the Conservative 
government. 
 
Secondly, we were successful. We had a resounding victory in 
terms of making this government withdraw the Bill to reorganize 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the sell-off of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, and that Bill is no longer 
before this legislature. 
 
They have the capability to bring it back in, Mr. Speaker. They 
have the capability to bring it back in. The member from Meadow 
Lake says it’s not true. It’s true to the extent

that it’s not being debated. It’s passed through first reading, but, 
Mr. Speaker, that Bill is not currently before us in the legislature, 
but they continue with privatization. Now it’s Bill 20, Bill 20 on 
privatization. 
 
So the second reason was that we had that victory; that we wanted 
to come back in and declare that Saskatchewan people, yes, we 
heard you. And the third reason was we wanted to come back in 
with tens of thousands of names which were gathered. In less 
than two weeks there were over 50,000 names on petitions; by 
this time, there’s over 100,000. 
 
So the third reason was, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to come back 
in this legislature to table at least 50,000 petitions to say to this 
Conservative government that Saskatchewan people are 
speaking to you; Saskatchewan people are saying that we do not 
want the Progressive Conservative government to proceed with 
the privatization of our utilities. 
 
We also heard loud and clear that there were other issues. The 
focus, certainly during that time, was on the SaskEnergy Bill — 
the privatization of SaskPower, the destruction of a utility that 
both the Premier and Deputy Premier had promised would never 
be privatized in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But there were other issues that cropped up, issues that people 
didn’t want the potash corporation being privatized either, 
because they understood the returns that we had received since 
1976. And as the people in the province become more and more 
aware of what Bill 1 means, they will want us to stop that Bill at 
any means we have at our disposal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Mr. Speaker, the members need to be aware 
that Bill 1 is a Bill dealing with privatization. In fact it’s the first 
Bill that was brought in by this government when the session 
came in, and that Bill gives overwhelming power, new and 
unusual power, to the cabinet members. If they want to sell off a 
Saskatchewan asset any more, they don’t have to come before 
this legislature if this Bill passes, Bill 1; they don’t have to ask 
their caucus; they don’t have to ask the opposition; they don’t 
have to ask the Saskatchewan people; they don’t even have to ask 
this legislature, Mr. Speaker. They can just go ahead and sell 
everything in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Behind the closed doors of the cabinet meeting, the Executive 
Council, those few members that sit on the front benches of the 
Conservative Party here in this Legislative Assembly can take all 
that power, they can take away all that democracy from the 
province of Saskatchewan and sell every public asset in the 
province. Privatization in private, Mr. Speaker, is what we call it. 
 
Now we want people in Saskatchewan also to be aware of the 
stages that these Bills all have to go through, Mr. Speaker. They 
seem intent right now on continuing the debate on the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. Now Bills get introduced, Mr. 
Speaker, and Bill 20, the Bill before us now, was brought in at 
first reading and there 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1140 
 

was no debate. 
 
The next stage, the stage that we’re at right now, Mr. Speaker, is 
called second reading, and at second reading there’s substantial 
debate. And I would recommend to those people in 
Saskatchewan who follow the legislature and what happens by 
this process, would refer to my leader’s speech of April 19 and 
April 20 on second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — It is one of the most informative presentations 
I’ve ever seen on the potash industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. It lays out the history, Mr. Speaker, it lays out the 
dilemma of not only the New Democrats in the early ’70s, but 
also the Liberals. It lays out the situation in the debates of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan coming into being. It talks 
about the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan’s success and the 
proud workings and the pride that Saskatchewan workers and 
Saskatchewan people had in the potash corporation, and it 
pointed out the proud history of the potash corporation. And 
sadly enough, the speech also pointed out the demise of the 
potash corporation under this government, the Progressive 
Conservative government in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I would encourage people in this province to phone in to our 
caucus office at 787-1911 and ask for a copy of the speech of the 
Leader of the Opposition on Bill 20, the privatization Bill on Sask 
potash. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — That number, Mr. Speaker, was 787-1911. 
Now that’s only on second reading, Mr. Speaker. The next stage 
that Bill 20 would normally go to would be the committee stage. 
In Committee of the Whole, this whole House in committee will 
study Bill 20 clause by clause. And we intend to bring expert 
testimony before Committee of the Whole to point out the benefit 
of Saskatchewan potash to Saskatchewan people and how this 
government is destroying a history and a future for the province 
to provide us with substantial revenues for the service of 
Saskatchewan people, by selling off and dismantling a 
Saskatchewan company run by Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — When dealing with expert testimony, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — According to previous arrangements, I now 
interrupt the proceedings. I am informed that His Excellency 
Wan Li is now here to address the Assembly. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — It is a privilege for me to introduce to this 
Assembly some distinguished visitors from China: His 
Excellency, Wan Li, chairman of the Standing Committee of the 
National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, 
and Mrs. Wan.

I also want to introduce other special guests who are 
accompanying Mr. Wan Li: His Excellency Mr. Zhang, 
Ambassador to Canada from the People’s Republic of China, and 
Mrs. Zhang; Mr. Cao, Deputy of the National People’s Congress; 
Mr. Zhi, Vice-minister of Foreign Affairs; and Mr. Gu, member 
of the Standing Committee. 
 
I wish also to welcome from Ottawa, the Hon. Andrée 
Champagne, MP, assistant deputy chairperson of the Committee 
of the Whole House. 
 
It is an honour for the members of this Assembly to be addressed 
by His Excellency Wan Li, a most distinguished legislator. Will 
you please welcome our guests to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all 
the colleagues, my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, and 
I’m sure I can speak for not only this side but both sides of the 
House, and I believe the Leader of the Opposition will extend his 
welcome, indeed all the people of Saskatchewan welcome His 
Honour, and it’s my honour to welcome with the support and 
hospitality that we can find here in the province, His Excellency 
Mr. Wan Li and Mrs. Wan to our province and to these legislative 
chambers. 
 
Mr. Wan Li is the Chairman of the People’s Congress, and only 
in a few times in our history have we had the privilege to 
welcome such a distinguished visitor to the very heart of our 
government and to the democratic process here to address the 
Assembly and the citizens of Saskatchewan, and indeed all of 
Canada. Today we are honoured that His Excellency has 
accepted our invitation to speak to us all here in this Assembly. 
 
I was hosted by Mr. Wan Li when I was in Beijing, and we talked 
about many things, and obviously the extensive two-way 
communication and trade that we have between the province of 
Saskatchewan and Canada and the People’s Republic of China 
and our sister province, the Jilin province. 
 
And we’ve just had a delegation return, and our discussions with 
respect to distance education, computerized literacy training, 
grain handling and storage equipment, telecommunications, hogs 
and beef production, apple-pear production in the province of 
Saskatchewan, co-productions of films and the film industry, as 
well as our extensive trade in wheat and potash, were many 
things that we agreed we had in common, and we look forward 
to an even better relationship. 
 
The twinning agreement that we have between the province of 
Jilin and the province of Saskatchewan has deepened our mutual 
understanding, and it’s promoted enhanced trade contracts 
between the province and our country. In fact, our trade from the 
province of Saskatchewan and China has increased from about 
$400 million in 1982 to 1.2 billion in 1988. We have a very, very 
unique relationship in agriculture, in trade, in education, in 
industry, in science and technology. 
  



 
May 15, 1989 

 

1141 
 

Mr. Wan Li, it’s a pleasure, Your Excellency, to have you here. 
Mr. Wan Li is an avid tennis player. He is also an excellent bridge 
player, and he’s noted in China for introducing and supporting 
sports to young people all over the People’s Republic of China, 
particularly at the level of the Olympics. He has been active in 
political life for decades and decades in the People’s Republic of 
China and is well respected and certainly loved. 
 
It is my distinct pleasure, personal pleasure, to welcome Mr. Wan 
Li and his wife and his delegation to the province of 
Saskatchewan and to this Assembly. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I join 
with the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan on behalf of 
the official opposition to welcome the honoured guest, His 
Excellency Wan Li and Mrs. Wan and the delegation that we 
have to the Saskatchewan legislature today. 
 
As the Premier has pointed out, throughout the years the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan have been working very hard to 
build close ties and enduring ties between the People’s Republic 
of China, the people of Canada, and the province of 
Saskatchewan. And your visit today, sir, symbolizes the success 
of that ongoing historical effort. 
 
I might add on a personal note that I had the opportunity and the 
privilege of visiting China in 1979 in a non-governmental 
delegation of about 20 people, led by a former premier of our 
province, the late Tommy Douglas. Your government at that time 
was involved in its modernizations program, and I was very 
much taken by the beauty of the country and the drive and the 
dedication of the people. And the program from what one can see 
and read seems to be indeed progressing well. 
 
Today, as a result of all those efforts, we enjoy a more successful 
trading relationship. And as the Premier has pointed out, I think 
the future can only hold greater promise for even more success 
in areas ranging from education, cultural exchanges, new 
technology. These all will work to develop a lasting and mutually 
beneficial relationship. As everybody knows, His Excellency is 
also going to be receiving an honorary degree, Mr. Speaker, on 
his visit here. Let me, sir, take this opportunity to offer to you our 
heartfelt congratulations with respect to the honorary degree that 
you’ll be getting from the University of Regina tomorrow. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues, permit me to welcome you again to 
Saskatchewan, and may you see in this province the kind of 
beauty that I was privileged to see in your country during my 
travels there. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by my seat mate, the member from Melville, that 
by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly do now adjourn in order to

hear the address of our distinguished guest, His Excellency 
Wan Li, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the 
National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of 
China. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:01 p.m. 
 
 


