


















































March 16, 1986 Evening


 
 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 March 16, 1989 
 

193 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe and the amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Trew. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, before dinner tonight I had just started my remarks on 
public participation in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’d 
indicated, and I wanted to start my remarks by indicating to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to all the people of the province, 
that when we talk about public participation we talk about a 
non-political public participation. 
 
It gives the opportunity here to all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to, for the first time, become involved in all 
the major Crown corporations that we set forth for public 
participation. It gives everyone the opportunity to participate, 
and become an owner of success and of the success stories that 
we have created in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to name off a few to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
don’t want to take a whole lot of time and name off all of them, 
but I want to name a few. 
 
I think probably one of the first major successes in this province 
has been Saskoil. I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that under the NDP administration, and when the 
Leader of the Opposition was the deputy premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan — the member from Riversdale — I 
want to indicate to you that Saskoil had never turned a profit, 
and always had to come back to the trough for more and more 
investment dollars to go out there and try and compete as an oil 
company in the world. 
 
And I want to indicate to you now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
Saskoil was one of the greatest success stories in this province. 
It has now become one of the most nationally known oil 
companies across this nation, in the beginning of public 
participation, and henceforth it has been profiting. And those 
particular profits are definitely coming back to all the people for 
benefits to all the people in the province through royalties and 
through shares. 
 
I want to indicate to you also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in your 
own particular riding up in . . . or around your particular riding 
of Prince Albert there, in the Shellbrook-Torch River area, that 
the Weyerhaeuser story in the province here has been nothing 
but a success again. And I want to just read you a recent 
announcement that has just come forth. 
 
But before I do that I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that when we inherited and up until the time we had 
sold Weyerhaeuser into the private sector, that that had put a 
debt burden on the public of Saskatchewan at  

approximately $90,000 per day cost to the taxpayer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 91,000. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — My colleague from Rosthern had remind me 
that it was 91,000. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was a per day cost 
on the debt of that pulp mill sitting up in Prince Albert region. 
And who argued that sale? Who argued here for days about 
give-aways, and about giving it to the private people so that 
they could operate it and profit and expand and create a whole 
bunch of jobs, and secure jobs, lifetime jobs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? It was the members of the NDP opposition that kept 
us in the legislature to debate it for day in and day out, and to 
try to convince the public that this was a wrong thing for this 
government to do. 
 
And I want to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you spoke 
earlier towards the throne speech, you had indicated the 
numbers that . . . in the millions of dollars of return, profit, 
return to the taxpayers that Weyerhaeuser has already given to 
us. And I want to indicate also that of their recent 
announcement because of this success story, a $20.8 million 
expansion was announced for the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill in 
Prince Albert. 
 

The company is going to build a plant to turn its roll of 
paper into sheets of paper before export (before export, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker.) It is expected to create 34 permanent jobs 
and about 100 man-years of construction employment. 
 
Weyerhaeuser said the expansion is in direct response to the 
free trade deal with the United States where most of the 
mill’s fine paper has been exported. The company has 
waited until now because duties on exporting sheeted paper 
to the United States were higher than the duties of shipping 
the rolls of paper. Weyerhaeuser expects construction to 
begin this spring with completion in the summer of 1990. 
Overall, Weyerhaeuser employs now about 1,000 people in 
Saskatchewan, including about 100 in a saw mill in Big 
River; another 100 at a chemical plant in Saskatoon; and the 
rest working out of its pulp and paper mills in Prince Albert. 
 

Now I want to indicate to the members opposite, those 
individuals, those 1,000 plus people, are going to have an 
opportunity to have secure life. Oh, I touched a nerve, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The member from Quill Lakes, he’s still upset 
about the fact of the Weyerhaeuser deal. And he’s also still 
upset about the free trade deal, and this here is documented 
proof that we can now export a finished product instead of our 
raw materials to have them processed in another country. But 
he’s still hollering and complaining about it. 
 
But I want to indicate to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when 
we’re talking about public participation, we’re talking about 
jobs. Jobs — jobs for our young, and secure jobs for the people 
that are already in the working place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again, the member from Quill Lakes is 
upset. He’s hollering; he’s trying to holler me down. But  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

194 
 

I want to indicate to you that what we are doing here is showing 
the people that there is so much more we can be. We had said 
this in 1982, that we believed in this province, that we had a 
vision of that, and that vision was that we knew we could be so 
much more. And I want to indicate that there are major 
investments going to be coming in here that will rattle the 
minds of the opposition within the next year and two, and so on 
and so on. 
 
I know the members don’t like to hear it across the way, 
because they were not able to attract business into this province. 
They, in fact, you know, the members opposite are arguing 
about the fact that there has been an exodus of people out of the 
province. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to indicate to you 
that we have an upgrader in Regina that they were against, that 
created jobs and brought people in. 
 
We have an upgrader announcement in my own riding of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, that’s in . . . last fall. We have already 
done some groundwork, and this spring, once the frost is gone, 
we’ll be doing more and will be . . . And there has been tender 
let for engineering on various different types of equipment, etc., 
millions of dollars worth of tenders. And they are against that. 
 
It was odd, while I’m on that topic, it was odd because here 
during the federal election, Mr. Broadbent, the leader of the 
federal NDP Party, comes out in the paper and says, oh no, 
we’re in favour of that upgrader in Lloydminster; that’s the 
greatest thing since sliced bread. But still in this legislature, 
they talk about us giving away millions of dollars to oil 
companies and everything else and saying, we’ll shut them 
down, we’ll shut them down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they 
shut down the oil industry in this province, if they get to be 
government and shut the oil industry down in this province, as 
they say they will, as the member from Riversdale says they 
will, then I’ll tell you what’s going to happen in my area. It’s 
going to become depressed. 
 
It will become a depressed area. And you want to talk about 
small businesses, they pretend to believe, make people believe 
that they’re trying to be on the small business side. I tend to 
challenge them if they depress the oil industry any more than 
what it had been from world prices, through their royalty tax 
structures as they indicate that they’re going to slap on to the oil 
companies in this province. 
 
Then I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’ll be major 
bankruptcy up in my particular area. People have invested 
dollars into small business ventures in my area, in the 
expectation of a secure oil industry in this province. And I’ll tell 
you, I want to warn them right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
from the words that have been coming out from the member of 
Riversdale, the Leader of the Opposition’s mouth, in this 
legislature, if he ever becomes leader I ask them to begin to 
worry, because he’s coming after them; he’s going to tax the oil 
companies into oblivion and chase them out of the province of 
the Saskatchewan once again. 
 

I want to indicate, and I have back-up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when they were in government, when they were in government, 
there was about 100 gas wells drilled over their whole period of 
government — about 100. And I want to indicate to you that 
since we’ve invited the gas companies to Saskatchewan and 
have allowed them to . . . and opened the door for them and 
allowed them to explore and develop gas in this province . . . 
The natural gas wells that we have drilled in 1988 was in the 
eight hundreds of gas wells in Saskatchewan. And I want to 
indicate to you that that gas is now feeding our domestic lines 
as well as exporting to the eastern markets. And I will indicate 
to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those jobs . . . Those wells that 
were drilled have created many, many hundreds of jobs for the 
men and women in this province. And they want to do away 
with it, they want to keep it in the ground. They don’t want to 
develop anything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because they want to 
keep the people in this province under fist. 
 
They want to keep the people of this province down to such a 
low that they don’t believe in themselves. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we believe in the people of this province. We believe 
that they have the brilliance, they have the attitude to go out and 
develop and grow. We have the attitude to expand, to become 
world-wide known. They have the . . . We have the abilities, the 
technology and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is what it’s all about. 
It’s about families, it’s about giving them some secure feeling 
about a province. 
 
I have sat here and listened about the fact of . . . and the 
condemnation on our administration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
health care. I could not believe that they’re still trying to carry 
that argument. I want to say to you that their mediscare to the 
people of this province is played out. They haven’t grasped the 
fact that people don’t believe them any more. People do not 
believe the NDP with their scare tactics on the medicare 
programs. 
 
I will give you the background of this. When they were in 
administration there was approximately $760 million spent in 
health care under their administration in this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we as a PC government and under the 
leadership of Premier Devine . . . I know you’re going to correct 
me again. I spoke . . . 
 
(1915) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members are not allowed to use other 
members’ names. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Under our great Premier and our leader, I 
want to indicate to you that our government is budgeted at a 
third or better now of the total budget in health care alone. 
We’re sitting into the billion of dollars — I believe it’s about 
1.2, 1.3 billion now. And I want to indicate to you that I give 
you some examples. I’ll just go back to my home riding 
because I’m sure other members want to brag about the various 
different facilities in health care things that have taken place in 
their particular areas. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
government, and through me, have been able to go ahead and 
put a hospital in Lloydminster, new facility; a hospital in 
Maidstone, new  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

195 
 

facility; a hospital in Cut Knife, new facility. 
 
And I want to talk to you about nursing homes. Nursing homes 
were . . . The members opposite . . . And I can’t use names and 
I respect that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it’s too bad, because 
there are individuals across the way there, the NDP opposition, 
that were ministers of Health, that are sitting in this legislature 
right now condemning us for not doing enough in health care. 
And the member from Saskatoon, I can’t remember, Nutana or 
somewhere, south, Saskatoon South, he was one of the fellows 
that was the minister of Health at that particular time and they 
had a moratorium, a moratorium on the nursing homes — and 
the people of Saskatchewan, in particular in my riding, will 
never forget them. 
 
I want to indicate, I want to indicate that the health system has 
improved tenfold in my riding — the facilities where people 
now can go into these facilities and not worry about the staff 
having to take pails around to collect the rain that was running 
from the roof and things like this. This is the kinds of things 
that they had to put up with out of my riding — literally pails 
and mopping floors because of raining through the . . . water 
running through the ceilings from rains and stuff. And they just 
turned their back on the people — poor facilities, and the 
equipment in them was poor, was outdated. They were so . . . 
The equipment was as outdated as the NDP opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
But you know, like, when it comes to the health care, the scare 
tactics they use on seniors, etc., Mr. Deputy Speaker, my 
minister have developed programs for seniors in this province 
that are second to none across the whole nation, and our seniors 
are finally realizing the fact that it was not the NDP that 
believed in them. It’s our administration that are trying to work 
with them. We’ve been condemned about having task forces: 
health task force, seniors task force, and everything else. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’re talking with the people in 
Saskatchewan; we’re talking to seniors; we’re talking to young 
people; we’re talking to the sick; we’re talking to the 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re not concerned about trying to scare 
people. We’re trying to warn the people in this province of 
Saskatchewan that if they ever bring back an administration 
under the leadership of the member from Riversdale and all his 
caucus, for what they are, I want to warn them that if they want 
to go back into those days of moratoriums, and high taxes, and 
saying . . . listening to all the lame-brain excuses of why they 
have to do this and that, I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re 
in for a real ride. 
 
Socialism is becoming a party of outdate. There is no ideas, 
there are no ideas of how they can compete into the real world. 
They’ve lost it. 
 
I want to tell you, I want to tell . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us about the real world. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Well, that’s . . . And the member from Quill 
Lakes wants me to tell him about the real world. Well I’ll tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill  

Lakes has never been in a real world; he’s never been in a real 
world. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that they also condemn us 
about education. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you a little bit 
about education and the facilities that we have up in my region. 
Since our government has taken power there has been 
continuous, continuous expansion and population in my area, 
continuous expansion of young families in my area, continuous 
expansion of education facilities in my area — not only in the 
city of Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re diversifying. Our smaller communities up in my 
constituency are expanding and we have to upgrade our 
facilities in education. Our education facilities are definitely 
expanding, and we’re . . . New jobs, new jobs for teachers, new 
jobs for young people, young men and women, young married 
families, young people. 
 
Our sporting facilities are expanding; our community 
businesses are expanding, Mr. Speaker; and this is what it’s all 
about. It was through support programs from agriculture, 
support programs to oil-related business, and mortgage 
protection programs that are bringing . . . In fact, I want to tell 
you this story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other day I had a young couple that lived in Lloydminster, 
Alberta, and they were down here for the throne speech. They 
came down for the throne speech, and they came to me and 
indicated to me that they are afraid of the interest rates taking 
their mortgage payments a little away on what their budget is 
going to be. And they know there’s a security in Saskatchewan 
on home mortgage payments. And they had indicated to me that 
they had just sold their home, I believe, and they’re going to 
now move back to the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster, and 
they’re going to settle in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it just made me happy to know that there’s a program that 
our government has developed that are bringing young people 
back to Saskatchewan — to feel more secure, to be able to 
budget, to be able to know that they’re not going to be paying 
more than nine and three-quarter per cent interest on their home 
mortgages. Now isn’t that a nice secure feeling. 
 
I want to indicate to you also, Mr. Speaker, when we’re talking 
about the fact of environment and various different 
environmental aspects and expansion and everything else, when 
we’re talking to these companies, we’re taking into 
consideration all environmental impacts. We’re taking into 
consideration the security of clean fresh air and good forestry 
programs and all around a clean province and a province that 
people can be proud to live in, to work in, to play in. It’s just 
one of those things. 
 
But I want to indicate to you that today I heard them slandering 
us about some emissions from the upgrader here in Regina 
which evidently they’re trying to run the upgrader down. 
They’re trying to say it’s no good. They’re trying to say it 
shouldn’t have been built. They didn’t believe in it in the first 
place, and the whole bloody gamut. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

196 
 

But I want to tell you that when they were in government . . . 
And it’s been mentioned here by a colleague that the NDP says, 
PCBs no danger. This was a headline: “NDP says PCBs no 
danger.” 
 

The NDP long for the old days. They also like to portray a 
strong sense of concern for the environment. In 1978, it 
was discovered that the NDP government of the day had 
kept secret a massive spill of PCBs in the city of Regina. 
More than 1,500 gallons of the PCBs was spilled onto the 
earth on the 1600 block of 1st Avenue. When the cover-up 
was discovered, the NDP Deputy Minister of Environment 
had this to say: “While it is normally department policy to 
make the public aware of a potential problem when we are 
first aware of it, in this case we felt there was no danger to 
the public.” 
 

Can you imagine? And now they’re the righteous ones here; 
they’re trying to condemn this administration for poor 
environmental policies. But there was no danger to the public. 
 

Late notification was not used as an explanation, as the 
(D.M.) deputy minister said the agency was notified 
immediately after the spill took place. The solution 
employed by the NDP was sealing the spill with asphalt. 
 

Now if you can imagine leaching problems and the whole thing 
that could have taken place, and gotten into the water systems, 
and could have travelled for miles underneath into the various 
water veins . . . 
 
In other words: 
 

The NDP were informed of the highly dangerous spill, 
which they then claimed posed not even a potential danger 
. . . 
 

And solved the problem, like I said, by paving over top of it. 
 
We may never know, we may never know how many cancer 
cases might have been caused by this spill or whatever, but I’ll 
tell you, I’ll tell you: did they care? Did they care? I ask you, I 
ask you if they cared. 
 
We have that same thing with the NDP government when they 
were in power, when they had said that waiting lists at cancer 
clinics for very important surgery to take place of all kinds and 
natures . . . Well they said that is the kind of system we have if 
we have a good health care system. It’s a sign of efficiency in 
our health care system. And now they stand across the way and 
the member from Riversdale, he indicates that these line-ups are 
just horrendous and he’s blowing us, trying to embarrass the 
government for this kind of thing. 
 
But I want to tell you something: these people had nowhere to 
go. They didn’t expand in the cancer facilities; they didn’t 
expand in the hospitals; they didn’t expand in health care costs. 
People had to go out of province. People had to leave this 
province for operations and treatments and CAT scans and the 
whole thing, Mr.  

Speaker. And these are the simple, fundamental, basic things 
that should have been given to the people, but they refused. 
 
And now yes, we as a Progressive Conservative government are 
in a catch-up mode. So they ask us over there, righteously, that 
we should be pouring more money into health care. Well we all 
agree with that. We should be pouring more money into health 
care. We should be pouring more money into education. We all 
agree we should be pouring more money into education. We 
should be pouring more money into agriculture. Well we all 
agree that we should be. We should be pouring money into 
almost literally every program that government has. But there’s 
only so much. 
 
And then on the other side of the . . . They turn around and they 
say, high taxes, too much high taxes. Well, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to remind the members opposite and the people in the province 
here that . . . I don’t have to tell the people of the province. I 
want to remind members opposite that government doesn’t have 
a machine that I can go in a back room and crank out a million 
dollars or two. The money comes from the people. There isn’t 
such a thing as free this, free that, free this and free that, free 
health care, free education, free agricultural programs, free this 
or that. People pay for it. They pay for it — hard, cold cash — 
they pay for it. 
 
They pay for it through resource revenues. They pay through it 
through income tax. They pay through it through various other 
taxes. Government has to get resources from somewhere. 
People aren’t that naive. The NDP opposition must be. It 
doesn’t take people to figure these kinds of things out. 
 
(1930) 
 
They want good quality education. They want good quality 
health care. They want good quality agricultural programs. 
They want all this quality service. They know the NDP 
squandered the money that they entrusted; they squandered it on 
the purchases of potash mines. 
 
What did they do with the potash mines? Did they create any 
more jobs? No. Did they create less jobs? Yes. Did they profit? 
No. Did they run a heavy deficit? I would suggest to you, Mr. 
Speaker, they ran millions and millions and millions and 
hundreds of millions of dollars deficit in the potash alone, by 
the purchase. And they don’t like to hear that. 
 
But I want to guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to be 
the first people, the NDP opposition are going to be the first 
people to stand up on this floor of the legislature when we put 
the potash mines up for public participation. Watch them! 
 
I’ll guarantee you, that although in 1976 and again in 1979, 
when they were thinking about it, when they were dwelling on 
it, they were saying in ’76 and ’79, yes, we’re going to put up 
these Crown corporations, potash mine, we’re going to allow 
the public to participate, they didn’t have the guts to do it. They 
didn’t have the guts to do it and I’ll tell you why. Because, as 
the member from Riversdale always states: the people that 
make the  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

197 
 

decision is the party, is the convention; they make the decisions. 
And they know; they know that the people involved and their 
delegates involved at their conventions wouldn’t let them do it. 
They wouldn’t let them do it. 
 
Listen. They wouldn’t let the people . . . The delegates at your 
convention would not let you people allow to put the potash or 
any Crown corporation up for public participation. Now we did 
it and we’re going to continue to do it. And it’s popular out 
there. And members of the opposition better take some polls, 
because they’re going to find out it’s popular out there, because 
we already know it. 
 
And I want to indicate to you that when it came to the question, 
when it came to the question that I said earlier, there was a 
question to the member from Riversdale, the Leader of the NDP 
Opposition, where it says, “Will you legislate to recover lost 
Crown corporations?” Well his answer was, “That decision’s 
going to have to be made if and when we assume office.” Well 
. . . And I wanted to remind you because you weren’t listening. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that I’ve 
enjoyed being able to have a couple of cents’ worth in this 
throne debate, and I’m certainly pleased about the vision that 
our Premier and our government is taking this province. 
 
And I want to indicate you that it’s a pleasure to be back in this 
Assembly, being able to speak, through your Chair, to the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan. And I just want them 
to get ready because we’re going to have a great time in this 
province for years to come. And I just can’t wait to be able to 
get some of these industries and some of these announcements 
that are just in the back room right now, get them going, getting 
the jobs created; because, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, there’s 
so much more we can be in this province, and I know we’re 
going to be it. 
 
And I want to say to you and to all the members of this 
legislature that I am proud to be able to support the main 
motion, and I am very disappointed that the NDP opposition 
even put in an amendment to that motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened carefully to 
the member’s remarks who has just resumed his seat. There was 
some of his remarks which was intelligible which occurred 
before supper and it had to do with the little game that’s going 
on about who is taking land away from farmers. 
 
A few days ago the member for Rosthern staged an event here 
in the Chamber where he had some people in the gallery 
claiming that the member from Riversdale had taken their land 
away from them in a court action. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
around this Chamber for quite a few years, and I’ve seen a lot 
of little games like this played, and the interesting thing about 
this particular game was that it was so transparent that everyone 
could see through it. No sooner had the member for Rosthern 
finished his speech and the people that he had set up in the 
gallery  

went out, the media confronted the people that had been in the 
gallery, had been the star witnesses for the member for 
Rosthern in this particular case. 
 
And when the media questioned these people, the person who 
was in the gallery, a Mr. Gaudet said he hadn’t actually met the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Riversdale — 
although the member from Rosthern said that the member for 
Riversdale showed no mercy in persecuting this person — said 
he’d never met the member for Riversdale, never had any 
personal dealings with the member from Riversdale; and he was 
not forced to give up his land as the member for Rosthern had 
said, he settled out of court — settled his case out of the court. 
 
The transparency of this particular case which was started by 
none other than the Premier of the province a couple of years 
back, the transparency is this: that when it comes time to put the 
evidence on the table, to fess up and show the facts with regard 
to the case, the Premier is unable to do it. 
 
As a consequence of the member for Rosthern’s little charade in 
the Chamber a couple of days ago, the member for Regina 
Elphinstone in fact brought forward documents and put them on 
the table of the legislature, which proved conclusively that a 
member of the cabinet of this government was personally 
involved in taking land away from people through court actions. 
A member of this government’s cabinet was personally 
involved in that — not the member for Riversdale, for where 
there is no evidence whatsoever, not one shred. And I invite the 
Premier, if he has evidence, to lay it on the table, so that 
everybody can judge the truth of the evidence — no evidence 
whatsoever. 
 
Today the member from Riversdale, the Leader of the 
Opposition, laid on the table — laid the documents on the table 
— that showed the biggest forecloser of farmers in 
Saskatchewan is the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The people of Saskatchewan should 
expect more of the Government of Saskatchewan than what’s 
been happening here with regard to this smear campaign. I 
hope, I hope that the members will cease and desist. If they put 
the evidence on the table, we’re quite prepared to look at it. But 
there is no evidence; there is no evidence. It’s a fiction, and it’s 
transparent. 
 
I sat waiting now, Mr. Speaker, for about two days to get into 
this particular debate, and it gave me some time to contemplate 
the Chamber, the legislature, the government, the opposition, 
and what’s going on. And as I sat here listening and thinking 
and looking, I thought about the years that I’ve spent in this 
Chamber. I’ve been in all of the legislative chambers in Canada, 
except the Northwest Territories, and in their own way they all 
have something attractive about them. But I suppose you would 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m biased. I appreciate this Chamber 
more than any of the others; more than any of the others. 
 
It has beautiful red rugs; it has lovely columns; it has  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

198 
 

beautiful oak woodwork; it has galleries for the public to look 
in. It’s a place that should inspire people to give good, 
thoughtful speeches about Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan’s 
problems, Saskatchewan’s victories; speeches which we can all 
be proud of. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of speeches here that I’m 
not too proud of. One is the prorogation speech and the other is 
the throne speech. These particular speeches were delivered in 
this Chamber by Her Honour, the Lieutenant Governor of the 
province of Saskatchewan. They were delivered last week on 
March 8 and there is an irony here; there’s an irony here that 
really bears some explanation because I’m sure the government 
members haven’t understood the irony of the situation. 
 
Here we have the situation where the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan, the first woman Lieutenant Governor of the 
province of Saskatchewan, delivering her first speech in the 
House, which is the prorogation speech, and her second speech 
in the House, which was the throne speech, on March 8, 
International Women’s Day — the first Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan that is a woman — on International Women’s 
Day. And that never got mentioned in either of the speeches; 
never got mentioned, no acknowledgement. 
 
But yet this government says that it is doing something for the 
women of Saskatchewan. The women of Saskatchewan have 
made some progress in accomplishing equality and I am proud 
to say they made some of that progress under our government 
when we were the government of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s not to suggest for a moment that more progress shouldn’t 
be made, but the government failed to recognize the 
opportunity. They were insensitive. And this is not the 
Lieutenant Governor’s speech; this is the Premier’s speech. The 
people of Saskatchewan should understand that the purpose or 
the duty of the Lieutenant Governor is to give the speech that is 
handed to her, in this case by the Premier of Saskatchewan. So 
the insensitivity of this government and the Premier, the leader 
of this government, shows quite clearly that he wasn’t able to 
grasp the situation on opening day. 
 
The contents, the words, the ideas for the prorogation speech 
and the throne speech came directly from the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. They’re not the words of the Lieutenant 
Governor. She did her duty. She delivered the two speeches to 
which I refer, but I’m sure that she must have been embarrassed 
having been handed these two speeches, her first two 
opportunities to speak to the people of Saskatchewan directly. 
No acknowledgement made of the fact that she’s the first 
woman Lieutenant Governor; no acknowledgement made of the 
fact that it was International Women’s Day on which she was 
delivering the speech, these two messages of mediocrity which 
she was forced to deliver to this House. 
 
Let’s examine them a bit, Mr. Speaker. What did the throne 
speech say? The throne speech said, we in Saskatchewan have a 
new plastic health card with new and increased fees for 
prescriptions to be paid by the sick. That’s if you interpret and 
analyse the throne speech. That’s what it said. Let me repeat it. 
We in Saskatchewan  

have a new plastic health card with new and increased fees for 
prescriptions to be paid by the sick. 
 
Three things about the plastic health card, Mr. Speaker. The 
plastic health card incurred expenses of . . . increase in expenses 
of several hundred per cent, and this increased cost was due to 
bureaucratic administrative structure which was necessary for 
the health card. Now that’s not the most serious fault with the 
health card. Most of that is a one-time expenditure although the 
cost of keeping the plastic card operational will be several times 
the cost annually of the previous card system which was in 
place. 
 
The serious part of the new plastic card is that every family in 
Saskatchewan will have a new $125-a-year deductible. Let me 
stress that, a new $125-a-year family deductible. Everyone who 
uses the health card, the sick that use a health card because 
they’re the only ones who use it, Mr. Speaker — let’s make no 
mistake about that — will have a new 20 per cent sick tax. 
 
(1945) 
 
I wonder why this happens, Mr. Speaker. Because we were 
given a guarantee; the people of Saskatchewan were given a 
guarantee. And I have that guarantee right here. It says on the 
guarantee, a written guarantee: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan 
rejects any form of deterrent fees or health insurance 
premiums. 
 

It continues on in the guarantee, Mr. Speaker, the written 
guarantee: 
 

The Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan will 
abolish the unfair deterrent fees for prescription drugs. 
 

And it’s signed by the leader of the Conservative Party, and 
co-signed by the seat mate of the minister in charge of 
piratization in the province of Saskatchewan. The Minister of 
Finance is the co-signer of this guarantee on health care. Can 
we trust them, Mr. Speaker? I doubt it, I doubt it. 
 
It’s an interesting side note which I just noticed on the 
guarantee. Who printed the guarantee? Well, Mr. Speaker, it 
was printed by Brigdens, Brigdens. And the minister of 
privatization will be listening, I’m sure. He knows who 
Brigdens is; that’s the printer of record for the Tory party in 
Saskatchewan. That is the company that has just got the 
telephone book privatized to them. A profitable section of 
SaskTel, the telephone book, has been privatized to Brigdens, 
who write the guarantee on health care by this minister across 
the way. 
 
That is another ironic situation. A guarantee signed by the 
member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden on health care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The throne speech, in another section, Mr. Speaker, announced 
again the expenditure of $9 million of taxpayers’ hard earned 
dollars on an 85th birthday extravaganza. The hidden purpose 
of the PC Party is to get  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

199 
 

the electors in the mood to re-elect this government again. 
That’s the hidden purpose of the $9 million birthday party. 
 
This government is a great patron of the advertising arts in 
Saskatchewan. My, do they do advertising. I’ve been watching 
some of the advertising, and this 85th birthday party is going to 
be an advertising extravaganza, I assure you, Mr. Speaker. A 
good chunk of that $9 million will go to the friends of the 
Conservative Party, the government of this province. 
 
Just looking around at some of the advertising . . . Well I’ve got 
some here. I’ve got the chamber of commerce magazine. It’s 
called Business Review. Going through the chamber of 
commerce Business Review, I was struck by the amount of 
government advertising in it. 
 
This is published quarterly, quarterly, this Business Review, Mr. 
Speaker. It has only 10,000 circulation in the province of 
Saskatchewan, no more than 10,000 circulation. This copy has 
only 36 pages, only 36 pages, but five full, complete pages are 
government advertising. Five full, complete pages of this 
quarterly publication are government advertising. I’ll let you 
guess at the price, Mr. Speaker, of advertising. And I want to 
say something about the price of advertising, just very shortly. 
 
I want to say, before I depart too far from the birthday 
extravaganza, what the Premier of this province is throwing for 
the 85th birthday of the province, I want to read to you what the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix says about the birthday extravaganza. 
When it was announced on October 14, or thereabouts, the 
Star-Phoenix issued an editorial. And I compliment them for 
the editorial, because the people of Saskatchewan were being 
told by this Premier and his government that tough times are 
ahead, we’ve all got to pull in our belts; we’ve all got to 
sacrifice; we’ve got to sacrifice if we’re going to save 
Saskatchewan. The Star-Phoenix had this to say in the editorial: 
“Expenditure repugnant.” The first paragraph: 
 

When necessary social agencies and health programs in 
this province are suffering from inadequate funding, the 
government’s plan to spend $9 million in preparation for 
Saskatchewan’s 85th birthday celebration is repugnant. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — That’s what the Star-Phoenix said. 
Further on, another paragraph, the Star Phoenix has this to say: 
 

There is something flagrantly political about this, given 
that Saskatchewan’s 85th birthday in 1990 coincides with 
the expiration of the Premier’s current mandate, and his 
dismissal of any possible connection does nothing to 
diminish speculation on this score. 
 

The Premier is trying to be . . . has been trying, ever since he 
announced this extravagant birthday party, to explain it. He’s 
been shifting around and trying to get away from the attack that 
was mounted here and by other people  

who are concerned about this flagrant expenditure of money, 
taxpayers’ dollar, on a birthday party, an 85th birthday party. 
As the Star-Phoenix said, whoever heard of celebrating an 85th 
birthday, anyway? Well the Star-Phoenix goes on: 
 

The name, the Future Corporation, and the theme which is 
supposed to emphasize Saskatchewan’s place in the world, 
do not suggest a traditional birthday celebration. In fact, 
they provide a ready vehicle for political propaganda. 
 

Political propaganda. This example of government waste in 
advertising pales to an insignificance when compared to the 
advertising overkill practised by this government in the 
TeleBond sales effort. That program cost the taxpayers well 
over $2 million of radio, TV, newspaper, magazine, billboards, 
and other promotional items; waste of taxpayers’ dollar; 
advertising overkill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now lest the members lack some examples of government 
extravagance in advertising, I have a recent one for them. I just 
received, a day or two ago, return no. 204 and it states as 
follows. The body of the request, the return, is as follows: 
 

For the period March 1, 1984 (keep those dates in mind, 
beginning March 1, ’84) to the date (of) this return (when 
it) was ordered: (which was September ’87, so from ’84 to 
’87) (1) the amounts paid to the firms of Dome Advertising 
Limited and Dome Media Buying Services Limited by 
each department . . . Crown corporation and agency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan . . . 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was a Herculean task, but I went through 
the return no. 204 and sorted out the expenditures, and you 
know what the Government of Saskatchewan paid to Dome 
Advertising in the period from September ’84 . . . March ’84 to 
September ’87? By the way, who is in Dome Advertising? 
Somebody with a very close connection to this government. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Spence Bozak. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Spence Bozak, Spence Bozak. He came 
right out of the heart of this government into Dome Advertising. 
Now some of my compatriots here, some of my compatriots 
here obviously haven’t read the return because they were 
guessing 100 or $1,000 — or 10,000? 
 
An Hon. Member: — 10,000, 30,000. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — 30,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 80,000. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, no, you’re way light. The Minister 
of Urban Affairs has his hand up. Do you have a guess? Does 
the Minister of Urban Affairs have a guess? He’d probably 
guess $10 million. Well, Mr. Minister of Urban Affairs, big 
spender that you are, you’re a piker compared to what has been 
spent on Dome Advertising by this government. From March 
’84 to September ’87, that short period of time, the total is 
$32.575 million. Let me repeat that to the member from Regina 
South, the  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

200 
 

member from Regina South because, by golly, he spent a lot of 
that advertising money in his own department, just tonnes of it. 
Well let me give you some examples; let me give you some 
examples that make up this figure of $32,575,099 — $32 
million. 
 
Well who are the big spenders? Well the Minister of 
Agriculture is obviously a fairly big spender. He spent over $1 
million in that period of time — just that little Minister of 
Agriculture spent over a million dollars. SaskPower spent 2.2 
million — SaskPower. That’s so they can split her in two and 
have two companies and you pay two power bills — a power 
and a gas bill — instead of one and twice as much advertising 
too, because that way you get more money into Dome 
Advertising for advertising because you’re two companies 
advertising then. 
 
And I can recall, I can recall those members, Mr. Speaker, when 
they sat on this side of the House. They said, oh well you don’t 
need to advertise utilities because there’s no competition. 
Utilities don’t have competition so they don’t need advertising. 
But you know, I have . . . racking my mind to say now who 
else, other than the power corporation section of the gas utility, 
the gas utility section, is delivering natural gas in 
Saskatchewan. I can’t think who they’re in competition with 
but, by golly, the SaskPower spent $2.2 million of this 32 
million. 
 
Economic Trade and Development, 2.6 million; Finance, 1.3. 
Well I can understand that. The Minister of Finance takes a lot 
of advertising to cover up the booboos he has made since he has 
been Minister of Finance. Revenue — over a million dollars by 
the department of revenue. Here’s a favourite of mine. The 
Minister of Finance got his hand back in here again through 
SaskTel — spent another 2 million in SaskTel, of hard earned 
taxpayers’ dollars. There’s hardly going to be anything left for 
the birthday party — nothing left for the birthday party. 
 
Tourism and small business: now here’s an area, here’s an area 
that the government’s really gone overboard. Tourism and small 
business: $4.5 million — 4.5. They must have just given it over 
to the advertising company and said, you come in and set up the 
advertising program, because they really went wild. 
 
SGI: this is another Crown corporation this government’s 
divided in half so they can spend twice as much on advertising 
because they’ve got two companies now — two companies, 
$4.5 million, 4.5. Health: a piddling $1.3 million. Well, the 
Minister of Health was keeping a low profile, not too many ads. 
 
Public Service Commission, over a million; and advanced 
education, a million. Highways, oh Highways, I’m going to get 
you, I’m going to get you later, because I want to talk to you 
about that advertising, Mr. Minister of Highways. Nothing 
personal, Mr. Speaker, my comments are going through you to 
the Minister of Highways. The Minister of Highways spent $1.8 
million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — 1.8. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What is the advertising? 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well, I don’t what he spent it for. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Didn’t build any highways. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, but it’s advertising, advertising. Yes, 
yes. Sask Housing Corporation: I knew I’d get to the Minister 
of Urban Affairs, who’s in charge of Sask Housing Corporation. 
He spent a tidy 1.5 million, contributing towards the $32.5 
million expenditure to Dome Advertising, a very good friend of 
the government. This is the same Dome Advertising where it 
was shown in court that SGI was being billed for services by 
Dome Advertising for which no services were done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(2000) 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The same company, Dome Advertising. 
Now if it follows — it takes me awhile to catch on, Mr. 
Speaker, but it follows — that if somebody is submitting bills to 
you for a service they didn’t provide, there’s some kind of a 
deal on there. There’s some kind of a deal on there. 
 
And as a matter of fact, and I haven’t had a chance to read it, 
but I would suggest it as required reading for all voters in 
Saskatchewan that they check what the judge said, check what 
the judge said in this particular case. Dome . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did the judge say? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh I haven’t read it. If I had it here, I’d 
quote it, I’d quote it. But I don’t have it here. 
 
Now the people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan who are asked to suck in their gut because times 
are tough in Saskatchewan, are going to be upset by this $32.5 
million figure. But we haven’t got to the other advertising 
companies the government employs; they have other friends. 
And I’m sure that some members, some hon. members will 
want to bring that information forward in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This has got me concerned because it’s 
infectious. I think these guys across the way are infecting the 
government in Ottawa with their extravagance. 
 
And I’ve seen an example of it recently, Mr. Speaker; they got 
the stamp on the thing upside down — the ad. Now I suppose 
the post office, Canada Post, is trying to make a point here. 
They’re telling us in this ad that they haven’t done such a good 
job. 
 
Now I remember getting a lecture from my father — it wasn’t a 
lecture, it was good advice — years ago. He says, never get up 
and tell people this is going to be a terrible speech I’m going to 
make, because they’re going to find out soon enough whether 
it’s a good speech or not. 
 
But Canada Post has broken that rule that my father told to  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

201 
 

me when I was a young fellow — don’t tell them that you’ve 
done a terrible job, they know you’ve done a terrible job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This corporation, run by their kissing 
cousins at Ottawa, who is trying to take the post office away 
from rural Saskatchewan, spent $3,718 on this Leader-Post ad. 
And at the same time, the same day, they spent $3,607 in the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. And at the same time, they had to get 
to their friends in Toronto, some money to their friends in 
Toronto, in Toronto Globe and Mail, $7,558, plus an extra 
charge because there’s colour. 
 
The advertising campaign, just in the print media for this one ad 
which has turned the world upside-down, at least the beaver 
upside-down, would exceed $60,000 — just in one day 60,000 
bucks of taxpayers’ money. I think these people should quit 
going to Ottawa, because those guys at Ottawa got a lot more 
money to spend, taxpayers’ money, and if they get the habits 
that this government has of spending taxpayers’ money, there 
ain’t going to be none left for the birthday party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — This throne speech is a grab bag of odds 
and ends from the past, a grab bag of odds and ends from the 
past. 
 
I want to refer to the prorogation speech. Even though the 
Premier has shut off the previous session with his prorogation 
speech which he gave to the Lieutenant Governor to read, even 
though he’s shut off that session, he is not going to shut me off 
because I’ve got a few things that I want to settle from that 
previous session. And I want to talk about it in this prorogation 
speech, because that’s part of the thing that started — end of the 
day we started this throne speech on March 8. 
 
In the prorogation speech it mentions mad dogs — this is a 
favourite of the Minister of Urban Affairs over there, mad dogs. 
But it failed to make any mention whatsoever to the ward 
system — never mentioned the ward system in the prorogation 
speech. But he mentioned the mad dogs, mad dogs. The ward 
system, which this insensitive, unfeeling government yanked 
away from the people of Saskatchewan in the last session of the 
legislature. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, I’ve concentrated on the Minister of 
Urban Affairs, but I’ve changed my mind because what I’m 
dealing with there is a puppet — I’m dealing with a puppet. 
And I’m going to go where the final responsibility lies, that’s 
with the puppeteer, the Premier. The Premier is the man that 
pulls his string, and the Premier of this province is the 
insensitive one who took the ward system away from the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, what do the people of Saskatchewan think of the ward 
system? What did they think of it before? In 1977 Reginans 
voted overwhelmingly by 9,000 votes in favour of keeping the 
ward system. I’m going back a little in history, in 1977. In 
1979, two years later the city of Saskatoon followed with a 
similarly overwhelming vote  

in support of the ward system; 7,642 people more in favour than 
opposed to it. In 1988, the minister who is the puppet of the 
Premier and does what the Premier says he should do, and 
doesn’t do anything without the express permission of the 
Premier, got representations from cities around Saskatchewan 
saying, “leave the ward system alone, we want the ward 
system” — the city of Regina, the city of Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert, Melville, Weyburn, Moose Jaw. 
 
Saskatoon in this particular item in the Star-Phoenix on May 
25, ’88: 
 

Saskatoon council is also opposed to abolition of the ward 
system, and passed a resolution that its position be 
forwarded to Regina aldermen. 
 

Now let’s just look at the size of the problem that we have 
before us here. The city of Melville has 5,123 people. The 
member from Melville sits in this Chamber, occasionally — has 
5123 people. The Premier of this province said to those people 
and their representatives who opposed taking more, just don’t 
worry, he says, I know what’s best for the people in Melville. 
So he told those 5,123 people, just you mind your business 
there and I’ll take care of how you’re elected. That’s what he 
said, this Premier who has said he believed in local autonomy. I 
think that’s just a phrase he picked up prior to 1982, and he’s 
just never dug it out of his vocabulary because it doesn’t mean 
anything any more. He should get rid of it because he doesn’t 
believe in local autonomy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — He told the city of Weyburn, which has 
10,153 people, he told them and their representatives, you just 
mind your own business. We’re going to have my version of 
elections in your city. I’m in favour of local autonomy and I’ll 
tell you how it’s done. That’s what the Premier said to the 
people of Weyburn. 
 
To the people of Prince Albert, 33,686 of them, the Premier 
says, I know what’s best for you, Prince Albert. And Prince 
Albert — get this, Mr. Speaker — Prince Albert was one of the 
cities that voluntarily accepted the ward system on their own. 
The legislation, prior to the Premier fiddling with it, said that 
only cities of 100,000 or more were obligated to have the ward 
system. Prince Albert has 33,686 and they voted in favour of 
the ward system; they put it in themselves. But the Premier 
says, even if you wanted that yourself, you can’t have it any 
more; I’m getting the Minister of Urban Affairs to take it away 
from you. 
 
Moose Jaw, 35,073 citizens there have had their representative 
told by the Premier of this province, through his puppet, the 
Minister of Urban Affairs, you have no right to the ward 
system; I’m taking it away on you. And he did. 
 
To our capital city, Regina, 175,000 people, the Premier of this 
province had the gall to say to them and their representatives, 
you have no right to the ward system, when they have pleaded 
on bended knee with this Premier to keep the ward system. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

202 
 

To the biggest city in Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 177,641, the 
Premier said, you’re not big enough to run your own affairs; I 
have to run them for you. And he took away the ward system. 
 
Total it all up, Mr. Speaker. It totals up to 436,740 people. The 
Premier of this province said, “I’ll run your cities the way I 
want to run them, through my puppet.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Some surprising events occurred in the 
lead-up to taking away this legislation, which the Minister of 
Urban Affairs did. And one of them occurred in Saskatoon. It 
appeared in the Star-Phoenix, April 23, ’88. 
 
And the editorial says, “Saskatoon businesses will send Urban 
Affairs Minister, Jack . . .” And I can’t say his name. I’ll just 
say blank. “Jack (blank), the same . . .” No it’s a four-letter . . . 
oh pardon me, it’s a five-letter word; it’s a five-letter word. 
 

. . . the same message as city council, leave the ward 
system alone. 
 

That’s what the board of trade said in Saskatoon. 
 

In what Saskatoon Board of Trade president Dick Strayer 
called a surprising outcome, the business community voted 
in favour of the ward system on a mail-in survey. 
 

And the amount of returns were very good in relation to 
mail-ins. 
 
Another comment from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, which I 
know the Minister of Urban Affairs will be making notes on 
there: 
 

If (blank) wants to take the pulse of the voters on this 
issue, he should push for municipal plebiscites or offer 
municipal governments financial support and legislative 
authority to hold more referendums. And even that sort of 
action would be questionable since there is no public 
pressure for the province to wipe out wards. 
 

And that’s the Star-Phoenix on March 24, ’88. 
 
The city of Saskatoon passed a resolution in council on March 
28, ’88. The wording of the . . . Don’t go away Mr. Urban 
Minister, you’ve got a lot to account for to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

That this city council indicate to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs and to the Premier . . . 
 

You see, they caught on before I did, that the Premier was 
pulling the string on the Minister of Urban Affairs, so they sent 
a copy to the Premier. Let me continue with a quote: 
 

Its support of the ward system and its disapproval of any 
change to the present system of voting . . . 
 

Carried — carried by Saskatoon city council. The city of  

Saskatoon appreciated the ward system. It was necessary 
because the 1982 ward boundaries had become outdated due to 
growth of the city — the largest, most beautiful city in the 
province of Saskatchewan — so that on February 15 ’88, the 
city of Saskatoon came down with new ward boundaries, at 
great expense to themselves, the taxpayers of the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
But the Premier of Saskatchewan ignored them. He was 
insensitive to the people of Saskatoon and the government of 
the city of Saskatoon. So the city of Saskatoon appealed to the 
Premier again, and they put a rush, urgent on it, Mr. Speaker, 
you see, in glowing day glow — rush, urgent. This is a letter to 
the Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. blank over there, 
and the leader of the Liberal Party, who I believe has 
disappeared. And it says: 
 
(2015) 
 

Gentlemen: 1988 Municipal Election — Ward System/At 
Large 
The Council of the City of Saskatoon at its meeting held 
on June 20, 1988, resolved that an urgent letter be sent to 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, the Leader of the Opposition, the Leader of the 
Liberal Party, and all M.L.A.’s representing the City of 
Saskatoon concerning the proposed amendments to the 
legislation dealing with the above matter. 
 
City Council wishes to reconfirm its support of the present 
ward system. In addition, the Council of The City of 
Saskatoon is of the opinion that the people should at least 
have a local option for the ward system as it presently 
exists. In the event that the currently proposed legislation 
proceeds, this Council recommends that it not come into 
force for the 1988 municipal election year. 
 
It is respectfully requested that the views of the City of 
Saskatoon be considered when the proposed legislation is 
reviewed. 
 

Well, the city of Saskatoon might have saved their breath, 
because the sole Tory member from Saskatoon was unable to 
carry that message to Regina, to the Premier who was 
insensitive to the issue. The sole Tory in the city of Saskatoon 
couldn’t carry that one simple, explicit message to the Premier 
of this province. Leave the ward system alone. He was unable 
to do that. He failed, he failed again. 
 
This was just before the final debate, Mr. Speaker, on the ward 
system in this Chamber which occurred in the wee hours of the 
morning. And it’s reported in the Star-Phoenix, June 30, 1988, 
and it refers to the debate at 1 a.m. in the morning when one of 
the members who had the forethought to ask for public 
participation in whether the public wanted to have the ward 
system kept in place or would rather go to some other system. 
And the calls flowed into this Chamber from people all over 
Saskatchewan at 1:30 in the morning, saying to the Premier, 
please leave the ward system in place. And they had some 
unpleasant things to say about the Minister of Urban Affairs 
which I can’t repeat in the House, Mr.  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

203 
 

Speaker, because of the rules about unparliamentary comments 
prevent me from doing that. 
 
Let’s take another poll with regard to this, Mr. Speaker. This 
poll occurred in October 1988. You will recall that STV in 
Saskatoon runs a television poll. They put a question on the 
television screen and everyone who phones in to answer yes or 
no to the question pays 50 cents to SaskTel — which is an 
interesting money-making scheme, and I compliment SaskTel 
for coming up with it. The question was this: “Are there too 
many aldermanic candidates for voters to make an informed 
decision?” The yeses, Mr. Minister, are 91 per cent; the noes, 9 
per cent. I guess that was the Tories — 9 per cent. Ninety-one 
per cent said that the ballot had too many aldermanic candidates 
for the voters to make an informed choice. 
 
Well I know the minister wouldn’t believe that this was a long 
ballot, so I obtained a copy of the ballot. This ballot, Mr. 
Minister, goes from A to Z. Mr. Minister, are you with me? 
From A to Z. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. What’s the hon. 
member’s point of order? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I will have something to say 
in this debate at an appropriate time, but I would like to point 
out that I understand the rules of this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The hon. member has the 
right to make his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the rules of 
the Assembly are such that producing items of exhibition are 
not allowable during a debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Point of order. The point of order is . . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Point of order. I would like to speak on 
the point of order before he rules. What I have before me, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m dealing strictly with the point of order, is an 
official document of the city of Saskatoon, which I intend to 
quote from extensively. I cannot quote from this. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well table it. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, you bet I’m going to table this 
because I want it on the record of province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I am going to quote from this document extensively. I cannot 
quote from this document unless I have it before me, Mr. 
Speaker. I am aware of the rules about quotations, and I am 
aware of the rules about exhibits — I have them before me; rule 
328 and rule 333. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve listened to the point of order and I’ve 
listened to the hon. member from Saskatoon Westmount and 
heard his views. It’s true, they’re both, both the hon. members 
are, in fact, correct. I don’t dispute either one; however, the 
ruling is that you can’t use anything as an  

exhibit — it might be a poster or anything else that you might 
have to quote from — but you can’t use it in such a way that it 
can be construed as an exhibit, and I think everybody 
understands that. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — I shall conform with your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. I shall not use this as an exhibit. I shall refer to it 
extensively because I intend to. 
 
Now this ballot, this ballot, Mr. Speaker, as I say, goes from A 
to Z. It covers a multitude of sins of this government; this 
government who said to the people of Saskatchewan, you can’t 
have the ward system; we’ll tell you what kind of a system you 
can have to elect your alderpeople in the city of Saskatoon. 
They told every city that. 
 
This ballot is twenty-six and a quarter inches long. The first 
comment on the ballot which I . . . The first comment that I 
want to make . . . It says on the top of this, Mr. Speaker, “For 
the office of alderman place an X in the circle to the right of the 
name. You’re entitled to vote for 10 candidates for this office.” 
And it starts . . . I said it goes from A to Z. The first name is 
Aalbers, and the last name is Zunti, Z-u-n-t-i. 
 
And there’s some interesting names in between those two, I’ll 
tell you, Mr. Speaker. There’s one Gay Caswell in here. Now 
this would . . . She’s widely known in this province. As a matter 
of fact, I understand she’s in the city of Regina right now with a 
big convention following. 
 
There’s a number of other ones here which . . . Let’s see. 
Where, where is it? Oh yes, here’s Mr. Penner, an appointment 
of the Premier of this province, running for political office here 
in a non-political council, mind you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did he win? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh yes, he won. Yes, I have no 
objections to that, mind you. Everybody has a right to run, as 
does Mr. Mostoway. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you find them on the ballot? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Well he’s there somewhere. But the 
interesting thing about this ballot, Mr. Speaker, is this. Before 
this government, this insensitive Premier, took away the ward 
system, the city of Saskatoon ballot was one column wide. This 
ballot is two columns wide. It’s twenty-six and a quarter inches 
long. If it was one column long it would be fifty-two and a half 
inches long, which is precisely two and half inches taller than 
the minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — And I want to table this document so the 
entire province . . . this is the official ballot, I want the entire 
legislature to have a look at that ballot, put it on the clerk’s 
table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — On a point of order. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

204 
 

An Hon. Member: — Stand up, Jack. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, they can’t see me perhaps 
because of my physical stature, but if they want to try to 
out-yell me, I’m ready to do that any day in the week. My point 
of order is this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — My point of order is this, Mr. Speaker. The 
member says that that is an official document from the city of 
Saskatoon. I don’t know if it’s an official document or a copy 
thereof, and if it’s a copy thereof, I don’t believe it’s an official 
document. I’d like you to check it. 
 
The Speaker: — If the member for Saskatoon Westmount is 
speaking to the point of order then he is recognized, otherwise 
. . . 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, absolutely. There is no point of order 
so I have nothing to speak to. Do I continue, Mr. Speaker? 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, the way that the Minister of Urban 
Affairs, this puppet of the Premier, stood up and started to 
speak, I thought he was objecting to the comment I made about 
the ballot being two and a half inches taller than he was. I take 
that back; it’s a personal remark and I don’t want to make that 
kind of remark about the minister. It’s about . . . I really should 
have said that it’s two and a half inches taller than the 
minister’s ego. That’s what I should have said. 
 
Now, has this government, has this insensitive Premier cost the 
city of Saskatoon extra money, and every other city that is 
involved, because of their shenanigans with the ward system? 
You bet they have; you bet they have, Mr. Speaker. It wouldn’t 
be . . . it’s bad enough that this government spends $32 million 
on advertising to Dome, the company Dome, a good friend of 
this government, but they insist on wasting the city of 
Saskatoon’s money too, in the ward system — taking away the 
ward system and giving us that long ballot. Because here’s what 
it says, “Election cost hike due to new format.” This is an 
article that appeared the Star-Phoenix on October 18, ’88. 
 

The cost of the 1988 municipal election will be almost 
$470,000. At least $50,000 of that total is a direct result of 
having gone to the at-large system of electing city council. 
The city council should send the bill to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan because he is the one that forced them to 
increase the cost. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The day after the election, Mr. Speaker, 
the people were still alive and kicking in Saskatoon, and an 
editorial appeared in the Star-Phoenix — I know the minister 
appreciates these editorials from the Star-Phoenix because I 
give him the date and he goes  

back and reads them and then they send the heavies up to the 
Star-Phoenix and they try to bludgeon them into writing more 
favourable editorials. The member for Regina South doesn’t 
know that I know that. But I got a report from the Star-Phoenix 
that a couple of years ago some heavies came up from the 
government and went into the Star-Phoenix and laid the law 
down about being a little more fair, get my message, nudge, 
nudge, wink, wink. 
 
An Hon. Member: — No more advertising. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes. That didn’t work with the 
Star-Phoenix, and I thank the Star-Phoenix for that. 
 
So last year they sent their heavyweights directly to Toronto to 
see the Siftons — they sent their heavyweights right to Toronto 
to see the Siftons, who own the Star-Phoenix and the 
Leader-Post. Now I thank God, and whoever else may be 
responsible for this, that the Star-Phoenix and the Leader-Post 
don’t always buckle under to this type of government, this type 
of government. 
 
An editorial in the Star-Phoenix reads as follows, October 27, 
’88: 
 

Wednesday’s civic election was a shameful example of 
how muddle-headed politicking can interfere with the 
democratic process. (That’s you they’re talking about, Mr. 
Premier, that’s you — muddle-headed politics.) In the 
wake of the frustrating experience by voters and the 
unfairness imposed upon public-spirited candidates, Urban 
Affairs minister, Jack (blank), the cabinet minister most 
responsible for abolishing the ward system should offer his 
heartfelt apologies and his resignation. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: — Resign, resign, resign. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Don’t you pay a bit of attention to them, 
Jack. You just stay right in; you hang right in there, because 
you’re one of the best things I’ve got going for me in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — You just stay right there. Keep making 
those speeches like you made last night to the Regina Home 
Builders’. What a show. That’s another story, Mr. Speaker. I 
won’t get into that because I’ve got more to say about the ward 
system and this puppet who has his string pulled by the Premier 
of this province and says to the people of Saskatoon, you have 
no business deciding how you’re going to elect your aldermen. 
 
(2030) 
 
The city of Regina is a bit concerned about this. Now these 
people across the way are now attempting to categorize the city 
of Regina as an NDP government in Regina city. It’s a 
campaign which will have innuendo, but it’ll be interesting to 
watch how they divide the opinion that exists in Saskatoon 
about the ward system  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

205 
 

and in Regina about the ward system. Because Saskatoon is 
totally opposed to you taking it away; so is Regina. As a matter 
of fact, in conjunction with the ballot in Regina in October for 
the civic elections, they ran a ballot on the ward system. I know 
the Minister of Urban Affairs didn’t like them running it, 
because he knew in advance what the results . . . his polling had 
told him what the results would be; so would the Premier, but 
they’re ramrodding this through; they didn’t care about that. 
 
The results of that poll are as follows: the question being, are 
you in favour of the city of Regina being divided into 10 wards? 
Yes, 47,657; no, 16,677 — 75 per cent said yes and 25 per cent, 
approximately, said no — overwhelmingly in favour of the 
ward system. 
 
An Hon. Member: — But Jack knows best. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, that’s right. Now the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon are not about to be one-upped by the 
Premier if they can avoid it. Now they’ll have their ways of 
dealing with you in due course. But both those cities now have 
adopted an informal ward system, and I have the informal ward 
boundaries right before me here in a newspaper article, Mr. 
Speaker. And I see in the Star-Phoenix on November 29, ’88, 
and it sets aside which alderman will represent what ward. 
 
The Star-Phoenix had another interesting editorial, Mr. 
Minister, and the date of this editorial is November 15, ’88. 
And it says, “Good decision”, that’s the heading. And one of 
the paragraphs, the mid paragraph says, 
 

Regrettably council can’t on its own restore wards in the 
electoral sense, but at least the partial system it is planning 
will better accommodate residents between elections, and 
it will be out of the reach of municipal affairs Minister 
Jack (blank). 
 

So they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. I’ll have to ask the member 
speaking, I had a little difficulty in hearing. Was he using the 
Urban Affairs Minister’s name or somebody else’s? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, Jack blank. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, okay. Fine. Okay, fine. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — A fictitious name, Mr. Speaker, 
fictitious. 
 
The . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh I’ve heard from the old 
Liberal member from Swift Current who’s now a Tory. I 
imagine she’ll be swinging back when the Liberals get a new 
leader. She’ll be swinging with the Liberals again. Okay. 
 
Now what does the city of Saskatoon do? We have the city of 
Saskatoon, a new council, brand-new council elected. Are they 
with the Premier and the minister on the ward system? 
 
Well they sent another letter to the Minister of Urban Affairs, 
the fellow whose string is pulled by the Premier of  

this province, and it was from the city council. It reported to the 
minister a motion that the city of council had passed, and they 
had passed this motion, resolution of council, November 14, ’88 
asking this — this is after the election, Mr. Minister, new 
council, brand-new council, masters in their own house, at least 
up to the informal boundaries that they’ve established, up to 
that extent anyway — November 14, ’88 asking the government 
to amend legislation to permit cities over 30,000 in population 
to utilize either a full ward or at-large system of election. 
 
Get the letter that the minister sent back. On December 9, the 
Minister of Urban Affairs sent this letter back to them, and I’ll 
read you two of the paragraphs. If anybody wants to see it, the 
minister, I’m sure, will give them a copy. He’s probably got it 
in his office. I’d be glad to let them see mine. One of the 
paragraphs said: 
 

Prior to the October 1988 civic election, Saskatoon city 
council chose to utilize an at-large system rather than a 
mixed ward, at-large option. 
 

Now that’s like the fellow that was on the pirate ship and he had 
to walk the plank. And the guy was pushing him out on the 
plank with the end of his sword. And he had a choice: he could 
jump in with the sharks, or he could take the steel. What kind of 
sarcasm is this from the Minister of Urban Affairs? He said, 
you had a choice; you had a choice. It was either cold steel or 
the sharks. That’s the choice the Premier of the province had 
given them. And then the ultimate sarcasm is in the final 
paragraph, when the Minister of Urban Affairs signs off. He 
signs off: 
 

I appreciate your raising your council’s view on this matter 
with me. Sincerely . . . 
 

I appreciate. Like heck he appreciated it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — He didn’t give a damn about the view of 
Saskatoon city council on this issue — never has and never 
will. You stay right in there, Jack. You’re right where I want 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, this is not an exhibit. This 
is the resolutions of the 84th annual convention of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
I see the Minister of Health is here, Mr. Speaker. He’s a bit 
frustrated. He’s a bit frustrated because he couldn’t get up in the 
question period today and get the Premier off the hook when the 
Leader of the Opposition had him reeling on the ropes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — He’s a bit frustrated, but you just sit 
there, Minister of Health. I’m sorry you missed the part I said 
about your department, but somebody else will get to you later 
on. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

206 
 

We have the SUMA convention which occurred January 29, ’89 
to February 1, ’89, after all the urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan had selected their new councils — their new 
councils. This is the new voice of urban municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, and this is the resolution: 
 

Therefore be it resolved: that SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) requests the provincial 
government to enact legislation granting the respective city 
council the discretion to establish an election process based 
upon an at-large representation or a single member ward 
representation. 
 

Carried. Carried without any opposition, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I know you were there at the SUMA convention. Yes, you 
were there spreading the message about diversification and 
privatization. And Jack Sandberg was there. Jack Sandberg was 
there at the SPC booth, lurking about at the SPC booth. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Paul Schoenhals. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I didn’t see Paul; I didn’t see Paul, 
but I saw Ralph Katzman lurking around the Highways booth 
there at the SUMA convention. 
 
An Hon. Member: — George Hill. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — No, I didn’t see George Hill; no, didn’t 
see him. 
 
And I saw the booth of the minister of privatization there. Yes, 
he had a list, would you believe it? The minister of privatization 
had a list there of all the things he’d privatize in Saskatchewan. 
But you know the one he forgot to put in the list? Sask 
Minerals. He forgot to put Sask Minerals in the privatization 
list. I wonder why? I thought and thought about this and I said, 
there’s got to be a reason; maybe I can figure it out. And I did a 
little research, and you know what happened? This minister of 
privatization couldn’t put Sask Minerals in the list of . . . well 
he doesn’t call them privatized, he calls them . . . what’s that 
other . . . public participation. He couldn’t put it in the public 
participation list because it wasn’t. 
 
What he did is he divided Sask Minerals up into two parts. He 
sold one part, the peat moss operation, to an entrepreneur in 
Quebec; he sold the sodium sulphate part to another 
entrepreneur in Ontario. So it becomes very difficult to see how 
Saskatchewan people were involved. How were they involved? 
It was sold, and control has gone to outside the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s almost as bad as selling out to the Chinese, 
you know, and I understand some people are trying to do that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did they have WESTBRIDGE there, 
John? Did they have WESTBRIDGE or not? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Oh, I don’t know. I’ll have to get my list 
out and do more research on that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — SUMA allowed all of this. 

Mr. Brockelbank: — Well I am sure that there were 
arrangements made. The ward system is still hot in Saskatoon; 
the Star-Phoenix says so. It says on February 4 — this is right 
after the SUMA convention was over, right after, and it says: 
 

Few issues have so united urban dwellers as their 
condemnation of last year’s wrong-headed government 
decision to abolish the ward system. 
 

And it’s no wonder; it’s no wonder. Saskatoon voters, for 
example, won’t soon forget the ridiculous civic election ballot 
they were forced to deal with, with about 70 candidates for the 
10 councillor jobs up for grabs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — With a ballot taller than the minister. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Yes, the ballot two and a half inches 
taller than the minister. Nor will they forget the arrogance. 
Maybe that ballot is a measure of the arrogance of the minister 
— that’s what it is. That takes it out of the . . . 
 

Nor will they forget (the editorial goes on, Mr. Speaker, in 
a serious vein) the arrogance of the municipal affairs 
minister (well they mean Urban Affairs minister), Jack 
(blank), in insisting that he knew better than they what they 
wanted in a system of electing councils and being 
represented for the next three years. 
 

Listen to this paragraph — and I should acquaint the Premier 
and the Minister of Urban Affairs with some of their philosophy 
which they had when they were in opposition, but which now 
they have discarded. It’s in this paragraph here, Mr. Minister: 
 

This provincial government move was diametrically 
opposed to the (blank) government’s strong election 
campaign commitment to local autonomy and respect for 
local preference. 
 

Well it certainly was in spades, in spades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am concerned about the priorities of this government which, in 
part, demonstrate themselves — or their lack of demonstration 
in part, too — in this throne speech which we have before us. 
 
What is this government saying? It’s sending mixed messages 
to the people of Saskatchewan. An article appeared in the 
Star-Phoenix on March 11, and the headline is: “Saskatchewan 
owes welfare recipients millions,” and it goes on to say: 
 

. . . the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal in June, the 
Department of Social Services discriminated . . . (and it 
goes on and) . . . estimated there are 9000 to 1200 people 
who were discriminated against by this government. (This 
is the court saying it — the court saying it.) . . . A board of 
inquiry is now trying to decide if the ruling applies to the 
individuals . . . (On the same day — the same day — in the 
Star-Phoenix, March 11, ’89) . . . government  

  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

207 
 

funds keep horse-racing on track. The provincial 
government will subsidize horse-racing in Saskatchewan to 
the tune of a half a million dollars a year. 
 

Now that sends mixed messages; that sends confusing messages 
to the public of Saskatchewan, when the government on the one 
hand is spending pails full of money on advertising, won’t pay 
its just bills that are before it, and is handing out money to other 
organizations. We wonder where their priorities are. Where are 
their priorities? This government is insensitive, arrogant, and 
contemptuous of the people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The statistics that I have to look at before 
I vote for this particular throne speech are dramatic and 
troublesome — dramatic and troublesome. I look at the labour 
statistics. The labour force in February has dropped 6,000 
compared to February ’88. From one year, February ’88 to 
February ’89, the labour force size has dropped 6,000. The 
number of persons employed . . . These are people that you call 
taxpayers; that’s where you get the money from to waste, which 
you’ve been wasting. The number of persons employed in 1988 
compared to 1989 has dropped 12,000 — the number of persons 
employed has dropped 12,000. The population, as we all know 
yesterday, has dropped 6,260 in the month of February alone, 
with an aggregate total to date in this year of 8,000. 
 
(2045) 
 
That’s where the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster thought 
there was a population influx in his constituency. They were on 
their way to Edmonton; they were just passing through. He’s 
going to get a light switch on the border there so that somebody 
can turn that out when they go. 
 
Bankruptcies, bankruptcies in Saskatchewan — just go back to 
’85. In ’85 there were 762; in ’86 there were 915; in ’87 there 
were 914; in ’88 there are 1,236. Housing starts — the Minister 
of Urban Affairs, I’m certain, will be interested in this. Housing 
starts, 1986 there were 5,510; 1987, 4,895; 1988 . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What year was that? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — . . . 3,902, 3,902. We’ve got a hearing 
aid program for you, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The deficit. When I am considering . . . 
When I and my constituents are considering whether they 
should continue to support this government, they have to take 
into consideration how have they managed the financial affairs 
of this province. Well I ask the people of Saskatchewan: would 
you trust a government who immediately before the election 
tells you that it’s going to have a deficit of $389 million, and 
immediately after the election you find out that it’s not $389 
million but $1.2 billion? Would you vote for that government? 
Not a chance. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order! Order. Order! I’d ask 
the member from the Battlefords to be quiet while the Speaker 
is on his feet, and I’d also ask . . . Order! I’d ask the member for 
Regina North East to apologize to the House for 
unparliamentary language from his seat. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — He said, that’s a lie. I’d ask . . . We 
have ruled on this before. Order, order, order, order. Order. The 
member from Regina North East . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
It doesn’t matter whether it’s on the record or not. I’m not 
arguing with the member from Regina North West. It’s 
unparliamentary language, whether you’re speaking from your 
feet or sitting in your seat. I would ask the member from Regina 
North East to apologize. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I respect the rules 
of this House. I will apologize for saying that the Minister of 
Finance lied in 1986. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I just made a ruling. 
The member from Quill Lakes seems to want to challenge it, so 
I’d ask him to apologize. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have no problem in apologizing for calling 
the Minister of Finance a liar. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order, order. The member 
from Regina North East has just got up and apologized to the 
House and sits down and says the same thing over again. I think 
. . . Order. I just ask the member for Regina North East to 
apologize again to the House. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I apologize for 
saying that the Minister of Finance lied. I will also apologize 
for saying very clearly that the Premier lied. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — The point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Speaker of the House ruled this afternoon 
that when there was an apology that they could not rephrase 
exactly what the thing was that they said, but they had to 
withdraw the remark without any further innuendos. And I 
would ask you to rule according to the way the Speaker ruled 
this afternoon. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s point of 
order is well taken. The debate continues. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. I can’t hear the 
member from Westmount. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was on my feet 
calling point of order. You didn’t recognize me. You were — 
and I want to say that you’re admonishing the ministers here — 
the Deputy Premier was standing there  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

208 
 

yelling at me. You did nothing; you did nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — As to the question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as to the question of whether a fact is a fact or a lie, just 
examine the facts. And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, a 
Premier and a Finance minister who say to you before the 
election, immediately before the election — you get out of that 
seat because that’s a hot seat right there, it’s going to be this 
session, a very hot seat — who say to the people of 
Saskatchewan before the ’86 election, the deficit’s going to 
$389 million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — $389 million. Immediately after the 
election, the audited statement with the Minister of Finance’s 
signature on it comes out and says it’s not $389 million, it’s 
$1.2 billion deficit. Now I leave that, Mr. Speaker, to the good 
people of Saskatchewan to decide whether that’s a truth or a 
mistruth. 
 
If that’s a stranger to the truth, if the Minister of Finance is a 
stranger to the truth, then I suppose what we said here this 
afternoon on — or this evening — on debating points of order 
has some validity. And I believe the Minister of Finance to be a 
stranger to the truth. 
 
In conclusion of my speech, because I don’t want to take any 
more of the valuable time of this House — I respect this House 
too much to waste the time of the House — but I want to say 
with unequivocal voice that I support completely the 
amendment which has been put forward. The amendment which 
is to be attached to the motion which is before the House in 
support of the throne speech says as follows: 
 

but regrets that the provincial government has failed to 
provide business and job opportunities and security for 
Saskatchewan people, has failed to protect and improve 
critical public services like health care and education, has 
mismanaged the province’s finances, has betrayed 
Saskatchewan’s farm families, has failed in its responsibility 
to protect our environment, and has misplaced its priorities 
by putting privatization for the few ahead of the public 
interest for all resulting in the out-migration of thousands of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 

That is the truth. I support that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and will 
not vote for this throne speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
originally looking forward to entering this throne debate, but to 
my constituents of Regina South I stand here ashamed of the 
absolutely outstanding situation that occurred tonight. I find it 
hard to believe that the new Leader of the Opposition would 
allow anything as disgraceful to start in this House as we saw it 
tonight. And he has the gall to sit there and laugh and thinks 
that it’s humorous. 
 

The member from Saskatoon Westmount proved to me tonight 
that the biggest joke in this Assembly is him. And what a sad 
situation for the people of Saskatoon, to have a member of the 
Legislative Assembly with the background that that man came 
from, serving in the very chair that he had absolutely no respect 
for with his colleagues tonight. It was a total disgrace, and to 
my people in Regina South, I apologize. 
 
You know, in public recently, the new Leader of the Opposition 
indicated that he had some trouble with unity in his caucus. It 
was on full display tonight. And not only does he lack unity in 
his caucus, in my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he lacks total 
respect from his colleagues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege for me to join with my colleagues 
and the members on the other side of this House to participate 
in this debate on the Speech from the Throne. And I would like 
to begin by offering my congratulations on behalf of my 
constituents of Regina South to Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor — if the opposition would show enough respect to 
listen to that — on the occasion of her, of course, first 
presentation of the throne speech to this Assembly. It was a 
presentation in the finest traditions of this Chamber. And I’m 
sure as she witnesses this debate, and particularly tonight, I’m 
sure that she must wonder at the activities and the absolutely 
disgraceful attitude that the NDP had for this Assembly and for 
her speech tonight. 
 
But I, on behalf of my constituents in Regina South, would 
want to personally convey my congratulations to Her Honour 
for a job very well done. I know that my constituents in Regina 
South are proud to have such a gracious and talented 
representative of Her Majesty the Queen in our Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
Also making his maiden speech to this Legislative Assembly, 
and doing it with great distinction, was the new member for the 
constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh yes, there was a high-minded speech 
if I ever heard one. 
 
(2100) 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Yes, I might say that it was the finest 
address ever given in this Assembly by any member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. And certainly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
was the only speech that we heard in this Assembly from a 
member of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg that made any sense. It was, 
of course, the first time in the history of this province that a PC 
MLA for the constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has 
spoken to this Assembly. 
 
I want to extend a very warm welcome to the new member of 
this Assembly, and want to commend the constituents of 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for having the foresight, courage to 
elect him to this Assembly in the face of all the fear mongering 
and under threat, as the member from Regina Elphinstone 
points out, and I’m glad that he pointed it out. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Westmount, a little bit  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

209 
 

earlier, talked about a ballot. Would we talk about the ballots — 
the fake, dud ballots put into the senior homes in that very 
by-election by the NDP; the same one that the investigation is 
going on right now by the chief electoral officer in being dealt 
with? Let’s find out how you . . . You mentioned the word, not 
me, about the threat of trying to suppress and fool the seniors of 
that seat. 
 
Tonight is no surprise to me, but I’m sure that it’s a surprise to 
the people. But imagine . . . that and fear mongering being 
distributed by the opposition party in that by-election last year 
— all sorts of distortions. Imagine the Leader of the Opposition 
of the party in the province of Saskatchewan putting his name 
on a letter stating the government was going to close down all 
hospitals in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg constituency. Shame on 
you. 
 
And know he ridicules this Assembly again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when from his chair he says, with a smug grin on his 
face, shame, he made me do it. No wonder you have no respect 
from your caucus. You don’t deserve any. Not only is the 
government not closing any hospitals in the constituency, but it 
is already planning a new, integrated health-care facility in the 
town of Lafleche. 
 
And the opposition leader still hasn’t had the decency to 
apologize to the people of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg for that 
distasteful act. And it has to reflect on the manner in which he 
conducts himself as Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. 
Have you ever thought about that title, sir, the one that we 
discussed earlier in the day about what you have a profit for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina South 
were pleased to note that the top priority was given to health 
care in the throne speech. Health care will continue to receive 
the prime attention of our government, and I’m sure that this 
will be further evident for all to see, including the NDP 
opposition, when my colleague, the Minister of Finance, 
presents his provincial budget later this month. 
 
This province has become a world leader in health care, and 
time and time again our Premier has given his word that health 
care will always be our number one priority. And indeed we 
have backed up his word since coming into office by devoting 
more funding to health care than at any time in the history of 
this province. 
 
And in the face of these record expenditures for health care, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, far greater expenditures than ever made in 
history by the NDP, all the NDP can do is peddle their old 
refrain about cut-backs and old rhetoric with their heads buried 
in the sand. But they had better try to come up with a new 
refrain, and more importantly, if they are serious about serving 
the people of this province, they better come up with some new, 
meaningful ideas, and certainly some honest, responsible 
criticism, rather than accusations made by members of your 
bench, sir, that prove to be extremely inaccurate time after time 
after time. You should be ashamed of dragging through this 
Assembly names of innocent people, without doing the research 
and being sure if indeed those complaints are  

legitimate. They will be dealt with in due course. But time after 
time . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What complaints? 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Check Hansard and you can see. The 
people are not stupid. You think they are. I happen to have 
respect for them. They see time after time you bringing in 
accusations without substance, and again it will be dealt with. 
 
Like the article I saw the other day in the Leader-Post, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, speaking about the national NDP for a 
moment. The article said, sure they would have a new leader, 
but he would be stuck with the same old, outdated policies, just 
like the Saskatchewan NDP. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is not resting on its laurels 
in health care, but rather we are moving forward to strengthen 
our health care system for the next decade and indeed into the 
21st century. As you know, the Commission on Directions in 
Health Care, appointed less than a year ago by our Premier, is 
now winding up its public hearings in Regina. And you know 
what a tremendous amount of interest that commission has 
created among organizations and groups, health care 
professionals and citizens, generally, in the hearings of that 
commission; so much so that the commission has had to extend 
their hearings for several extra days in Regina. In fact, 
everybody has shown tremendous interest in the work of the 
commission except the NDP. You would think that perhaps the 
health critic of the NDP might be concerned, but obviously she, 
as well, has none. As usual, they’re out of step again, as always, 
with the people of this province. 
 
Our government expects to receive the report from the 
commission later this year, and I’m sure that that report will 
help set the foundation for the changes that are required to meet 
Saskatchewan’s future health care needs. 
 
Earlier tonight, now that I’ve had time to just give it a little 
pause and reflection, when the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount was speaking, he, as quite often the members of the 
NDP do in referring to the Future Corporation as a big birthday 
party, I can’t help but recall the same old tired argument and 
how I tell my people of Regina South that it’s the same old 
rhetoric, nothing new, that they brought up, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when we were involved with Expo. It was the same 
story, the same sad rhetoric. No pride by the NDP in this great, 
wonderful province of Saskatchewan. No pride in 
Saskatchewan, and the NDP government of the day in Manitoba 
as well, no pride in their province. They didn’t attend at Expo. 
 
The NDP in Saskatchewan ridiculed our attendance at Expo, 
and now when we have a similar situation in the Future 
Corporation directed at taking our province into the next 
century, directed at putting our province on the map of this new 
global village that has been created because of all the new 
technical jobs and all the new business specialties and high-tech 
industries that are forming, and when we want to participate in 
a big game with the big world, the NDP say no, we’re having a 
party. 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

210 
 

What . . . How you lose it, I don’t have the foggiest idea. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Westmount pulled out a magazine 
that he referred to, the Business Review, and he called it a 
chamber of commerce publication. Well I don’t believe that it is 
a chamber of commerce publication. 
 
But interestingly enough, and even if it were, that’s not the 
basis of my argument, the new Leader of the Opposition, the 
new NDP leader is starting to try to become the champion of 
small business all of a sudden. And I don’t have the foggiest 
idea either, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who would champion his 
cause in the small-business community. 
 
Here the member from Saskatoon Westmount stood in his place 
and condemned — if indeed it were a chamber of commerce 
publication — condemned the use of government advertising in 
that publication. Does that indicate to you how the NDP are in 
favour of small business? Does that indicate to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, how the Leader of the Opposition can go out and make 
these claims that he is the new champion for small business? I 
doubt that very much. 
 
And as this Assembly unfolds, and as this new session of the 
legislature opens, the real NDP attitude and philosophy, the real 
mark of the Leader of the Opposition will be left distastefully, 
not only in the mouths of the small-business community, but 
throughout the people of this province as they watch in near 
horror and see how they behave themselves in this magnificent 
place. 
 
And I suppose that one other question that I ask and give them 
an opportunity year after year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if the 
members, any members of the Opposition would claim to have 
a membership in the chamber of commerce. I doubt, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that again we would find that there is not one 
single, solitary member of the new representatives of the 
small-business community that hold a membership in their local 
chamber of commerce. 
 
We again see in very vivid terms how they continued to live in 
the past with the rhetoric displayed by the member from 
Saskatoon Westmount. When he brings up an old debate, all he 
could talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in regard to the throne 
speech, was something that was not even in it, an old piece of 
history — the ward system. If that is the best talent that that 
member has, is to go back into the annals of history and pull 
something out, it’s really unfortunate that that would be the best 
that they could put up to stand and speak. 
 
The ward system is in the past. The NDP lives in the past and 
yet, if he would even complete all of his accusations — they 
take, Mr. Deputy Speaker, text from context and switch figures 
around, and the member referred to the various votes that were 
taken in Regina and Saskatoon, but not once did you have the 
honesty, the courage, the decency to point out the votes where 
Saskatoon indeed voted twice to retain the at-large system 
before the NDP government of the day imposed it. 
 
Do you believe that the people of this province are  

stupid? You obviously do. The people of this province are 
aware of that fact, and don’t think for a moment that even 
constituents of yours know that you didn’t have the courage, the 
resolve, to tell the full story in this Assembly, and they’re 
probably ashamed of you after they saw how you behaved 
tonight. 
 
And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m only going to dwell 
on it for a minute or two, not the 30 minutes that the member 
chose to speak on it because that is all in the past. And I should 
point out just for one little piece of information — and I won’t 
call it your stupidity because that’s not nice — but I think in 
your lack of research, did you know that it’s your city council, 
the city of Saskatoon, that has the right to determine the size of 
the ballot. 
 
They chose to use that particular ballot and go in that fashion. 
And this government had nothing to do with it. And if you 
would have checked it out, sir, you would have been able to 
determine that that’s how it went. And again you display that; 
again you display that, and you know you’re not supposed to do 
that in the House, but you’re welcome to break the rules. 
You’re welcome to again show that you have no respect for the 
Chair, the very Chair that you once sat in. Shame on you. And 
you don’t know that it was the city of Saskatoon that controls 
the size of the ballot and how it’s to be printed and how it’s to 
be made up. Well, before you come on with your big, glorious 
speeches, why don’t you check it out. 
 
The member from Saskatoon during his remarks was 
interrupted several times by members of the legislature. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How tall was that ballot? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two and a half inches taller than the 
fellow over there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And they made some unkind comments to 
our Minister of Finance. I should point out that again . . . Well I 
can take all the jokes that they want to make about my size, and 
I guess they think that it’s funny. I suppose that if I were a 
handicapped person you would probably make jokes as well. 
Would you think that that’s funny? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Never said a thing about your . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Oh no. Oh you referred to the size of the 
ballot, don’t tell me that, and my physical stature. So you know, 
I wouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of anything that 
they did. 
 
But in regard to the budget projection, they failed to recognize 
also that a budget projection is simply a projection. 
 
(2115) 
 
The member from Saskatoon Westmount indicated that I had 
the opportunity to speak to our local home building industry last 
night, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I did, and as always I enjoyed 
it. I want to tell everybody how pleased we are with the very 
effective working relationship that our government has, not 
only with all members and all  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

211 
 

sectors of the business community in our province, but certainly 
with all of the home builders, not only in Regina but in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a good open line of communication with business, 
between the business community and this government. And not 
only with them as associations in their respective business 
communities, but also with most of them as far as it relates to 
them individually, as well. 
 
So as a result, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it makes it possible for us to 
always have frank and honest, sincere discussions with any 
sector of the business community. 
 
Our government clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is solidly behind 
business — we always have been; we always will be. We are 
not promoted or driven or hidden by any fears such as the 
Regina Manifesto, created by, well, I guess the CCF of the day, 
but now adhered to by the NDP, and perhaps one day I will read 
that into the records when the opportunity arrives and let the 
small-business community determine for themselves. But we 
work hard to ensure that we give good, solid representation to 
the business community of our province because we know that 
it’s business and industry that really creates the wealth in our 
society, that really creates the jobs. 
 
And it’s the private sector that create the opportunities, and that 
will provide the opportunities for this province to grow and 
prosper and thrive, so that my kids and my grand-kids will have 
a better place in which to live. And that’s why we have, and 
value so much, every opportunity that we can dialogue with the 
business community. 
 
And for instance, out of dialogue with the people such as home 
builders, have come programs which have helped to encourage 
and stimulate, in this case, their particular industry. And they 
have been great, popular, solid programs now with the general 
public of Saskatchewan. I refer, of course, to programs such as 
the mortgage protection plan, which protects home owners and 
everyone involved in the housing industry from the effects of 
rising interest rates. 
 
That program, still in effect by this government, when in 1982 
the NDP saw the interest rates go to 21, 22 per cent — said 
there wasn’t anything they could do about it. There was no way 
that they could protect the people of this province. There was 
no way that they could protect the families of this province. 
There was a way, but they didn’t care. They didn’t care to 
exploit the ways that they could have protected the people from 
that kind of an interest rate — 21, 22 per cent — with people 
beginning to lose their homes, or giving up everything that they 
had in the form of extra dollars so that they could afford to 
make their ever-increasing payments. 
 
But in 1982, we said no, there is a better way; we can do 
something about it. We can protect families, we can protect 
home owners, we can protect home builders. And the mortgage 
protection plan did just that. No new ideas at all from the NDP 
— zero, blank, dud. 
 
And in 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province 
dealt with the NDP in the harshest fashion of  

any display, I believe, in the history of this province when they 
threw all but eight out of office and said, enough! We need a 
government with fresh, new ideas; a government that does care 
about people; a government that is prepared to protect people, 
to do things for families, and our government since 1982 has 
been doing that. 
 
The home improvement program, those in the subtrades last 
night and in the suppliers’ businesses, they’re well aware of the 
powerful impact that that program has had on their business 
operations — the home improvement program and the strong 
impact of that program to those involved in building subtrades, 
to suppliers, operators. 
 
The members opposite don’t really recognize, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the impact in rural Saskatchewan that that home 
program has had, and they don’t care. They don’t care about 
rural Saskatchewan. They don’t care much about urban 
Saskatchewan, but they care less about rural. The impact in 
rural Saskatchewan that has kept small contractor after small 
contractor after small contractor alive and well and employing 
people in rural Saskatchewan where, particularly since last 
year’s drought, there has been a severe impact on employment 
in the rural area. 
 
And yes, unfortunately, for the first time our employment levels 
have increased a little bit, the effects of the drought, Mr. 
Speaker, nobody hauling grain, no trucking, nothing like that. 
But the home program for three years, almost three years, has 
kept employment levels in Saskatchewan number two in the 
country almost continually. 
 
No single program ever introduced in Saskatchewan has had the 
impact and the public appeal, and at the same time generated as 
much economic wealth and activity as the home improvement 
program. And I’m pleased to tell you tonight that more than one 
billion dollars in home improvement activity has been 
generated since the introduction of that popular program in 
September of 1986 — one billion dollars. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tell us about the fictitious figure of the 
number of jobs . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — And the member from Regina North West 
again chastises from his seat across the room, and he’s asked 
about the jobs that it’s created, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll get 
there. To the end of January, let him respond to the 282,000 
individual applications for matching grants that have been 
processed — part of that 282,000 by the members opposite. 
 
And we’re finding that the matching grant of $1,500 has 
stimulated home owners to the extent that many have exceeded, 
by far, the $3,000 required in total costs on their individual 
projects. As a result, over $600 million in home improvements 
have been generated by the matching grants, and another $400 
million in home improvements have resulted from the 59,000 
individual loans at 6 per cent — another 6 per cent. I hope the 
members of the NDP are paying attention to that — 6 per cent 
on the $10,000 loan made by lending institutions under that 
program. 
 
Our research surveys show that these tremendous  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

212 
 

expenditures on home improvements have resulted in 22,000 
jobs for the people of our province, and the home program has 
been a tremendous stimulant for the home improvement 
industry. My people in Regina South would be interested in 
knowing that here in Regina alone the home program has 
generated $192 million in home improvements, and our figures 
show that a total of 73,000 people in our city have taken 
advantage of the program. 
 
So I hope that the members opposite, particularly the members 
from Regina, if and when they ever contact their constituents, 
talk to them about that successful program, because with the 
73,000 people in Regina taking advantage of that program, 
obviously that is the majority of adults living in our city, and 
certainly they would be well advised to talk to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to highlight briefly, in these remarks 
in my debate to the Speech to the Throne, some of my 
responsibilities and programs from my cabinet portfolio, but 
rather than deal with items of the past, I look to the future, and I 
will contain my remarks in that regard and direct them into the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past October, as was pointed out recently, 
municipal elections were held in cities, towns and villages 
throughout the province, and I’m pleased to note that it was also 
one of the heaviest voter turn-outs in recent years, particularly 
in the cities. And I would suspect that the at-large system, to a 
large degree, was responsible for the big voter turn-out. These 
elections also were notable for the record number of candidates 
running for council, and we saw a display earlier in this 
Assembly as to the number that ran in Saskatoon. And I 
suppose that the NDP doesn’t like to see that many run. I 
suppose they think that in a democracy, that if there are 10 seats 
there should be 10 candidates. Well I was pleased to see the 
high number of candidates that ran in Saskatoon. It tells me that 
the people of Saskatoon are indeed interested in their city and 
how to operate it. 
 
But I did note that there was indeed a wide variation of the costs 
of the campaigns mounted by many of the candidates, or at least 
what appeared to be a wide variation of the costs. In fact, at its 
recent annual convention, the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association — which I have a lot of time and 
respect and energy for and meet with regularly, not unlike the 
members — they passed a resolution requesting that the 
government bring in legislation establishing election 
expenditure guide-lines at municipal elections, limitations on 
campaign contributions and the disclosure of sources of funding 
by all candidates for municipal elected office. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that limitations on 
campaign contributions and expenditures enhance the 
democratic election process by making municipal office more 
accessible to representatives from all areas of the community 
and by limiting the influence of individual campaign 
contributors. A requirement for the disclosure of the source of 
candidate’s funding will increase, in my mind, the 
accountability of candidates for municipal office to the public. 
 
My Department of Urban Affairs is currently reviewing  

similar legislation in other jurisdictions. That way we can 
ensure that any legislation that we will bring in will be fair, it 
will be equitable, and it will be up to date. 
 
We will, as always of course, continue to consult with SUMA 
on the details that will affect their elections. We will get their 
feedback on any of the proposed legislation. And I hope that we 
can introduce these amendments to The Local Government 
Election Act in time for the next municipal elections to take 
place in the fall of 1991. 
 
And again tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we witnessed for 
another time the uncontrollable antics of the opposition and the 
lack of disrespect, not only for this Assembly but for the people 
of the province, when again they contradict the legislation, the 
very important legislation, on control of dangerous dogs. 
 
And they’re laughing again now from their seat. They’re 
laughing again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For some reason or other 
they believe that the issue of dangerous dogs, they believe that 
the issue of dangerous dogs is a joke. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the issue of controlling dangerous dogs is 
one of increasing concern in our society, and the members of 
the NDP should heed that because that concern is widespread, 
not only across this nation but across this continent, throughout 
North America. And the NDP in Saskatchewan sit and laugh 
about it. And I guess because a great part of North America is 
indeed made up by Americans, they laugh at it because of their 
total disrespect for the people of the United States of America. 
And there they go again, jiding and joking about this. 
 
Last year we heard from many groups and individuals who 
asked that we take action to control the public. Many members 
will recall that in the last session we responded to their pleas for 
action. And at that time, a year ago, the Leader of the 
Opposition thought that this piece of legislation was a big joke. 
 
(2130) 
 
And he referred to mad dogs, and people as mad dogs, us as 
mad dogs. What an unfortunate position for a man that is 
supposed to have a highly respected position in this democracy 
of ours, to not be able to control his passion; to not be able to 
separate sincere, good, honest humour from sincere attempts for 
quality of life for people, not only of urban centres but of rural 
centres. 
 
And now the member from Saskatoon Westmount, he laughs at 
the legislation. Mr. Speaker, I just find it hard to believe that if 
members of their families, any member, or their relatives or 
friends were attacked by a dangerous dog running loose in their 
constituency — indeed, never mind if it was their relatives or if 
it was their friends but indeed one of their constituents, and he 
or she was attacked by a dangerous dog, I would challenge you, 
I would challenge you to go up and laugh and giggle at that 
family as they suffer with their child or their mother or their 
sister or whoever, after a vicious, dangerous dog attack. And 
you have the nerve to laugh at that piece of legislation. 
 
To this day the NDP still haven’t had the decency to  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

213 
 

apologize to the people of this province who have . . . and 
they’re laughing again. They won’t even listen — that the 
apology should go to the people of this province who have been 
attacked by dogs who do appreciate this legislation, who indeed 
when you laugh at that legislation, you indeed laugh as the 
member from Regina North West is doing right now, at some 
poor, innocent child in this province that was maliciously 
attacked by a dog, that suffers some big scar to this day. 
 
Mr. Solomon: — Mr. Speaker, I have a point of order. The 
member from Albert south, Regina South, is accusing me of 
laughing at the legislation that his department has put forward. I 
am not laughing at that; I am laughing at the member. He’s such 
a humorous person. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I find your point of order not 
well taken, a dispute between two members. The debate 
continues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s all of 
a sudden, it’s all of a sudden strange that for the very first time, 
for the very first time we see a member of the NDP stand up 
and try to squirm his way out of this one. 
 
Now we’ve talked . . . And there they go laughing again . . . 
There they go laughing again. We know what you think of that 
legislation. We know that you think it’s funny. 
 
One day I will bring to you a child that suffers the scar of a 
vicious dog attack, and let me see you laugh in their face. To 
this day, you don’t have the decency to apologize to the poor, 
unfortunate people that have had to suffer and endure that. 
 
Well at any rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we responded to requests 
for action. We didn’t laugh at it when the people came up and 
said, we want this dangerous dog legislation. We didn’t laugh 
when the municipality said, we need more help. We didn’t 
laugh when the city of Saskatoon said, please help us strengthen 
our by-laws. 
 
No, we were concerned. It was a legitimate piece of legislation, 
and it wasn’t a laughing matter. And it also puts proper 
responsibility for those types of animals to their owners. We 
have provided expanded powers to urban municipalities to 
indeed deal with animal control problems. In fact, our 
legislation is considered by many to be the strongest, to be the 
most responsible dog control legislation in North America, and 
they’re just having a good time with this one, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They’re still laughing about it; they still think it’s 
funny. We have the leading legislation in North America. 
Perhaps all of those jurisdictions that are interested in seeing 
this legislation should come and sit in this Assembly and see 
what the loyal opposition think about the legislation and then, 
and then let them explain to the general public. 
 
I am pleased to report to this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that to date we have received a positive response from 
municipalities, particularly cities who have reported to us that 
enforcement is going well. I know that as a result of this 
legislation being in place, two law enforcement officers in the 
city of Saskatoon were allowed to protect themselves, and 
protect themselves without any fear or hesitation. And the 
member from  

Saskatoon Westmount, why don’t you go and talk to those law 
enforcement officers? Why don’t you go and laugh in their face 
when they had protection to deal with the animals as they had 
to? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the area of economic development our 
government will be giving further encouragement to public 
participation initiatives. We feel these public participation 
initiatives are ushering in a new era for our province. The need 
to diversify is one of the main challenges facing our provincial 
economy. Simply to survive as a viable economy in today’s 
world we must diversify. 
 
I guess one of the biggest forms of diversification that I can 
think of, and how well it’s worked, that the NDP again really 
missed the boat on — they talked about an upgrader for I don’t 
know how long, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 10 years, 15 years? They 
kept talking about an upgrader, talking about an upgrader — 
well we acted. We acted on an upgrader, and I can tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the people of Regina South are awful 
proud of the Regina upgrader, the single largest investment in 
the history of our province. 
 
And you know, as we saw this diversification go on, it was 
made possible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of a partnership 
between the government and the co-ops. Now that’s not 
supposed to happen with a Tory government. But the NDP, in 
their narrow-minded little blinkers that profess now to be the 
champions of small business or business, and yet still chastise 
the Weyerhaeusers, still chastise the bacon plants, still don’t 
believe that the upgrader is here, they couldn’t see past the nose 
on their face that indeed they could have encouraged the co-op 
to do what they did with our government. But no, they just 
don’t have the foresight for anything like that. 
 
This winter, at the annual convention of the Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association, I had the privilege of 
discussing the merits and the opportunities created by the 
private sector delivery of activities currently carried out by 
governments — federal, provincial and municipal. And I must 
say that I received quite a favourable response, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because of the record attendance of more than 1,000 
delegates from all parts of the province. 
 
And as I discussed with the SUMA delegates, we as 
government, provincial and municipal, we’re here to provide 
services to the public, the people that elected us. The public 
expects us to maintain and also to improve the levels of service, 
but at the same time they obviously resist paying more in taxes 
for these services. So we, as government agencies, have a duty, 
have a responsibility of considering alternative ways of 
delivering services. 
 
Municipal public participation, I believe, can help to achieve 
those ends, and that’s what we discussed. And at the same time 
it would encourage local economic development. As I advised 
the SUMA delegates, if private sector delivery of services 
works well in many circumstances provincially, then why 
wouldn’t it work as well in municipalities as well? And I 
suggested to them that they examine the many successful 
ventures in  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

214 
 

contracting out various municipal services, right here in our 
province, as well as in other parts of Canada. 
 
As the Speech from the Throne has outlined, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, public participation will continue to chart a new 
course for economic growth, for diversification and job creation 
in Saskatchewan. During the coming year, our government will 
be giving further encouragement to public participation 
initiatives through employee ownership, new savings 
opportunity in Crown corporation bonds. 
 
Indeed, public participation opportunities such as these are 
leading to the creation of a capital market here in 
Saskatchewan, which mobilizes local savings rather than 
borrowing only from inter-financial markets at high interest 
rates, and where we see the interest leave Saskatchewan, leave 
Canada, go to New York, go to foreign countries, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But by the people of Saskatchewan investing right 
here at home, the interest stays here at home. Our people get 
that interest to put back into our economy. 
 
And if you think about it for a moment — and I just mentioned 
the upgrader, and I know that a lot of my constituents in Regina 
South belong to the co-op, and as they go along a highway and 
need gas and there’s a string of service stations, undoubtedly 
those with a co-op membership, because they’ve got that 
teeny-weeny little membership, they’ll stop there. And they will 
buy their gas because of that investment. 
 
Indeed, if they have a share in any particular motel, let’s say an 
Imperial 400, probably the same thing would happen there, Mr. 
Speaker, as they travel around the province, needed an 
overnight. If they had just a tiny little share, they would 
probably stop there. 
 
I can assure you that the people that have invested in the VCC 
(venture capital corporation) in the Fuddruckers operation here 
in Regina would certainly go there, would certainly go there to 
enjoy their meal because of the little interest that they have in 
the VCC, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I noticed a little bit earlier, the member from Saskatoon 
Westmount engaging in a battle from his seat, where he seems 
to shine better, with my colleague, the Minister of Public 
Participation. But I would like to commend my colleague, the 
member from Indian Head-Wolseley, for the tremendous 
leadership that he is giving to the public participation 
movement in our province. 
 
Since the formation of our Department of Public Participation 
just one year ago, and under his guidance, our province has 
moved to the forefront of public participation initiatives across 
Canada. This is an objective that most of us who live in this 
province share and accept, and if we didn’t know it before, the 
urgent need to become involved in public participation — 
because that will help the diversification that we’re looking for, 
the need to diversify — was certainly driven home to all of us 
by the events of the past few years. 
 
Who could have predicted back in the mid ’70s, when our 
economy was thriving, that the world prices for our  

key resource products upon which we depend for our basic 
livelihood in this province, would suffer such a severe decline, 
and all at the same time? And it has been a major economic 
downturn, created not by us, but created for us by the poor 
market conditions around the world for our resource products. 
To offset this, we must learn to take our rich raw materials 
another step along the production line and do more processing 
and do more manufacturing of our resources before we ship the 
products to the market of the world. 
 
And, for instance, the privatization or the public participation of 
Weyerhaeuser at the pulp mill has had major benefits and major 
impact to that area of Northern Saskatchewan, as you well 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And diversification at its best is 
now very apparent with the introduction of the new paper mill 
which would never have been there if it were a government 
operated proposition. And we would really look forward with 
anticipation to that. 
 
(2145) 
 
And that public participation, that improvement, that 
diversification, to help all the Northerners to obtain more 
employment — and the member from the North is now sitting 
there giggling. I guess he thinks employment in the North is 
funny, too. It’s really unfortunate. 
 
But to help us to diversify, our government strongly supported 
the new trading agreement with the United States. Now here’s a 
major opportunity for us to obtain wider markets for products 
we can manufacture and process right here at home. 
 
And I’ll use the paper mill. Do you think that that paper mill is 
going to just supply paper to Saskatchewan? You’re an idiot if 
you think that. It’s going to go out throughout the world. Their 
sales will be going to the United States. So there’s a major 
opportunity for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to obtain wider 
markets for products that we can manufacture and process right 
here at home. 
 
Obviously, exports to that huge American market is one of the 
most important things we can do to secure Saskatchewan’s 
future. And that is totally lost by the members opposite. 
 
Public participation is designed to increase economic growth 
and to diversify our economy, objectives that all of us must 
strongly desire for our province. Public participation also 
provides incentives for our citizens to increase their ownership 
and control of Saskatchewan corporations, now owned or 
previously owned directly by government. 
 
To bring further support to the process of diversification and to 
facilitate economic development, our government is now giving 
prime attention to public participation initiatives. These 
initiatives are bringing a new era for economic development in 
our province. 
 
Public participation involves a four-dimensional program. 
These are: number one, the privatization or sale of 
government-owned assets which will create greater efficiencies 
and improved services, and to develop more  
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

215 
 

business opportunities and jobs, something that this government 
cares very much about. And, the jobs that can only come from 
the private sector. 
 
But number two, the four-dimensional program, the widespread 
sale of government and Crown corporation bonds and shares. 
 
Third, the formation of employee-owned companies. And again 
it was referred to tonight. We see that in the new yellow pages 
telephone directory, for all of the employees participated in the 
public participation of forming another new company and going 
out on their own and getting it done. 
 
Now the NDP seem to have a little trouble with employees 
going out and starting their own business. I don’t know why 
they won’t accept the business community. The member from 
Saskatoon Westmount freely admits that he has trouble with the 
business community and with the employees when he can’t see 
the rationalization of employees striking out on their own, and 
rather than being civil servants, going out and entering into 
new, fresh, vibrant business enterprises so that they can create 
even more opportunities for themselves. And I really can’t 
believe why he can’t see that. 
 
And finally the fourth dimension, the contracting out of services 
to the private sector and volunteer organizations. 
 
Now these initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are helping to 
stimulate economic growth and diversification. They’re 
attracting new investment. They are creating new jobs. And 
they are creating new ownership opportunities for our citizens. 
 
Let me give you some examples. First, with respect to the sale 
of a government asset: Prince Albert pulp mill, which the 
government was indeed heavily involved, was losing $91,000 a 
day. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ninety-two. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — I might be able to stand corrected on that 
figure, but it was in the area of $91,000 a day. 
 
And since the sale of the pulp mill to Weyerhaeuser, it has now 
become a profitable operation. It has given us that first paper 
mill that I mentioned with 170 permanent new jobs and many, 
many new opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses and 
industries. 
 
With respect to the sale of bonds and shares, I look at the very 
successful sale of SaskPower bonds. The sale that raised over 
$343 million, with a total of 42,000 Saskatchewan residents 
purchasing those bonds and keeping the interest money right 
here in Saskatchewan. You don’t have to be any mental giant to 
figure out how good that is. And I know that you people are still 
working desperately to figure it out. 
 
Bond sales such as this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, allow our people 
to invest right here at home, and rather than forcing those 
companies to have to borrow from banks in New York or 
Toronto to finance their major projects. 

We know that Saskatchewan people are excellent savers and 
have big amounts of dollars saved away in various savings 
accounts, so that bond and share offerings rechannel these 
savings to keep our interest and earnings at home. It makes our 
money work at home. New investment, new markets, 
diversification, economic growth, new jobs — I guess 
everything the NDP does not stand for — these and other 
factors are all part of the public participation programs of our 
government. 
 
All of us have a stake in the future of our province — even you 
people if you want to stay in opposition — you’ve got a stake in 
it; otherwise you’ll be out in the streets, and through public 
participation we can secure a more prosperous future for our 
province. 
 
And where does the NDP members opposite stand in the midst 
of all of these successful public participation initiatives? Out of 
step, of course, as usual. They put their heads in the sand. They 
stubbornly refuse to accept any progress. They’re still trying to 
exist with their policies for the first half of the 20th century 
while the rest of the world is getting ready to move into the 
21st. Even their leaders are starting to admit that they’re not in 
step, and if the member from Regina North West is not in tune 
with his leader — he might be one of the ones that your leader 
indicated, you know, he was having some problems with unity 
in your caucus. You might be one of those, so I’ll quote some 
other NDP leaders for you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was wondering by leave 
of the House if I could introduce a special guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Rolfes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I want to 
thank the Minister of Urban Affairs to allow me to introduce a 
special guest that’s in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I met this young fellow only tonight. He is the Rhodes 
Scholar-elect from the province of Alberta. He’s here this 
evening to attend a convention, a journalists’ convention at the 
U of R (University of Regina). And he’s off to England next 
fall, might I say, with my son Brian, who also is a Rhodes 
Scholar-elect from Saskatchewan. And they’re off to Oxford 
next fall for two years. David is going to be studying 
philosophy. He hopes to get a master’s in philosophy. And I 
hope that my son will get a master’s in law. 
 
So I welcome David here to the proceedings, and hope that you 
have a good stay in England and learn well. And I want to thank 
the Minister of Urban Affairs for allowing me to introduce 
David Howarth from Edmonton to the House this evening. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 
  



 
March 16, 1989 

 

216 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Wolfe and the amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Trew. 
 
Hon. Mr. Klein: — Welcome, David, and good luck. 
 
But some other NDP leaders, Gerry Kaplan. Boy, the members 
opposite are full of all kinds of humour tonight, aren’t they? 
Gerry Kaplan, one of the socialists’ back room strategists, 
admitted the other day on national TV that their policies were 
not viable in the new economic world. “There’s something 
going on in the new economic world that we in the NDP don’t 
know about,” he said. And that was his confession. Now that 
may be a startling confession for a die-hard NDP socialist to 
confess, but as a business man for many, many years in the city 
of Regina, I could have told him that 25 years ago. 
 
Another NDP stalwart for many years, Stephen Lewis, who is 
reported to be one of the leading candidates for their vacant 
national leadership, also made quite a confession. He said the 
other day that the NDP were great at distributing wealth but 
very poor at productivity. How true. Many of us in this province 
have long, bitter memories at their efforts to try to distribute 
wealth and their weakness that they experienced in productivity. 
They were great at distributing wealth as they taxed companies 
and industry to death — companies and industries who had 
been providing jobs for the people of this province. And if they 
couldn’t finish them off by heavy taxation and their 
bureaucratic regulations, there was always the threat of taking 
them over, of nationalizing them, which had been a key 
platform plank in the NDP philosophy. And the only way in 
which they could hope to develop any productivity was to take 
over an existing business or industry already developed by a 
private entrepreneur. 
 
The only thing that the NDP know about creating jobs is to add 
people to the government payroll, either directly within 
government departments or within their vast family of Crown 
corporations that they created and which has added to the 
tremendous burden on Saskatchewan taxpayers and laid the 
foundation for the debt we’re now carrying. 
 
And while I’m speaking about this public participation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the minutes of the Saskatchewan crown 
investments corporation directors meeting for January of 1982 
were brought to my attention — 1982 just prior to the 
provincial election. And the NDP cabinet ministers of the day 
stamped their seal on approval of privatization. 
 
I understand that the then Premier Allan Blakeney — Finance 
minister at the time, who is presently in opposition, the member 
from Regina North East and others — I guess I’m striking a 
nerve because there they go yelling again. 
 
But they argue public participation now. You know why? 
Because they think they’re going to be in step with the  

people of Saskatchewan because it’s being promoted by the 
Tories. And that you have to argue that simply because . . . And 
because they are too afraid to admit that it’s right, and too afraid 
to agree that it’s right, and too afraid to agree to tell the people 
that it’s right. And yet in 1982 members of that very bench 
today agreed that privatization was pretty good. 
 
They actively considered a public participation program in 1982 
and proposed creating a holding company called SHAR 
(Saskatchewan Holding and Reinvestment) or maybe share; I 
guess it depended on how you wanted to pronounce it, and 
approval in principle was given which would provide 
Saskatchewan residents an opportunity to make equity 
investments in Saskatchewan enterprises through SHAR. And 
the NDP’s proposal had two stated objectives. 
 
Understand this, number one, to encourage Saskatchewan 
residents to invest in provincial industrial developments. That’s 
what we’re doing now. What’s your problem? You thought it 
was a good idea in 1982. You should have done it; you might 
have been re-elected. 
 
And secondly, to generate a new pool of capital for strategic 
investments and large industrial projects. Now isn’t that 
something, you agreeing with us! What’s wrong with it now, 
nine years later? Have you changed your mind, or doesn’t your 
leader have any policies? He doesn’t have any agricultural 
policies. He’ll day-dream one up, and if he can’t figure one out, 
then he’ll make up a story about something. Why can’t you 
people ever get together? No wonder he hasn’t got any unity in 
his caucus. 
 
The SHAR proposal had three guiding principles to provide a 
mechanism for all residents of Saskatchewan to invest in the 
province. Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say, but I see it 
approaching 10 o’clock and I ask you to call it 10 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 
 
 


