





























































Hansard: March 19, 1990


March 19, 1990 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In accordance with Rule 39 of 
this Assembly . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. I wish to advise the Leader of the Opposition that I’m 
advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here to prorogue this session of the 
legislature. In order to get to Rule 39, we would have to go to Routine Proceedings. 
Since we are not going to Routine Proceedings this morning, I am unable to recognize 
the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

PROROGATION 
 
At 10:05 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and took her 
seat upon the Throne. 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to discharge your from further attendance at the third session of the 21st 
legislature. In relieving you of further attendance, I would like to congratulate you on 
the work that you have successfully completed. 
 
At the opening of this third session, my government emphasized its commitment to 
continue to protect the province’s citizens, to continue to act as an agent of change for 
the economic development and diversification of the province, and to encourage the 
citizens of Saskatchewan to share in and participate in building and developing a 
prosperous province. 
 
You have passed legislation which protects farmers’ rights, and which offers farmers 
further financial options at a time of depressed prices and reduced cash flows. The 
importance of these measures to the agricultural sector has been reinforced by the 
continuing devastating effects of drought, high interest rates, and the economic crisis 
that has been created by international grain wars. 
 
The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Reorganization Act will provide individual 
residents of Saskatchewan with an opportunity to invest capital and share in the potash 
industry, transferring the assets of the corporation to a share capital corporation. This 
undertaking will permit residents of the province to participate in the economic growth 
of a world potash producer through the acquisition of shares and bonds. 
 
You have enacted legislation with the respect to the development of human potential. 
The new Adoption Act and The Child and Family Services Act will continue to protect 



and expand the rights of children in the province. The Child Care Act provides a 
framework for a child care program in the province. 
 
You also passed legislation to protect individual rights and allow for the development of 
the potential of human abilities. Amendments to the Saskatchewan Human Rights code 
extend protection to individuals with disabilities, whether they be caused by learning 
disabilities or mental illness; and the Dependent Adults Act clarifies the guardianships 
of dependent adults where there is a demonstrated need for protection of them. 
 
Continuing concern for maintaining our clean environment led to the legislation 
implementing an environment surcharge on the use of leaded gasoline. Amendments to 
The Clean Air Act expanded penalties and increased fines for causing environmental 
damage to the province. 
 
In taking leave of you, I commend you for the conscientious manner in which you 
approach your duties, and I wish you the full blessings of providence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: -- Mr. Speaker and members of the Legislative Assembly, it is the 
will and pleasure of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative 
Assembly be prorogued until later today, the 19th day of March, 1990, at 2 o’clock 
p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:10 a.m. 


