





























































Hansard: March 29, 1990


 

 

March 29/90 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers  

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
introduce to this House, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, seven people who are seated in your gallery.  These 
are people, Mr. Speaker, who take a great deal of interest in the goings on 
of this Assembly, and they have in common, Mr. Speaker, that they have all 
been successful candidates who have come from exciting nomination campaigns 
and will be representing the New Democratic Party in their constituencies 
in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won't conclude my remarks by asking all members of the 
Assembly to wish them every success in the next political campaign, but I 
will conclude by asking all members to welcome them to this House today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce them and have them stand as I introduce 
them, and to introduce them in the order in which they were nominated as 
New Democrat candidates. 
 
First of all, Dale Flavel who will be contesting the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. Glen McPherson who will be the New Democrat candidate 
in Shaunavon. Armand Roy who will be the candidate for the New Democrats in 
Kinistino.  The Rosthern candidate, Mr. Speaker, will be Kim Dmytryshyn.  
Grant Whitmore, the candidate for Biggar for the New Democratic Party.  Ron 
Bishoff, the New Democratic candidate in Thunder Creek.  And Mary McGuire 
who will be the New Democratic candidate in Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to show them an 
enthusiastic welcome to this building here today. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's my 
pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, two visitors from my constituency who are in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would like to introduce Mrs. Eileen Stone and Annemarie Buchmann-Gerber, 
who are both visiting from the constituency of Saskatoon University and the 
new constituency of Saskatoon Greystone, Mr. Speaker.  And I would like to 
ask all members in this Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to draw the attention 



 

 

of the members of the House to a guest who is visiting with us today, a 
gentleman who's been leading the battle against the goods and services tax 
in Ottawa, the Member of Parliament for Yorkton Melville, Lorne Nystrom. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like join with 
the opposition in welcoming the guests that we have in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I make a habit of trying to introduce to the Legislative Assembly all 
guests that come from my constituency.  And I would certainly like to 
welcome Kim Dmytryshyn here as well, and I hope you have an interesting 
proceedings today.  I know that you've got a perfect view of the 
proceedings from up there, Kim, and I assure you that I will work very hard 
to make sure that you have that view for many, many years to come. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask 
through you and to ask all members of this Assembly to welcome Mr. Jim 
Hampson from my constituency.  It's 300 miles and we don't get many people 
visiting from the riding here in Regina.  And I'd just would like to 
indicate also, Mr. Speaker, to you that Mr. Jim Hampson holds the 
vice-presidency for our region on the Progressive Conservative provincial 
executive, as well as my vice-president for the constituency.  I ask all 
members to welcome Jim Hampson. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Seeing that almost everyone in 
the Speaker's gallery has been introduced, I'd like to introduce someone 
from my constituency, Gary Scott from Aylesbury.  He's been in talking over 
problems pertaining to many people in the constituency of Arm River.  Gary 
Scott is not like other people in the gallery -- he's not a candidate -- 
but I will say he's definitely a Progressive Conservative.  I ask all 
people to welcome Gary Scott. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Work Proceeding at Rafferty Project 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question today is to 
the minister responsible to the Souris Basin Development Authority.  Mr. 
Minister, I have here an editorial from the March 20, 1990 edition of The 
Minot Daily News which discusses a talk given to the Minot Kiwanis Club by 
our buddy here in the legislature, Mr. George Hill, head of the Souris 
Basin Development Authority.  Mr. Minister, that editorial states he, Mr. 
Hill, also disclosed that even though work on Rafferty has stopped, 
Saskatchewan can go ahead with river channelization, building of causeways, 
mitigation, and other necessary steps. 



 

 

 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, do you agree that despite your agreement with the 
federal government, work can go ahead on digging river channels, bulldozing 
trees, building golf courses, building causeways?  Would you not consider 
that work to be contrary to the letter and the spirit of the 
federal-provincial agreement on Rafferty-Alameda? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the specifics of what work was able to 
continue on the Rafferty project was clearly spelled out in the agreement 
and announced at that time, clearly spelled out, and it was determined by 
the engineering panel and that was determined.  That is the only work 
that's going on, that which was determined at the time of the agreement 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, I've read that agreement.  You made an agreement with the federal 
government to halt work on the Raffery-Alameda project while the review was 
going on.  In return your government receives $1 million a month from the 
federal treasury.  At the time the agreement was signed, you said that only 
work on the dam necessary to ensure public safety would be continued.  
Building golf courses, digging river channels, building causeways in the 
Souris River basin does not seem to fall under that definition, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
My question is this: would you agree, Mr. Minister, that if you undertake 
such work as you are now doing, that you are receiving money from the 
federal treasury under false pretences? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, we are receiving no money from the federal 
government under false pretences.  Any work that is being done and that 
will go on prior to the completion of the review, which is now under way, 
will be work which has been agreed to in the agreement that was referred to 
by member and by myself and in the agreement which was allowed by the 
engineering firm that the federal government agreed would be the body . . . 
not the engineering firm, I'm sorry, the engineering panel which the 
federal government and our government agreed would be the panel which would 
determine which work should carry on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, if I may, another new question to the same 
minister.  Mr. Minister, given the statement that you've just made to the 
House, I wonder, sir, if you would mind tabling before the legislature, in 
the spirit of non-partisanship, in the spirit of co-operation, any 
correspondence that you have had with Mr. Lucien Bouchard, federal Minister 
of the Environment, the independent environmental review panel which is 
outraged at the work which is presently going on, or that engineering panel 
to which you just referred. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, I'm afraid I cannot accept your word on this.  Would you 
please table any correspondence or documents which supports the position 
you now take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the member stands in his place and says 
that the review panel which is now under way is outraged at work that is 
now going on.  I'm not aware that that's the case.  I don't believe that it 
is the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have stated before, at the time that the negotiations 
were complete with the federal government for the licence to remain intact 
but for construction to stop on the Rafferty project, we announced that 
that construction would stop and that anything that was carried on for the 
purposes of the stabilization of the structure, the integrity of the 
structure as it had been completed to that point, all of that work would 
carry on.  Any work would carry on that would . . . we determine that. 
 
That work is going on, that work will continue to go on, and the 
engineering panel will have the authority to determine which work will go 
and which work will not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lyons: -- Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary question 
to the same minister.  Mr. Minister, you've stated before the House that 
that was the agreement with the federal government.  That's not the 
understanding of anybody here in Saskatchewan or across Canada as to the 
nature of that agreement. 
 
Do you have a secret accord with the federal government which outlines the 
continuing of work to go on, and if so, will you table it?  And, Mr. 
Minister, will you table all correspondence between Mr. Bouchard, between 
the independent review table, and between the engineering firm that 
supports your contention that that work is legal and is not contrary to the 
. . . you taking $1 million a month from the federal treasury on this 
question, sir.  Will you table those documents? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: -- Mr. Speaker, the member, as he has done on several 
occasions in the past, will characterize any discussion or any negotiation 
that goes on between two governments as some kind of clandestine, secret 
operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say to you and I'll say to the House and the public of 
Saskatchewan, I have been absolutely forthright from the beginning of those 
discussions with the Hon. Mr. Bouchard, as it related to the 
Rafferty-Alameda project, as it related to the judgement that was brought 
down by Mr. Justice Muldoon, as it relates to all of that process.  We've 
been very forthright about it. 



 

 

 
We've concluded those negotiations.  We announced to the public of 
Saskatchewan, including that member, that we have an agreement for a 
million dollars a month during the period of delay, up to a maximum of 10 
months.  That's clear and that's open.  And the amount of work, as I've 
stated in other answers today and have stated on other occasions, the work 
that will carry on will be that work which is determined by the engineering 
panel which is necessary to carry on, and that's by agreement between the 
two parties.  There's no secret accord and there is nothing to table 
because of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Privatization of SGI 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Economic Diversification and Trade, that minister responsible for 
privatization.  Mr. Minister, I see here by the Star-Phoenix that the 
province is still considering SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) share 
sale -- big headlines in the Star-Phoenix.  I want to quote from that news 
story, Mr. Minister, and it says: 
 

 The province hasn't abandoned the idea of selling shares in the general 
insurance side of the Saskatchewan General Insurance, says the minister 
responsible for SGI Grant Schmidt. 

 
Mr. Minister, can you tell the Assembly today why your government continues 
to push its right-wing ideological push for privatization when everyone in 
the province, or at least the vast majority, are opposed to this idea that 
is leading us to rack and ruin and has led to the outflow of 65,000 people 
in the last four or five years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased that the opposition has 
asked that question because I have been waiting for the opportunity to 
explain to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the people of Saskatchewan and 
hopefully to the opposition.   I know I will have to repeat this several 
times for the opposition to understand this, but this is not a question of 
ideology, Mr. Speaker.  This is a question of good business and 
diversification of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a successful general insurance company in this province that is 
operating contrary to all business practices.  It is only allowed to do 
business with 4 per cent of the Canadian market, our population.  It cannot 
take a larger share of the Saskatchewan market because we can't afford to 
take a bigger risk.  One big storm would wipe out all of the company if it 
hit one location like that storm that hit Edmonton.  So the business 
practices would tell you that this kind of a corporation should be able to 
do business across Canada. 
 
I believe it would be good business practice to expand this company so that 
other Canadians can also do business with this company.  And if we expanded 



 

 

it, it would immediately create new jobs here in Regina, and jobs is what 
we need in this province.  So I hope the opposition understands that this 
is an important business concept and has nothing to do with ideology. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  I want 
to ask the minister, in light of his last answer, and I want to quote from 
what you said in Saskatoon.  And I quote: 
 

 He (referring to you the minister) plans no legislative bill to sell 
shares in the general insurance operation but is working on another way to 
do it.  His plan is still "fuzzy" but he expects to have more to say on 
the topic in another month or two. 

 
Mr. Minister, are you confirming today to the Assembly and the people of 
this province that you do intend to privatize SGI?  Is that what you're 
telling us here today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, let me make this perfectly clear, 
perfectly, absolutely clear -- that it is the intention of this government 
to have SGI for ever for ever.  It is also a business consideration that we 
expand SGI so that we can create new jobs and bring other Canadians' money 
into this province.  That is the clear intention.  We are exploring those 
possibilities.  We are looking at every angle, and we are looking at the 
possibility of doing this without the opposition obstructing progress in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to that minister.  I want 
to tell you, the reason the people of the province are suspicious when you 
get in your place and promise to keep anything for ever is that the Premier 
promised that with the gas tax at the time of the last election, and we 
know where that's at. 
 
I want to say to and I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, and quote to you that 
in your comments of that interview, you said, I don't like to use the words 
"privatize."  You said, and I quote, you don't like to use the word 
"privatize."  Well, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: don't you realize that 
selling off the assets of the province to your friends is privatization by 
any other word?  Isn't that what you're doing when you sell off SGI to your 
friends? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Mr. Speaker, the proper terminology probably would be 
"people-ize" this company.  We will people-ize this company.  If this 
company belongs to the people, we were prepared to give them a certificate 
of title.  And I have thousands of friends in this province; the government 
has hundreds of thousands of friends in this province.  All of the people 



 

 

in this province should have an opportunity to have a certificate of title 
to their very own company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Lay-off Notices to Stand-by Fire Crews 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my question to 
the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources.  Mr. Minister, for the past 
two years there have been 16 individuals from the Buffalo Narrows region, 
namely Michel village, St. George's Hill, and Dillon, who have worked on a 
stand-by crew to battle forest fires, on a system where eight work for two 
weeks and the other eight work for the next two weeks. 
 
Earlier this week, Mr. Minister, three weeks before they were to be called 
back to go to work, they were told that their jobs were abolished.  Would 
the minister explain this decision to the House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think anyone more than I is 
concerned when people lose their jobs.  And when the hon. member from 
Athabasca mentioned it in his throne speech, I was immediately concerned 
and went to my department to get an answer to this question.  The truth of 
the matter is that this program that we had on an experimental basis for 
the past two years is being changed.  We're going with a new and improved 
program, and we are going through the formalities of informing these people 
that the program has come to an end.  A new, improved program is going to 
be put into place, and we will give the people who worked on the previous 
program, because of their experience with the past program, very reasonable 
consideration to be part of this new program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you know full 
well that when you give them their lay-off notices, they were not informed 
that there was any new program.  The jobs were abolished and that was the 
end of the issue.  My new question to you, Mr. Minister, is: the Buffalo 
Narrows area is not the only region which had such stand-by crews.  Can you 
tell this House how many people and how many other crews also lost their 
jobs and where those crews were located? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe, and I could be corrected on 
this, but I believe there's a total of about 32 people who were involved in 
this program in the Dillon, Turnor Lake, and Patuanak areas.  They are all 
. . . let's put them all in the same category, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
just bring to the attention of the hon. member once again, that when this 
program was put in place two years ago, it was under the understanding that 
the program was on an experimental basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Thompson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Most certainly the individuals 
that were working on those crews were never told that it was experimental, 
and it came as quite a shock when three weeks before they were supposed to 
go to work that your department informed them that they had lost their 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Minister, unemployment in northern Saskatchewan is currently running as 
high as 70 and 80, and some places 90 per cent, in some communities, and 
there are few jobs at this time.  Now you have decided to narrow that field 
even more.  Can you tell the House why, at a time when you should be doing 
more to create employment in the North, you are instead cutting it back?  
And, Mr. Minister, will you reverse that decision?  I'm asking you today to 
reverse that decision and cancel those lay-off notices and hire those 
individuals back. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- I would once again, Mr. Speaker, draw to the 
attention of the hon. member that this is a formality; that this program 
has come to an end; a new program has come into place at this time. 
 
Of course, who can tell what our fire-fighting situation will be like this 
year.  Conditions are not good.  It would appear that we will certainly 
need all the manpower that is available.  And I will once again assure you 
that these people will get all the consideration in the world to be part of 
this new program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: -- Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  I ask you the straight 
question, Mr. Minister:  will you write to those individuals that were on 
those crews and reverse your decision and guarantee them that their jobs 
will be there three weeks down the road?  Yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Kopelchuk: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat for one more time that I will 
assure the member that these people, because of their experience on the 
previous program, will be given every consideration under the new program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Bureaucratic Undermining of Farm Security Programs 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture 
I will direct my question to the Associate Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. 
Minister, on January 22, 1990 edition of the Davidson Leader, the member 
from Arm River was quoted as saying he brought to your attention the fact 
that certain bureaucrats are undermining Saskatchewan farmers.  He states: 
 

 I get very angry when I hear reports that bureaucrats are not doing their 
jobs, and instead are sabotaging the farm protection methods. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is:  could you tell us what farm 
protection measures are being sabotaged by your bureaucrats, and exactly 
how is this being done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all start out by saying 
that the system out there, the system that serves the farm communities, 
whether it's the rural service centres, the lands branch, the Department of 
Agriculture, those are very professional people who have been there for 
many years, who have served this province well. 
 
And I do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that those systems are undermining the 
farmers.  What I believe, Mr. Speaker, is that we have drought out there.  
We had drought over two-thirds of the province last year, one-third in 
severe drought.  We've had drought in two consecutive years.  We've had 
drought in three out of the last five years. 
 
We've had low farm prices.  The farmers need help.  They need help.  They 
don't need help from being criticized by the opposition. They need help 
from this government, they need help from the federal government, and they 
need some good rains and moisture and good farm prices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, new question.  There was just one item you 
missed, Mr. Minister, and that's a Tory government that's not standing up 
for farmers.  And that's the main problem in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Minister, in an advertisement in the same newspaper the 
member takes exception with a statement made by your deputy minister, Mr. 
Jack Drew, to the effect that the farm picture is looking better and that 
there can be optimism because now things are turning around. 
 
Just to give us a little better understanding of just what's going on in 
that department -- and I'm not sure who's going to answer this one -- but 
can you tell us, Mr. Minister, do you agree with your colleague or do you 
agree with the deputy minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all I want to make it understood 
that this government has helped the farmer in financial assistance since 
1985 to 1989.  I went through here in my speech the other night, Mr. 
Speaker, and listed them all out and I won't go through it again. But I 
believe it was around $825 million that has been put directly into 
agriculture by this government, into subsidies and interest rates, 
write-downs, and crop . . . and not crop insurance -- without crop 
insurance.  Crop insurance has put $1.2 billion into this province in the 
last four years, Mr. Speaker -- $1.2 billion. 



 

 

 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the main subject that should be talked 
about here today is not whether one of the deputy minister believes, as I 
do, that we have a good opportunity to turn the province around.  I believe 
if we have some rain, that the price goes up reasonably well, that we can 
well have a turnaround in this agriculture in this province because the 
farmers out there are capable of doing it.  All we need is the opportunity 
to meet those needs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, you've had 
eight years of opportunity and things are continuing to get worse because 
of your failure to implement a long-term program.  And the point to be made 
here is that no wonder things aren't going anywhere with support for 
farmers from your side, because you can't get along.  And I guess maybe the 
hundred people you're going to call in to give you some advice may be able 
to straighten the mess out. 
 
Mr. Minister, the same ad, the member states that of the cases reviewed . . 
. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm having some difficulty hearing the hon. 
member from Humboldt and ask members to give him that opportunity to speak. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand why the members 
opposite get a little edgy when it hits so close to home about their lack 
of being able to control the farm situation.  Mr. Minister, the member 
states: 
 

 Of the cases reviewed by the Farm Land Security Board, those who end up 
with a case prepared for the courts are getting better settlements than 
those resolved through mediation. 

 
Mr. Minister, do you agree with this assessment, and if so, have you made 
any changes to the boards to correct it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what changes have been made to 
the mediation board, if any.  I believe that we have been able to work with 
the financial institutions to some degree to get some write-downs to help 
some young farmers stay on the land.  I believe they've been working 
particularly with the credit unions to get particularly the farm operating 
loans available to farmers.  And I believe they've been able to work with 
governments and such things as the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and other 
organizations to look at how we can serve to get the operating money needed 
for the farmers. 
 
And in regards to the farm debt review, there's been ongoing . . . and I 
have to take notice if you needed the names or change of the mediation 
board. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Meeting of Finance Ministers in Ottawa 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the Minister 
of Finance.  Mr. Minister, I have here a newspaper article which reports on 
a meeting of Finance ministers with Michael Wilson, the federal minister, 
in Ottawa last Tuesday.  My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: is it 
correct that you were not one of the ministers in attendance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yesterday you criticized the Minister of Finance for 
travelling. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It is not the Minister of Justice but the 
Minister of Finance who's answering the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is correct.  I was not 
in attendance at that meeting. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  Mr. 
Minister, you pretend, and your government pretends, that you're fighting 
the goods and services tax, which this meeting was all about, but yet you 
can't even find time in your schedule to meet with the federal minister to 
protest this tax, while you can find time, you and your colleagues, to 
travel the world on junkets throughout the whole year of 12 months of the 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, this lack of political involvement on 
your part and your government's part is playing into the hands of the 
federal Minister of Finance who is taking this one clear message from your 
lack of action in this issue, and that is that when push comes to shove, 
your government is going to roll over and play dead and agree with that GST 
(goods and services tax), as you did earlier. 
 
Mr. Minister, I ask you: how are the people of Saskatchewan to believe that 
you're really in opposition to this tax when you are not prepared to go to 
such an important meeting and make that position clear to the federal 
Minister of Finance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I said the hon. member was right 
when he said, when he asked, was I at the meeting in Ottawa, and I said no.  
But what he didn't ask me is, did I meet with Mike Wilson this past 
Saturday at 7 o'clock in the morning to discuss the very same issues that 
were going to be raised in Ottawa.  I met with him at 7 in the morning, 
covered the issues, didn't fly to Ottawa, and saved the taxpayers some 
money and made our points, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Member from Meadow Lake, would the member 
from Meadow Lake come to order, and the member from Regina Elphinstone.  
Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Clean Air Policy 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise in this 
Assembly this afternoon and inform the House that together with my 
colleague, the hon. Minister of the Environment and Public Safety, we're 
announcing a public consultive process to develop a clean air policy for 
Saskatchewan.  The process will consider such environmental issues as acid 
rain, ozone depletion and global warming.  Specifically, it will focus on 
how to reduce emission levels of sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen 
oxides, and volatile organic compounds, while sustaining economic growth.  
Our energy resource base has been an important factor in the economic 
development of Saskatchewan.  We recognize, however, that the development 
of our energy resources must be done in an environmentally responsible 
manner.  I am very pleased with the historic environmental record of energy 
producing companies in Saskatchewan. 
 
However, emerging environmental concerns such as global warming are 
creating new challenges for both our energy producers and consumers.  Since 
all sectors of society are impacted by and contribute to the emission of 
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, it is important that these 
groups have the opportunity to participate in choosing our province's 
responses to global warming. 
 
To that end, the Environment minister and I have announced a consultative 
process to develop a clean air policy for Saskatchewan.  The provincial 
round table on environment and economy will play a leading role.  The round 
table will review air quality standards in the province, will review the 
roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders in maintaining our air 
quality, and will develop recommendations for action to reduce atmospheric 
emissions. 
 
Coincident with the work of the round table, the provincial Departments of 
Energy and Mines and Environment and Public Safety will hold public 
consultations beginning with the release of discussion papers this summer 
and followed by public workshops in the fall.  This public consultation 
process will examine the broad range of policy responses available to 
Saskatchewan and recommend specific actions. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, there are times when one can stand up and 
welcome an announcement by a government in a ministerial statement.  And 
although the sounding of the words sounds positive and impressive, I think 
there is no reason for the public of Saskatchewan to feel any confidence 
that this government is on top of the environmental issues and is prepared 
to do anything about them. 
 



 

 

Let me say, Mr. Speaker, what this announcement is all about.  It is the 
same announcement which this government made in the throne speech of 1989 
and did absolutely nothing about it, and there is no reason to believe that 
they will do any more after this announcement one year later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this government that cut back the monitoring of 
emissions into the air in Saskatchewan in a very dramatic way about two or 
three years ago.  Now they're going to study the impact of the damage that 
may have been done because of that cut-back that the government made.  This 
is the same government that passed in 1987 a new Clear Air Act and failed 
to proclaim it until two years later in 1989 because it couldn't get its 
act together to act. 
 
This announcement, Mr. Speaker, I regret to say, because the issue is so 
important, is nothing more than an excuse by this government to do nothing 
and to stall and to delay, just as its Consensus Saskatchewan proposal, in 
the hope that somehow it will get it by an election while the government 
sits on its hands and does nothing, while our environment is being 
destroyed all around us, creating a threat not only to vegetation and the 
ecology, but creating a threat around the world to human existence itself, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act respecting Family and Community Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This government is taking a 
new and innovative step today within the second reading of The Family and 
Community Services Act. 
 
As Minister of the Family, it'll be my privilege to begin the work 
anticipated by this new Act.  Mr. Speaker, The Family and Community Service 
Act establishes a clear new legislative base with which to strengthen and 
assist families in our province.  It provides vision and direction for our 
families and for the Family Foundation created last fall to support 
families in Saskatchewan. 
 
The purpose of the Act is contained within one clause mandating its general 
powers, Mr. Speaker.  That mandate is to develop services that will 
strengthen families, to foster the healthy development of children, and to 
provide local services and support for families.  Mr. Speaker, these 
important phrases succinctly state three general ideals of the Act and the 
Family Foundation. 
 
First, we will work to strengthen families, all forms of families.  Our 
society is one in which many cultures co-exist, each with its own heritage 
and in many cases with its own view of what a family is.  It is also a 



 

 

society in which differing values and behaviours are tolerated and 
accepted, Mr. Speaker.  Recognizing the diversity of families is a 
fundamental element of this Act. 
 
Secondly, the healthy development of children is a central purpose of the 
Act and of the foundation.  Our children are our greatest resource.  They 
will build our future.  They deserve our utmost care and our utmost 
protection.  Creating an environment in which children can learn and mature 
and in which they can be safe and protected is one of our highest 
objectives.  Governments and societies have an obligation to prepare our 
children for an economic role in life.  Children are educated and trained 
to learn skills that they will use in the market-place, and that's 
important. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we believe that governments and societies should also 
be concerned with preparing our children as family members and care givers.  
The Family Foundation will promote that ideal. 
 
Third, the foundation is concerned with our communities.  Strong caring 
communities are vital to strong families.  Our best solutions to family 
problems will be found in our communities by the people who experience them 
day to day.  If we are to strengthen our families, it will be in 
partnership with the communities.  Subsequent sections of The Family and 
Community Services Act describe how we will serve Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
First of all, we will listen to them as we have been doing for the past few 
months.  Mr. Speaker, the Act emphasizes listening to rural and urban 
families, to schools, churches and religious organizations, service 
agencies, and other organizations that have an impact on families.  We will 
research ideas and trends in Saskatchewan communities and society to 
understand how families are changing, and we will help communities develop 
services that support family life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by listening and working together in partnership with 
community groups, agencies, and individuals, we will find the local 
solutions that work for families. 
 
In addition to describing the foundation's work with communities, The 
Family and Community Services Act elaborates its vital policy leadership 
role.  Within government, the foundation will speak for family concern, 
acting as a bridge between local problems and government programs.  Issues 
and priorities identified by Saskatchewan families and organizations will 
be translated into policy and into programs. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the message and the idea will be coming from 
below, not from government, not from bureaucracy, but from the people.  
Because, Mr. Speaker, the best solutions to family problems will be found 
in our communities by the people who experience them day to day. 
 
The Act provides for the monitoring of all government programs, services, 
and initiatives affecting families.  It asks that recommendations be made 
to improve them.  It asks that economic and social policy be carefully 



 

 

evaluated.  It asks that the means of developing family living skills 
through government programs be recommended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act makes it clear that the Family Foundation's policy 
leadership role is to stem from its connection with families and 
communities.  Government policy is to be guided by the input and priorities 
of the public.  Discussion and listening are to be the starting points of 
policy change. 
 
(1445) 
 
Under its previous legislative base, The Family Services Act, the Family 
Foundation is working with communities and government.  This work has been 
fully consistent with the mandate and principles proposed in The Family and 
Community Services Act. 
 
I will make brief reference to three current initiatives.  Extensive 
consultation and dialogue has been undertaken on family issues.  Mr. 
Speaker, since assuming my cabinet portfolio last October, I have met with 
leaders in about 20 communities across Saskatchewan and dozens of community 
and provincial organizations.  I have also had a number of opportunities to 
listen to the views of Saskatchewan youth on families.  I have found there 
is much to be learned from such dialogue with our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that my wife and I have four daughters has been a 
good learning experience for me to learn from you.  They do have much to 
say.   This dialogue is continuing to work -- the work that was begun last 
year. 
 
In conjunction, Mr. Speaker, with the symposium about families, the highly 
successful interprovincial conference held here in July of 1989, 
discussions were held with over 100 community leaders, more than 200 
non-government agencies with municipal, business, professional, religious, 
educational, cultural, recreational leaders, and with dozens of 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
A second important initiative has been the forums about families program.  
These are community designed and delivered workshops and seminars. They are 
oriented towards family living skills and personal development of family 
members.  Participants explore such subjects as: parenting skills, marriage 
preparation, understanding child behaviour, family budgeting, drug 
awareness, caring for ageing parents, communication within the family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our young people tell me that parents don't listen.  Our young 
people have a great deal to say, and they want to express their thoughts 
and they want to express their feelings to their parents.  They only want 
their parents to listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 23 forums about families have been completed to date across 
the province with 2,600 participants.  A hundred and fifty forums are 
planned for this year; about 84 are already scheduled.  I attended one, as 
a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, this morning at LeBoldus High School here in 
Regina. 



 

 

 
A third initiative concerns hunger.  This problem has rightly gained much 
attention in Saskatchewan.  In looking for solutions, we began by 
discussing  the problem with our communities.  In November I wrote to every 
school board in the province asking for input.  I have met with individuals 
across the province who are running volunteer feeding programs for 
children.  I have discussed the issue with school boards and principals, 
with nutritionists and school teachers, public health professionals, civic 
officials and many others, including, as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the 
volunteers who are delivering this program and who should be commended for 
their unselfish attitude towards these young people who need the food. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- These people have told me several things, Mr. Speaker.  
They've told me that education and support to families will help alleviate 
the deeply-rooted causes of hunger; that communities should be active 
participants in designing solutions, and, Mr. Speaker, they will be; that 
we should be wary of government starting new feeding programs for children.  
With their input, I have made recommendations to cabinet on hunger 
initiatives which I expect to be announced, Mr. Speaker, in the near 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to discussing . . . The discussion of this Bill 
is an opportunity to tell the members of the legislature and the public of 
our vision for Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan communities.  The 
Family and Community Services Act represents a commitment to working in 
partnership with families and with communities.  It describes our mission 
of building bridges between families and family members, and between 
communities and government. 
 
It is a commitment to the men, women, and children of Saskatchewan to value 
and prepare them for their contribution to our society as family members 
and as care givers.  It is a commitment to the families of Saskatchewan 
that all government agencies will consider the impact their decisions have 
on families.  It is a commitment to the public that our concerns about 
families will be translated into government and community action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to move second reading of The Family and 
Community Services Act.  Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to make a few remarks if I could on this Bill, and I intend to move to 
adjourn the debate after my remarks, in that I would like to study the 
minister's comments and see what, if anything, is in the budget tonight in 
terms of real support to families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was struck by the minister's comment, and I agreed with him about the 
need for a partnership between communities, between communities and 
government.  And I agree with that; we agree with him on this side of the 
House. 



 

 

 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the need for partnership exists not just in the 
last few months, as he talked about; the need for partnership should have 
occurred over the last eight years.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I can only say to 
the minister that we support the need for partnership, but not just at 
election times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me make very clear at the outset of my remarks, I want to 
make this very, very clear that we on this side of the House, we strongly 
endorse supporting Saskatchewan families.  We strongly endorse supporting 
Saskatchewan communities.  And I want to make that very clear.  Our 
governments generally over the years in Saskatchewan, our citizens in this 
great province, have a proven record of doing just that -- of taking care 
of families, of building communities. 
 
They've got a proven record of doing that by providing meaningful jobs 
throughout the province; by utilizing an effective mixed economy in doing 
that; by providing a good educational system over the years, a good health 
care system, often the envy of all the world; by having a positive and a 
constructive social safety net. 
 
Again, in many years, the envy of other provinces across Canada.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, a history of being open and honest over the years with the 
families and the communities of Saskatchewan.  That's a general proud 
record of governments, typically provincially, Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. 
Speaker, by supporting the agricultural farms and families and the 
small-business people in small towns and in the cities, and so on. 
 
So our province over the years, Mr. Speaker, has done well.  It is unique.  
Our province is very special and it's a proud place to live, Mr. Speaker, 
and we in this province have pioneered in many, many areas, very 
progressive legislation in the support of families and in the support of 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for most of the last 50 years it has been our party that has 
been in government and been part of and partnership to a lot of the things 
that I've just talked about.  We've been working with Saskatchewan 
families, we've been working with Saskatchewan communities, and we have 
been part of the building that the minister talks about, part of that 
caring and part of that compassionate and supportive environment that we 
take pride in in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
My focus today is in supporting families and supporting communities and the 
need in reinforcing the need to support families and support Saskatchewan 
communities in these very difficult times, Mr. Speaker.  However, Mr. 
Speaker, I might say that the record of this government over the last eight 
years has just been the opposite to the kind of society that the minister 
just said that we want to build in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it has been 
a record of tearing down supports to families.  It has been a record of 
leaving communities exposed to the pressures of the world market-place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have not been protecting communities.  They've been 
putting communities in a situation where young people have had to flee from 



 

 

the communities and flee from the province.  And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
almost a unanimous view of the people in Saskatchewan.  This is a 
Saskatchewan consensus that that's how these people have behaved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we welcome any initiative -- and I want to make that very 
clear -- which is supportive to families, which is supportive to 
communities, and which builds, Mr. Speaker, if it is sincere, and of course 
that is the test, Mr. Speaker, here.  This PC government, the public is 
telling me, cannot be trusted.  They have absolutely no credibility at this 
point.  They're going to have to earn the respect of the public of 
Saskatchewan.  And there are many examples of why they have no credibility, 
and there are a vast majority of people think that it's too late already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they say one thing and they do just the opposite, and the 
examples are numerous, whether its taxation, health care, privatization -- 
you name it.  And the best indicator, Mr. Speaker, is what the people of 
Saskatchewan are saying to me -- that's what the small-business people of 
Saskatoon Eastview are saying to me -- the best indicator of how this 
government will behave in the future is how they have behaved in the past, 
over the past eight years. That's the best indicator, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talked about the family symposium of last July, almost a year 
ago -- talked about what a great symposium that is, Mr. Speaker. And there 
were good ideas from that symposium.  Mr. Speaker, so far he has done 
nothing with the recommendations from that symposium.  And that's why, Mr. 
Speaker, after one year one has to question their seriousness about helping 
Saskatchewan families and helping Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Now this minister has been in place for six months, Mr. Speaker; he's been 
floundering badly for six months.  He's been making insensitive statements 
towards poor people.  He's been making patronizing statements towards poor 
people.  And I don't say that he did this consciously; I don't think he 
did.  And I just don't think he realized the insensitivity because he is 
part of the government that is out of touch.  But he's been making 
insensitive statements towards poor people, in a sense blaming them for the 
poverty that they find themselves in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are his accomplishments today?  After six months and some 
250, $300,000, he has not even been able, until today, in six months to 
articulate to the public of Saskatchewan what his mandate is.  His 
accomplishments to date is he's published a facts sheet telling the public 
what great things the Government of Saskatchewan is doing for them. 
 
I would like to go on record as saying, Mr. Speaker, I have examined this 
thoroughly; this document that has been published by this minister is 
misleading.  It's misleading to the public of Saskatchewan.  That's what 
he's done, and this document is misleading. 
 
He's put two social workers into schools, and I don't quarrel with that. 
I'm not saying that's not a good initiative.  But he thinks that that's 
solving the problem.  On a certain level, that's a good idea, but that's 
not dealing with the problem.  At the time that he announced that, it took 
three ministers to announce that initiative, and it took a lot of pride in 



 

 

trying to convince the public that they're dealing with poverty. 
 
He talked about community forums today, and I give him credit for going 
around the community to listen to what the people have to say.  Mr. 
Speaker, I'm aware that in the community forum of Weyburn, what did the 
public tell him?  They said, we don't like your policies; we don't like 
your policies on taxation.  You're hurting Saskatchewan families; you're 
hurting Saskatchewan communities.  We don't like your policies on store 
hours.  You've shown no leadership there.  And we don't like your policy on 
allowing liquor advertising, Mr. Speaker.  That's what they told him. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the role of this minister today, after six months, he's 
been a cheer-leader for the government.  He's basically been a 
smoke-screen; his role has been a smoke-screen.  He didn't even acknowledge 
. . . He hasn't even acknowledged in this House that we have the second 
highest rate of family poverty in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took a long time before he would acknowledge that poverty 
existed in this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of where this 
minister has impacted upon his colleagues to put one peanut butter sandwich 
in the tummy of a hungry child, one additional sandwich in the last six 
months. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what he has done is he's defended -- and that's why I say 
he's insensitive -- he's defended the very hurtful policies of this 
government which in fact has put more stress on families, more stress on 
communities.  It hasn't helped them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in six months this family minister and his department has 
made no difference, absolutely no difference to the hurtful PC policies of 
this province.  In fact, as my hon. friend says, he has cost us money with 
no tangible results. 
 
(1500) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that unless we see some concrete evidence which we 
haven't seen in the last six months, that this minister's role is one of a 
public relations initiative.  Who else but this PC government would 
establish an expensive ministry, fund it, staff it, remodel the offices, 
pay the minister $90,000 a year, but not be able to tell the public what 
his mandate is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's why we're in trouble in this province, because we have 
this kind of knee-jerk planning.  They identify a problem and they try and 
solve it with a public relations initiative.  Mr. Speaker, I can only 
conclude -- I hope I'm wrong -- but I can only conclude that on the 
surface, this ministry appears to be nothing but a public relations 
exercise. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that it appears to be a sign of desperation. 
And I cannot stress too much that no other government since the last Tory 
government 50 years ago has done more to hurt families, has done more to 
hurt communities in the province of Saskatchewan.  They've put tremendous 



 

 

stress on families, yet they've cut the service and supports to families, 
Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they have put tremendous stress on communities, 
and they in fact have eroded the supports to communities.  They have not 
stood up for Saskatchewan with the hurtful policies of the federal 
government, as my colleague from Humboldt outlined very clearly yesterday. 
 
The new super minister has never in this House acknowledged that 
out-migration is a problem despite the fact that some 55 net people have 
left this province in the last five years; 60 per cent of them are under 
the age of 34.  He has acknowledged that that's a problem.  How on earth is 
he going to deal with it if he's not going to acknowledge it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of communities, we've seen in the last four or five 
years 1,000 families come off the farm.  And this is a government that in 
eight years has failed to protect our rural communities by providing 
long-term support programs and failed to deal with the other issues of land 
transfers and input costs and the interest rates, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here's a minister -- and it's very unclear in the Act, and 
I'll have a lot of questions for this minister -- here's a minister who has 
a department.  In fact the Act doesn't say he's even setting up a 
department.  But here's a minister who is in charge of a department, it has 
no power, he has no power, he has no authority to ensure that his cabinet 
colleagues will be influenced.  There's no authority here to indicate that.  
There are no resources, as far as I can see, outlined here.  He's got no 
programs.  Mr. Speaker, that's not good enough.  That's not good enough.  
The public is not going to be fooled unless this minister can deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that the government has found itself in political 
difficulty.  And no wonder! with privatization, the secret deals, 
withholding information, the financial mess they've created in the 
province, savage cuts to health care and education and social services, 
record level taxes on Saskatchewan families, and that they're . . . the 
rate of high unemployment. 
 
They're low on the polls and the Premier was confronted with the question 
of, what are we going to do.  Well let's establish a ministry of the 
families, and we can talk about how we value young people, about how we 
value families.  And, Mr. Speaker, we've heard now for a year how important 
that young people are to the province and how valuable families are, and 
they continue to leave in record numbers -- 23,700 net out-migration last 
year. 
 
So what they say about families and their record, Mr. Speaker, are quite 
the opposite.  Mr. Speaker, they decided to say, well we want to be a 
kinder and a more gentle government and that we want to listen.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, part of listening is whether or not you hear the message.  And for 
the minister to get up and say that we've been in partnership and we've 
worked closely and co-operatively and collaboratively with communities and 
families, just simply isn't true.  If that's how he views what this 
government has done, then he's out of step with the Saskatchewan people, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's nothing new in this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  If the 
government was sincere, if they were sincere, there is nothing in this Bill 
that the current ministers of Social Services, Education, and Health, for 
sure, shouldn't already be implementing on behalf of families and 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, they should have 
already been doing this if they were sincere and concerned. 
 
Many of the ministers, including the Premier, talked about taking politics 
out of government, Mr. Speaker.  That was kind of the thrust to their 
throne speech.  And I'm not surprised they would say that.  Mr. Speaker, 
their political record is not good, and frankly, regarding Saskatchewan 
families and Saskatchewan communities, their record is one of betrayal, of 
deception, and of extreme hardship placed on Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan communities. 
 
And I say to the minister that the public of Saskatchewan, unless the 
nature of your support changes, that the public of Saskatchewan has had 
enough of your kind of support to families and communities unless it takes 
a different form, Mr. Speaker.  Because your approach to Saskatchewan 
communities is tearing down rather than building.  The dental plan is a 
good example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so despite his rhetoric, the public is going to be waiting to see 
whether or not there is some substance to what the minister is talking 
about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about consensus in Saskatchewan.  The 
minister talks about the vision of this government.  Mr. Speaker, I note 
that he was so impressed with the vision in the throne speech that he 
didn't even get up to speak on it. 
 
Now here's a throne speech that talked about the importance of families and 
young people and how this government was going to strengthen the fabric of 
rural Saskatchewan and communities and support families.  The Minister of 
the Family didn't even speak to the throne speech.  So obviously I'm left 
to conclude that he saw nothing there of any substance.  And so I didn't 
see him defending the vision of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things that the Saskatchewan families have a 
consensus about with regard to the way this government has treated families 
and communities.  There's a strong consensus across the province that Tory 
times are tough times. 
 
There is a strong consensus across the province that this government has 
broken just too many promises, Mr. Speaker, that they've got absolutely no 
credibility.  There's a consensus about that, Mr. Speaker.  There's a 
strong consensus in Saskatchewan that there are too many food banks.  
There's a strong consensus in Saskatchewan that this government has wasted 
too much money.  There's a strong consensus that 20 cabinet ministers and 
10 legislative secretaries is a waste of money, Mr. Speaker.  And there's a 
strong consensus that this government has been involved in mismanagement 
unparalleled by any government in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, there's a strong . . . yes, there is lots of 
consensus in Saskatchewan.  There's a strong consensus that this government 
has taxed all of us to the hilt and there's just no room for families and 
communities to breathe, Mr. Speaker.  There's a strong consensus that the 
policies of this government have been directly related to, during the last 
three years, record levels of personal and business bankruptcies, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There's a strong consensus that we can't continue to lose 1,000 families 
off the farm every year, Mr. Speaker.  And there's a strong consensus that 
this government should quit foreclosing on family farms, Mr. Speaker, quit 
taking legal actions against family farms. 
 
And there's a strong consensus which touches every family in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, that out-migration has got to be turned around.  Mr. Speaker, 
out-migration is tearing apart families.  If the Minister of the Family was 
concerned about families, he would speak to the new super-minister to see 
about turning that situation around.  Mr. Speaker, there's a strong 
consensus that we can't afford to lose 55,000 people over the last three 
years.  We can't afford to continue on that trend.  And there's a strong 
consensus that when our youth leave, Mr. Speaker, that there goes our 
future. 
 
But there's also a strong consensus that we cannot continue to see children 
going to school hungry, Mr. Speaker.  The Family minister says that from 
his observation around the province there's no need for a school lunch 
program, Mr. Speaker.  And that's why I say it's one thing to go out and 
listen, but unless you hear what people are saying to you, Mr. Speaker, 
that minister is going to make no difference to the well-being of the lives 
of Saskatchewan families and communities.  Mr. Speaker, there's a strong 
consensus in rural Saskatchewan that the dental program was a bad decision 
and that the government should reverse that decision if they're concerned 
about families. 
 
There's a strong consensus that we have had the worst job creation record 
in the last three or four years, and that there's something got to be done 
with that. And there's a strong consensus among senior citizens and their 
families that the home care program has got to be restored to its proper 
funding levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on.  There is a lot of consensus in 
Saskatchewan already, but this government is not listening.  Mr. Speaker, 
there is consensus on many, many other issues that create hardship on 
Saskatchewan families, and it's not just the opposition that's saying that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to comment for a minute on an article in today's Leader-Post, 
March 29, and the headline is "'Fierce' Sask. pride disappearing: study."  
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a study that was released today . . . released 
Wednesday by the Saskatchewan Red Cross.  This is not the opposition -- the 
Saskatchewan Red Cross -- a very in-depth study of some 2,150 Saskatchewan 



 

 

people, which is a pretty good sampling Mr. Speaker, a cross-section of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
I'd like to make just a few quotes from this release.  It says: 
 

 Feelings of pessimism, hopelessness, and despair are pervasive in 
Saskatchewan society, according to the Red Cross study released in Regina 
Wednesday. 

 
 The survey of 2,150 Saskatchewan people suggests concerns about 

deteriorating health (Mr. Minister of Health), social and economic 
conditions are grave and the whole sense of community (the sense of 
community which the minister was just talking about) is threatened in a 
province that has long prided itself on its small-town neighborliness. 

 
And I continue quoting: 
 

 "Sixty-seven per cent of all respondents were feeling pessimism, 
hopelessness, and despair about the future of this province," the study 
said. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what an indictment on this government, with this kind of 
feeling throughout the province. 
 
I go on to say, Mr. Speaker, despite what the minister just said about them 
as a government, community building.  It says: 
 

 "There was a distinct feeling that the 'spirit' or concept of community 
was disintegrating . . ." 

 
It's a study of over 2,000 Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 
Speaker, it goes on to say that . . . well, it states that the report is 
not designed as a report card on any particular government.  Then they go 
on to say, but: 
 

 . . . the commissioner of the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Red 
Cross Society, had some advice for Finance Minister Lorne Hepworth just 
one day before this evening's introduction of the provincial budget in the 
legislature. 

 
 "Listen to the people of Saskatchewan," she advised. 
 
 "This (report) is there to help you chart your course . . ." 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here's 2,100 people.  Here's the commissioner of the 
Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Red Cross telling the government to 
change its course. 
 
Now the Minister of Education doesn't like this.  But he's the one that has 
got a crisis in the technical system in the university and K to 12, and he 
doesn't like this.  So obviously the public of Saskatchewan has touched a 
nerve with the results of this survey, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, and then she goes on to say that: 
 

 The most disturbing element of the report has to do with the deterioration 
of the concept of community . . . 

 
And that is exactly what my colleague from Humboldt said yesterday about 
the way that policies of this government have allowed Saskatchewan 
communities to be eroded.  The concept of Saskatchewan communities is 
deteriorating. 
 
Now this flies in the face of everything that the minister just said, Mr. 
Speaker.  Then she goes on to say: 
 

 There is "growing intolerance, cynicism, and criticism by urban and rural 
people for each other . . ." 

 
Well I'm not surprised, Mr. Speaker, because this government has pitted 
urban people against rural people; they've pitted low income people against 
business people.  That's been their strategy, Mr. Speaker.  They have 
contributed to a growing intolerance in this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
it's reflected in this study. 
 
(1515) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, pardon me if I'm being a little bit cynical about this 
government's record with what the Minister of the Family says their record 
is today.  Obviously the public of Saskatchewan doesn't believe him, 
doesn't agree with him, and, Mr. Speaker, would be quite leery of the 
commitments that he's making today. 
 
And many of those surveyed -- I quote here again: 
 

 . . . were concerned that there was not a co-ordinated approach to 
delivery of health care and social services . . . 

 
Exactly what our colleagues have been saying for some time, Mr. Speaker -- 
haphazard planning in economic development, haphazard planning in financial 
management, and haphazard planning in the provision of the human services. 
 
Mr. Speaker -- and I quote one last part here -- it says: 
 

 Many of those surveyed in the 14 to 18 age-group said there was no point 
in getting a good education because there are few jobs available even for 
those who do apply for them. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if that's the view that young people have about this 
government -- first of all, they can't get into university because this 
Minister of Education has allowed quotas to be put on the university, and 
then they're saying, even if we get an education, we can't get a job in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that's what our young people are feeling this way.  That's a 
tremendous . . . They should be having some fun and associating with their 



 

 

peers and learning to be young people.  They're worried about if they get 
an education there's no opportunities for them anyway. 
 
So there's a study that I hope that the Minister of the Family and all of 
his colleagues look very closely at, Mr. Speaker.  That was released 
yesterday.  Over 2,000 people participated, almost a thousand personal 
interviews, and I would say that the results of this study represent what I 
said earlier about a consensus that exists in Saskatchewan, that this 
government is not supporting families and is not involved in community 
building. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, and I'm drawing my remarks to a conclusion 
here, that the best indicator of how a government will behave in the future 
is how they behaved in the past.  I think that's a reasonable proposition 
that you would agree with. 
 
Now after eight years of insensitivity, after eight years of insensitive 
firings, after eight years of arrogance and hardships on Saskatchewan 
families -- the 200 potash workers, for example, last year that were fired 
and were into this gallery crying and pleading with the government to 
reverse that hurtful decision -- after eight years of those kinds of 
hardships on families, Mr. Speaker, it'll be hard to believe that this 
minister will be able to redirect the priorities of this government in the 
wrong-headed direction that it's going in now. 
 
I wish the minister luck.  I will give him credit if I see any concrete 
results coming from the activities of his department.  I certainly will.  I 
will give him credit, as we will on this side of the House.  But, Mr. 
Speaker, I say very clearly that the public of Saskatchewan will be 
watching to see if there is any real change in direction by this 
government.  And maybe we'll start by seeing that tonight in the throne 
speech. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Budget. 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Mr. Speaker, but the throne . . . in the budget, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech offered no vision that I could see, that we 
could see on this side of the House, obviously that the Minister of the 
Family could see, because he didn't speak to it; he didn't support it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not give the minister any powers that his 
colleagues don't already have.  I think that's important.  And it's going 
to be very difficult to take the Minister of the Family seriously unless we 
see some concrete signs in the budget tonight where families and 
communities are going to be supported and unless we see a change in 
attitude by this government, Mr. Speaker, one where they'll be honest with 
families and honest with communities of the province, a change in attitude 
where they will develop sound economic policies and abandon their 
right-wing privatization approach which maybe single-handedly has had the 
greatest negative impact on Saskatchewan families and communities. 
 
We look for a change in attitude in education, in health care, and we look 



 

 

for a change in attitude and some concrete action for farm families and 
small-business people.  Mr. Speaker, we look to see if -- we're going to be 
looking to see if there is any concrete support in social programs which 
are required more than ever in difficult times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are also going to be looking to see whether or not 
there is a proved sense of tolerance and sensitivity by this government in 
relation to particularly minority groups and low income people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, if there is concrete help in the budget tonight, if 
there is concrete help that this minister can demonstrate where he's making 
a difference, I will give him support, I will give him credit for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many questions in this Bill.  There are questions 
regarding the intent of the Bill.  There are questions regarding the powers 
that the minister does and does not have, and I will want answers to those 
questions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister is going to have to convince me, while I 
believe that he is sincere and well-intentioned, that he is going to have 
to start making -- I saw him on TV last night, the night before last -- 
he's going to have to start making some comments that show some 
sensitivity, that show some understanding of the problems that families 
face if he is going to be taken seriously, that the Minister of the Family 
is going to make any difference.  And I would urge him, I would urge him to 
very seriously look at the recommendations from the family symposium last 
year and urge his colleagues to be supportive to some of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, I will have more remarks at another time.  I would 
like to study the minister's comments today, see what's in the throne 
speech tonight, Mr. Speaker, and . . . the budget speech tonight. I've got 
to get the throne speech out of my mind, Mr. Speaker.  And I wish to . . . 
For the mean time, Mr. Speaker, I've got some colleagues who will want to 
speak on this Bill.  I request that we adjourn the debate at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hodgins: -- Mr. Speaker, because it is near 3:30 and the Assembly 
must prepare itself for the budget tonight, and by agreement with the House 
Leader, I would move that we recess the legislature until 7 o'clock 
tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


