















































Hansard: June 21, 1990


 

 

June 21, 1990 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Hopfner, from the Special Committee on Regulations, presents the second report of the 
committee which is hereby tabled as sessional paper no. 128. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by the member 
from Yorkton: 
 

That the second report of the Special Committee on Regulations now be concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am honoured to present to this Assembly — and 
would ask him to stand; he is seated in the Speaker’s gallery — and his name is Mike Doherty from 
Rose Valley, Saskatchewan. Mike is the president of the Saskatchewan Special Olympics and is in town 
today to oversee the olympics and the provincial summer games being hosted by the city of Regina. 
 
For the benefit of members, the opening ceremonies are Friday night at Douglas Park and the actual 
games run all Saturday. And athletes from all across the province, Mr. Speaker, will be in town to 
compete. I would ask all members to join me in wishing the athletes well and a special welcome tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce you and through you to this 
Assembly, some students seated in the west gallery to your left. They are 17 students from grade 8 and 9 
in Goodeve, Saskatchewan. They are here visiting the legislature and other spots in Regina today. They 
are accompanied by their principal, Dave Petlak, and their bus driver Cyril Denesiuk. They are here 
touring the legislature and I will meet with them at 3 p.m. once they have completed their tour. 
 
Some of the students come from the Goodeve district and also form Fire Hills Indian Reserve south of 
Goodeve and in particular, most of the students I believe are from Little Black Bear Indian Reserve 
south of Goodeve. So that we have rural and village students, and I want your and all the members to 
welcome these students to the Assembly. they come her ever year and they find it very fruitful to be 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to introduce you to you and through 
you to the House a group of 21 grade 4 students from Henry Braun Elementary School here in Regina. 
They’re seated in the east gallery. They have been hiking around the park. They started this morning at 
the science centre and I know they’ve got a long ways to go yet. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet with them as they came in because they are not staying for the whole 
question period. And I was very pleased to have that opportunity. I want to extend to them and their 
chaperon, Mrs. Langham, on behalf of all the members, our greetings and wish them a very enjoyable 
visit to the legislature and a safe trip home, and ask the members to join me in extending greetings to 
these students from Henry Braun. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured today to introduce, 
seated in your gallery, to you and to members of the Assembly, two special guests, Father Bob Ogle, 
who is a constituent of mine, and a special person, Marylou Ogle, who is with him. 
 
Father Bob, as he’s known, is a former member of parliament, as you know, and has made a great 
contribution to Canadian politics and distinguished himself internationally. He’s a distinguished 
Canadian, a recent recipient of the Order of Canada. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, next week Father 
Bob will be recognized by the province of Saskatchewan for that special recognition. 
 
Father Bob is a profound humanitarian. He’s devoted his life to serving people and to social justice, 
particularly in third-world development, and a special concern there. 
 
And Father Bob has written a number of books; I have one here. It’s Father Bob Ogle A Man of Letters. 
And he just happens to have some with him today and he’s promoting his book. But Father Bob’s books 
are very special books, required reading for young people and people concerned about social justice and 
politicians and … required reading. And a very distinguished Canadian, very well respected. And I 
would ask all members to give a warm welcome to Father Bob and Marylou. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wolfe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to welcome Father Bob Ogle here on behalf 
of the government. Father Bob Ogle is a friend to us all and a special friend to me and some of my 
family. I’m not sure if Father Bob remembers but when I went to university, I attended his parish. Father 
Bob Ogle and Father Dennis Shirley are true friends. And at any rate, I’d like to welcome him to the 
legislature and congratulate him on the awards and the true honour he deserves. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to be recognized by you. It is also 
my pleasure to make two introductions today, Mr. Speaker. First of all I’d like to introduce, Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, 38 Grade 5 students from King 
George School in Moose Jaw. This is the second visit from King George to the Legislative Assembly 
during this session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These grade 5 students are accompanied by their instructors Marlene Hart and Cheryl Jones. They’ve 
already been on a tour of the building earlier, Mr. Speaker, and immediately following question period 
I’ll be joining them for pictures on the steps. I understand that they are going to have to leave right away 



 

 

for busing arrangements and that we won’t have time for a visit today, but we will have time for a visit 
when I take the pictures to the school in the fall, and we’ll do that. 
 
And so having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the Assembly to extend a very warm 
welcome to the students from King George and their instructors and also to wish them a very pleasant 
summer holiday. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hagel: — I thank you again, Mr. Speaker, for the recognition. I would like to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to all members of the Assembly, some 10 employees at the Imperial 400 Motel here in 
Regina who would like to be working. They’re members of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store 
Union, Mr. Speaker, and are currently involved in an industrial dispute at that location. 
 
It was my pleasure to meet with these people earlier this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask if the 
RWSDU (Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union) folks would please stand and if all members 
would show them welcome to this, their Legislative Assembly, and thank you for joining us here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We sometime keep the best for the last. I want to take this 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to the other members of the House, some 
18 grade 7 and 8 students from Drake School. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Louanne 
Burlingham and MaryAnne Patzer. I want to extend a warm welcome to the students. I’ll meet with 
them shortly after question period. 
 
And I want at the same time, Mr. Speaker, to also introduce a former colleague and a friend of mine who 
is seated in the east gallery as are the students, and a former MLA and cabinet minister, Mr. Don Cody 
is present. So I ask all members to join me — and I want also, if I may in this extended welcome, to also 
extend a welcome to Father Bob Ogle, who I consider a great spiritual leader and also a great friend. He 
attended my nominating convention in Englefeld back in 1978 and I’ve followed his career and his 
writings throughout the years. So in that, Mr. Speaker, will all members join in welcoming all of my 
guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear!` 
 
Mr. Gleim: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great pleasure today to introduce to you and to the 
Assembly 19 grade 4 and 5 students from the town of Kincaid. 
 
I would also like to welcome their teacher, Louise Walker. I don’t know who the bus driver is, it hasn’t 
got it on here, but I will be meeting with these students and the teacher at 3:00 p.m. to take pictures and 
to have drinks and to have a discussion. Until then, I’d like for everybody in the Assembly here to help 
me welcome these students to Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to extend a warm welcome to the 
students from Kincaid and a special welcome to a friend, Louise Walker. I had the opportunity of 
visiting with them a couple of weeks ago when I was in Kincaid. They were studying the electoral 



 

 

process that we go through to get to this Chamber, and I might say that one of the most informed groups 
in terms of students that I’ve ever met with. So I’d like to welcome them as well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce a friend and constituent of the 
Elphinstone constituency. He also happens to be probably the most popular councillor in Regina, Mr. 
Joe McKeown. Mr. McKeown is here with us today to observe question period and I’m sure all 
members will want to join with me in welcoming Joe to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a rarity when one gets a compliment from 
my colleague and desk mate, the member from Quill Lakes. As the members in the opposition will 
know, I share their feelings because it’s a rarity inside our caucus. But I do agree with him when he says 
that it’s the best for the last. And I want to thank him for those words of encouragement; I need them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a … 
 
An Hon. Member: — People would be worried by the source, Roy. 
 
Mr. Romanow: — That’s about it. That’s just about it. Mr. Speaker, I have a great deal of pleasure at 
introducing to you … Well first of all, a word of support and welcome to Father Bob who as we know 
has been struggling bravely and courageously against a very, very serious illness and illnesses, and it’s 
good to see him here today in pretty good health. 
 
I’d like to however introduce a person who has been recently nominated as a candidate for the New 
Democratic Party, who is seated in the Speaker’s gallery, for the constituency of Kindersley. We’ve 
gotten into this habit lately and I think it’s a good procedure to fall into. 
 
Mr. Lorne Johnston is the reeve of the RM of Snipe Lake who farms in the Eston district. He is a 
director of the Local UGG (United Grain Growers Limited) and a member of the Saskatchewan pool. 
He’s a national director of the Canadian Seed Grower’s Association, national director of Ducks 
Unlimited. Very well known in athletic activities being a scout for the Regina Pats at hockey level and 
other areas. So he’s got an impressive record of community service. Married — his wife Louvain could 
not be with him today. He has two in the family: daughter Lisa, 17; and son Ned, 15. 
 
And it really is encouraging to see people of this calibre enter into public life. And of course on a 
partisan note, I’m extremely pleased to see Mr. Johnston as the nominated candidate, and we all look 
forward to the hopefully early occasion when there’ll be a by-election in Kindersley constituency, or a 
general election. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
ORAL QUESTIONS 

 
Distribution of Agriculture Payments 

 
Mr. Upshall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Associate Minister of 
Agriculture. Mr. Minister, you will know that a couple of days ago Manitoba announced that they would 



 

 

have their federal farm aid program in the hands of their farmers by the end of June or about nine days 
from now. You will also know that your swift measures will put the application forms to our 
Saskatchewan farmers out in about two weeks after that and you say that the payments will be in hand 
by about the end of July, and I say it will probably be more like the end of August. Mr. Minister, how 
can you justify this lack of competence on your part and your inefficiency in compared to the Manitoba 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, the Manitoba government reached an agreement with the federal 
government about their cost-sharing relationship earlier than we did; and I think if you probably take 
that into consideration. The second thing you need to take into consideration is that we got considerably 
more than they did, about four times as much. And I think that that’s basically due to the Premier’s 
involvement in agriculture and the Premier’s constant volume of energy that he puts into agriculture. 
 
I would also state that they are going to get theirs because of the impact of the Premier’s involvement in 
agriculture in western Canada. And I think that’s … they have consistently said that our Premier should 
lead the way in dealing with their agricultural policies as well as ours. So they’re complimenting him in 
relation to their agenda. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister, maybe if the Premier of this province spent a little more time 
looking after Saskatchewan farmers and a little less time looking after Brian Mulroney, we’d have a lot 
more accomplished here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Right from the beginning this program has been mismanaged and you’ve had all kinds 
of excuses. But, Mr. Minister, you failed to deliver $500 million. You failed to deliver it before spring 
seeding. Now we get half the amount and we’re going to get it in, you said July, and probably by the end 
of August. In the light of all the problems Saskatchewan farmers are facing, Mr. Minister, how in the 
world do you justify this incompetence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, when we started negotiating with the federal government, we had 
nothing in our pockets in western Canada. We had nothing in our pockets as farmers in Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, British Columbia, or Manitoba. And it’s the work of the Premier in involving himself with 
agriculture in relation to that that has given us an opportunity to have $5.50 go into the pockets of 
farmers per cultivated acre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: — Well, Mr. Minister … 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I know the hon. member is very anxious to put his question, but I’d just 
like to remind him once more that his remarks should be put through the Speaker. 
 



 

 

Mr. Upshall: — My apologies, Mr. Speaker. A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same minister. Mr. 
Minister, you will know that the total amount of money going to be delivered to farmers, the difference 
between that and what was on the table three months ago, is the amount of money that the 80 cents an 
acre that you so generously put in. So the blame lies squarely on your shoulders for this long delay in 
delivering money to Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you just explain to the farm families of Saskatchewan why you have intentionally 
delayed the payment until, you said, July, and like I say, probably more like the end of August. Can you 
explain to the farm families why you’ve done that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: — Mr. Chairman, the agreement reached with the federal government was signed 
off just recently, and they have to put their money in order to … in place to put it out so that we can put 
it out to the farmers. We will be delivering it as soon as we possibly can. And we have scheduled July 
12 to be the date when applications will be in the elevators. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly when 
they’ll be there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Divisions Accounting Procedures 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, recently our 
government brought in a new set of regulations for school boards to provide publicly the details of their 
spending. We obviously don’t argue with greater accountability of how taxpayers’ money is spent, but I 
want to know why it is that you are forcing school boards and, as I understand it, municipal governments 
to follow public accounting procedures which your government refuses to follow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of this government of consultation with groups that 
are going to be affected by actions that are taken is certainly the case that the member has just raised. 
It’s my understanding that before any of this was moved forward with that there was consultation with 
all of the groups involved particularly the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), the 
teachers’ federation, and also the LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents) group, the directors of education. 
 
So all of the different parties that are involved in education were involved in this, Mr. Speaker, and had 
agreed to the fact that we should be moving forward with some type of public accounting within our 
school divisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I want to give you an example of what 
I’m talking about. You are now calling on school boards to provide aggregate totals for payments to 
individuals and firms where the aggregate exceeds $10,000. That information, Mr. Minister, used to be 
available to the public through the supplementary information to the Public Accounts, but your 
government has neglected to include that information since 1985. Mr. Minister, why won’t you live by 
the same rules that you are forcing on the school boards? If it’s good for the goose, Mr. Minister, it 
should be good for the gander. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, we see another example of the member opposite trying to 
exaggerate and indicate that things are happening that shouldn’t be happening — that there’s no 
consultation. That is not the case at all, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is that there are public 
accounts with regard to this legislature; there are public accounts with regard to city administrations and 
with many other types of administrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say again for you and for the media and for others who are listening today that this, 
in fact, has been done in consultation with all of the other players in the educational field. And again, as 
I say, it’s been done in consultation with the trustees association, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, and the organization of directors of superintendents in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — New question to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, you also require school 
boards to report publicly the purpose of each contract they award, as well as the names of the individuals 
or firms with which the contracts are made, as well as to whom the payment is made. Again, Mr. 
Minister, this is something your government refuses to do and it is certainly within the interest of the 
public. 
 
So again I have to ask you, Mr. Minister: why don’t you live within the same rules that you are forcing 
on other governments? Why are you allowed to keep secret information which you tell school boards 
they must provide? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t agree with what the member is saying — that we 
are not providing the information that people are wanting. I think that when you consider the fact that … 
(inaudible interjection) … Do we have a trained seal over here or what … 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I’d ask all hon. members to just restrain themselves and allow the 
minister to answer the question. They will have an opportunity for their own remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Well, I thought we had another guest that hadn’t been introduced, Mr. 
Speaker. Flipper, the seal, I thought maybe was here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say again and I would also add that ratepayers in this province are asking for much 
more information than is being expected in these public accounts from school boards. We in fact have 
gone through this very, very carefully with all of the players that have been involved and have indicated 
that there are some areas which are particularly sensitive, I think particularly when it comes to salaries 
of teachers and others within school divisions. And there has been total agreement with all of those 
groups that have been involved with what is happening with the public accounting for school boards in 
the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister. Mr. Minister, the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan are demanding the same kind of accountability from your government as they are from 
school boards and municipalities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Minister, you have set down a clear set of guide-lines for how school 
boards and municipalities must account for their spending; however, you have no such guide-lines for 
how your government spends our money. I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: why are you asking school 
boards and municipalities to come forward with this kind of accountability when your own government, 
the PC government of Saskatchewan, isn’t prepared to be accountable to the taxpayers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Meiklejohn: — Mr. Speaker, this government is providing information for the taxpayers of 
this province in the same way that any other administration in the past has provided it. And we will 
continue to do that. 
 
I’m not sure if the member opposite is indicating whether she’s in favour of what’s taking place within 
the school systems of this province or not, but the ratepayers are asking for that type of information, and 
we will continue to operate in the same type of consultative manner as we’ve operated here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financing for Swift Current Packaging Plant 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible 
for SEDCO. Mr. Minister, you announced with your usual fanfare and lack of detail last week that 
SEDCO would be part of a funding package to help establish a packaging factory in Swift Current. 
 
At that time you said there would be $17.2 million in government funding, consisting of 10.2 million 
from SEDCO, approximately 5 million from the western diversification fund and 2 million to be raised 
through equity financing with Community Development Bonds. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: why did your cabinet then pass an order in council whereby SEDCO 
guaranteed the whole 17.2 million? Can you tell us that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, the details of the financing package which were outlined to the 
media last week on the Impact Packaging plant for Swift Current were very clearly laid out. 
 
The WDO (western diversification office) portion of the loan and the community bond portion both will 
be bridged by SEDCO at commercial rates, which is not an unusual procedure at all with projects in the 
province of Saskatchewan, with the WDO office working very closely on economic diversification 
projects in our province and where SEDCO can provide the immediate up-front funding as their money 
comes into play. 
 



 

 

And naturally, because the community bond legislation was only passed in this legislature a few days 
ago, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be prudent for the government to put this proviso into place so that 
people in the community do have time to do it properly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the minister. Mr. Minister, some would 
wonder why it is that SEDCO guaranteed the $2 million Community Development Bond because, as 
you have just said, they are already guaranteed through the government. 
 
But I wonder, I wonder why you would be guaranteeing the western diversification loan, the federal 
government loan of $5 million. It doesn’t make any sense. I want to know why you’re guaranteeing that 
WDO money. Can you tell us that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — As I said before, Mr. Speaker, SEDCO is simply bridging the financing from 
WDO to Impact Packaging because of the need for cash requirements up front in order to get this plant 
off the ground in the next month. And it’s simply a bridging arrangement until their money comes into 
play. 
 
I might like to add, Mr. Speaker, that besides being probably the most environmentally friendly project 
in western Canada, there’s very significant private capital being brought to this project. In people 
investing in the company, both the private investors and also some very large commercial enterprises 
have nearly $8 million of money up themselves, with provisions to raise more in the private market. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s what economic diversification in this province is all about. It’s that 
blend of federal, provincial, civic, and private money coming together to put together the most 
environmentally plant in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I have another question for the same minister. Mr. Minister, I would 
suggest to you that the problem here is that your government has decided that SEDCO is a deep well 
that never runs out of public funds and that you’ll guarantee anything, and anything can be financed. 
That’s what the problem is. The only criteria is whether or not it helps profile your politics, your PC 
politics in this province. 
 
When SEDCO backs investments like GigaText and like Supercart, that’s one thing, and it’s something 
you should be taken to task for. But, Mr. Minister, when the Government of Canada has decided that the 
only way it’ll put risk capital into a project is when SEDCO will guarantee it, I think it’s totally 
misusing the purpose of SEDCO, and I think you know that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you: if this is such a good program, you tell me why the federal government 
insists that the loan has to be guaranteed by SEDCO, because that’s what it looks like what has 
happened here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, Impact Packaging, as I said, is not only one of the most 
environmentally friendly plants that will be in Canada, it provides direct employment to the city of Swift 
Current. It will be employing people all across our province with SARCAN and Cosmopolitan 
Industries in Saskatoon gathering waste paper, which currently has no use except to go into our landfills, 
Mr. Speaker, mould it into a product that will be sold all over North America and indeed maybe around 
the world. 
 
Now when those kind of opportunities come to the people of Saskatchewan, I think it’s incumbent that 
the government be prepared to combine with private enterprise and build such a project. The member 
has asked, why would SEDCO provide the bridging to the WDO loan. And that is so that the plant, so 
that this plant can get under way so that we can start providing jobs to disadvantaged people in this 
province, so that we can show the way in western Canada as far as the environment goes. That’s why, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — You say that this new product, Mr. Minister, will be sold all over North America and 
possibly the world. The American Food and Drug Administration has regulations preventing the use of 
recycled materials coming into contact with food. And your own vice-president at SEDCO says that the 
FDA (Food and Drug Administration) will not give approval to the recycled product until they can 
actually see the manufactured product. 
 
Now you’ve put up $17.2 million at risk and you don’t even know if you can market the product into the 
major market of the United States of America. You’re so easy, Mr. Minister, that we expect that when 
Premier Devine is down in Newfoundland today … 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Number one, the hon. member knows he should not refer to another 
member by name. Number two, I think it’s time he put the question. 
 
Mr. Anguish: — Well the question I put to the minister: is it true that your government is viewed as so 
easy all across Canada that you’re likely to be sold the Sprung cucumber plant today from 
Newfoundland? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, Impact Packaging, through the patented process that they have to 
coat the moulded paper pulp, which was available to members of the media at the news conference last 
week, that FDA approval has been sought in the … reading back from the FDA is that there should not 
be any difficulty with the marketing of this product. 
 
The test market has already been researched. There are over a hundred million people within range of 
the Swift Current plant that can be marketed to. The product market area can use up to 11 billion of 
these trays per year. Now Impact Packaging only has to achieve 3 to 5 per cent of that entire market to 
be a very profitable operation and sustain the jobs in Swift Current and around this province for a long 
time to come. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that FDA approval will be there, and approval in Canada will 
follow right behind. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Anguish: — There’s a company the minister will be aware of in Tisdale, Saskatchewan, Fripp 
Fibre Forms, which uses recycled paper to make egg cartons. And they’re a little upset with you. They 
put their money into a good process in Saskatchewan. You attract people from outside the province of 
Saskatchewan, give them $17.2 million that you put at risk, of our money. 
 
Why would you do that? Instead of enhancing local Saskatchewan business who put their own capital at 
risk, you put the taxpayers’ capital at risk to have someone come in and compete in an unfair market, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s absolutely right. The Fripp people in Tisdale are 
manufacturing a very good product. That particular company came from Montreal, set up business in 
Saskatchewan, and are manufacturing egg cartons, amongst other things. I understand they also have 
plants in the United States that are in the moulded plastics business. 
 
Impact Packaging has no intention, Mr. Speaker, of getting into the egg carton business. What Impact 
Packaging is aiming at is the food tray business. The present styrofoam trays, which we know to be not 
as environmentally friendly as moulded plastic trays, they will have this special coating on. 
 
And the applications, Mr. Speaker, in their market area are immense. They can also go in to the clam-
shell type of container for fast food outlets. There are lots of areas for Impact Packaging, Mr. Speaker, to 
market their product without getting in the way of Mr. Fripp and his egg cartons. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Anguish: — I have a final question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the minister 
also mentioned about using a lot of paper from Saskatchewan, a lot of waste recycled paper. Now 
according to Cosmo Industries in Saskatoon, Impact out of Swift Current has offered them $5 a tonne 
for recycled newspaper, while Fripp in Tisdale pays them forty-one fifty a tonne. Now according to 
Cosmo Industries, if Impact is only offering $5 a tonne for recycled newspapers, they’re going to have 
to get that product from a municipally subsidized program in Alberta. 
 
Now I find it strange that you’d be either promoting the shipping of Alberta’s waste newspapers into 
Saskatchewan or are you, Mr. Minister, going to set up a subsidy program for the collection of 
newspapers to supply Impact Industries in Swift Current? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Swenson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious, from the questions from the members opposite, that 
they don’t like Impact Packaging. They don’t like the idea of people in this province having the 
opportunity to recycle waste paper into a marketable product. It’s quite obvious from those questions, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The very fact is that Impact, at their announcement in Swift Current, had the head of SARCAN at the 
announcement ceremony. And that gentleman seemed very pleased with what was happening in Swift 
Current last week. Now he sees a lot of opportunity for SARCAN in this process. 
 
Impact Packaging have backup systems of getting waste paper. And the member is absolutely right. 
They’ve made contact with people in Calgary so that if they can’t access all of the paper that they need 



 

 

within the province of Saskatchewan, they have that backup system to maintain full capacity in Impact 
Packaging. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that is only a prudent business decision, given the amount of 
the investment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Changes to Electrical Rates 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, My question today is to the minister, 
the acting minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I would ask the minister to stand 
here in his place and to explain to the people of Saskatchewan his latest brilliant manoeuvre on behalf of 
the consumers of this province. 
 
We’ve seen, Mr. Minister, that you have cut electrical rates to the 75 per cent of electrical consumers in 
this province — that is, the heavy industrial users, the energy hogs if you like — in Saskatchewan, and 
at the same time have not, have not done anything with the rates to the home owners of this province. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, my question … 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. Lyons: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this. You’ve cut the rates to 75 per cent of 
the industrial users in this province who have traditionally cross-subsidized electrical rates to the 25 per 
cent, which are the home owners. How can you justify that to the home owners of this province, cutting 
electrical rates for the industrial users and making them cross-subsidize those people? Mr. Minister, will 
you stand in your place and explain that to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I will take notice of the question in the absence of the minister 
responsible for Saskatchewan Power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Countering Effects of Rail Line Abandonment 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have a statement I’d like to make today to 
the Assembly regarding the innovative approach this government is taking to counter the effects of rail 
line abandonment. 
 
Together with Southern Rails, a co-operative made up of farmers from the Avonlea and Rockglen areas, 
we’ve developed a world first road-rail vehicle which is on display at the farm progress show this week. 
 
This unique vehicle pulls hopper cars on rail lines to interchange points with CN (Canadian National) 
and CP (Canadian Pacific) and then travels between these lines using the existing highway system. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to advise all members of the legislature that Southern Rails has, late yesterday, 
reached an agreement with CP Rail to purchase the former colony subdivision between Rockglen and 
Killdeer which was scheduled for abandonment. 
 
Negotiations were difficult and long, Mr. Speaker, and officials of my department spent considerable 
time and effort assisting Southern Rails in reaching this agreement. With the assistance of this 
government, Southern Rails Co-operative is hauling grain on their own rail lines. In a year of relatively 
poor production in the Avonlea area, Southern Rails has handled over 200 cars in the past six months 
and they have been able to transport their grain for about one-third of the cost which was being spent by 
CN to do the same job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s proof that this government is committed to the development of human potential by 
giving people the support and opportunity they need to contribute and build. Mr. Speaker, it’s proof that 
this government is making choices available which represents sound management of shared and sensible 
goals. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1445) 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll be quite frank with the minister. It is very questionable whether that’s a ministerial 
statement, very questionable. And … Order, order. It’s very questionable. I have brought this to the 
attention of hon. members before. Ministerial statements should be a statement of clear government 
policy. I’ll give the opposition an opportunity to reply, if they so wish. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, thank you for drawing to the attention of the cabinet minister that 
made the announcement of urgent public concern as a ministerial statement. I’ve seen the statements 
masquerading before in this form but never, never abusing the rules so much as this, Minister. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe if the hon. member wishes to reply to the statement, he may do 
that. I don’t believe it’s the hon. member’s place to get into questioning the rules or whether or not the 
member has broken them. Respond to the statement, and I believe that’s the best course of action. 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Mr. Speaker, I do want to comment on the minister’s statement, as vague and as 
late as it comes. The short-line railways in Saskatchewan are a new innovation. The short-line railway is 
a cop-out for the major railways not hauling the grain to the market. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — The short-line railway in Saskatchewan is this government’s cop-out on hauling 
and delivering the grain to markets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brockelbank: — Now, Mr. Speaker, last year, one year ago, over one year ago in estimates this 
same or the previous minister of Highways was talking about the same short-line railway in 



 

 

Saskatchewan. This is not new. This is old news. It’s obvious that the minister had to get up and fill 
some space in today’s agenda. And that’s really what it is — filling space in the agenda. There’s nothing 
new in the announcement. Short-line railway was there over a year ago. The minister, previous minister 
talked about it in the estimates and at other times in his speeches in the House. It’s old news. There’s 
nothing new there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To introduce my officials to the committee: to my 
immediate left is Art Wakabayashi, the deputy minister of Finance; to his left, Jim Marshall, director, 
revenue and economic policy division; to my right, Bill Jones, assistant deputy minister, treasury and 
debt management division; behind Mr. Jones is Kirk McGregor, director of taxation policy, taxation and 
economic policy division. To Kirk’s left is Keith Laxdal, associate deputy minister, treasury board 
division. And to Keith’s left is Bill Van Sickle who is executive director, administrative division. 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I would like to begin with the usual question with respect to your 
personal staff. I would like the names, titles, and salaries of your personal staff. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth — Mr. Chairman, if I could have a page I can send this over to the hon. member. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, are those in dollar amounts, what they were making a year ago, or 
have there been any changes in their salaries? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the summer student just started, and July 1, ’89 there was a 4 
per cent cost of living increase, I think it was a year ago. The ones that aren’t on the list, Mr. Chairman, 
are the secretaries as well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, is Kevin Doherty, Fred Petrowich, and Derrell Rodine making now, 
in dollar amounts, exactly what they were making a year ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Four per cent more than a year ago, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, on what basis was a 4 per cent increase granted to these people, Mr. 
Minister? 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, this was tied to the out-of-scope personnel increase across the 
board in government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Was it precisely the same as everybody else got, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, unless there were performance bonuses for some others, which 
I wouldn’t know about, my understanding would be yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what on earth does a Finance minister do with four people, their 
salaries, not including the summer student, totalling $10,000? Together with the summer student, the 
salaries total $12,000 a month. What on earth does a Finance minister do with four assistants? Heavens, 
Mr. Minister, Persian kings operated with a smaller staff than what you’ve got. What on earth do these 
people do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, configuration in my offices that I have, one that deals primarily 
with the … one that primarily deals, Mr. Chairman, with issues related to the Finance department, 
whether it be on the expenditure side or the revenue side, one that helps deal with the constituency 
matters, and one who deals with communications relative to the minister’s office. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, all I can say is, I pity the one who has to deal with the constituency 
matters. I assume that it is his responsibility to get you re-elected, an almost impossible chore, the one I 
really pity. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to leave this subject but I think this is part and parcel of the fiscal problems in 
this government, is that there’s no leadership shown at the top. Mr. Minister, $12,000 a month on a staff 
and you just simply don’t need it. You just do not need that, Mr. Minister. 
 
You might be able to justify one executive assistant which has heretofore been the time-honoured 
system, but not four. That, Mr. Minister, is just a disgrace. It is simply just a disgrace. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know whether or not these people took any out-of-province trips in the last year, 
and if so, where and what were the amounts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, one of the members of my staff 
accompanied me to the following four meetings that were out-of-province … three meetings, sorry. One 
was a ministers of Finance meeting in Montreal, October 16; one was a meeting with the investment 
banking community, November 20, Toronto; and December 6, another Finance ministers’ meeting in 
Ottawa, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What earthly purpose, Mr. Minister, did a ministerial assistant serve on such a trip? 
Surely you’ve got enough strength left at this point in time to carry your own grip. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, they’re there to provide me with advice, number one. Number 
two, to provide a link back to the office while one is in the meetings. And number three, to undertake 
any tasks that I may need while at the meetings, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Let’s be a little more honest, Mr. Minister, it’s somebody to carouse with after 
hours. That’s what they’re there for, and I cannot see that they would serve any other purpose. If you 
need advice, surely you get that from your officials, not from your ministerial assistants, Mr. Minister. 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, I would like to know what was spent on travelling. You can give me this in writing. If 
your officials have it, you can send it in writing. I’d like to know what was spent on travelling by you 
and by the ministerial assistant who accompanied you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The three trips that I mentioned, plus the first ministers’ meeting where there 
were no officials from my office but the deputy minister attended, which was the first ministers’ meeting 
November 8 in Ottawa, break down like this: the October 16 meeting, 3,552; the November 8 first 
ministers’ meeting, 2,590; the November 20 Toronto meeting with the investment community … or the 
investment dealers rather, 3,263; and the December 6 Finance ministers’ meeting, 3,386, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know how on earth do you spent $3,500 going to Toronto? My goodness 
gracious. Your entertainment expensed really must be impressive. Mr. Minister, are you prepared to give 
me a breakdown of those figures? 
 
(1500) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, those number represent the air fare, number one; the hotel bills; 
and I suspect any other miscellaneous expenditures, Mr. Speaker, associated with the trip. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, either you ate an enormous amount of food or your entertainment 
expenses were awful high. 
 
Mr. Minister, that leads me I think to what is a more substantive subject, and that is the disgraceful 
leadership which you and your predecessors have provided to this province in terms of the fiscal 
management of this province’s affairs. 
 
Mr. Minister, the figures are well-known from one end of this province to the other by everybody, 
whatever their interest in public affairs, and I will therefore not go into … and I think play a major 
reason why the Conservative Party is not down in the polls but disappearing entirely in the polls. 
 
Mr. Minister, this is your ninth straight deficit. Not only have you been unable to balance the books, you 
have, with a couple of exceptions, you and your predecessors have been unable to estimate the amount 
correctly. Last year you missed by 73 per cent, by no means your worst effort. You missed by 300 per 
cent on another occasion. You’ve missed more than once by over a hundred per cent in trying to 
estimate it. 
 
The cumulative deficit is $4.3 billion. That’s from zero when you took office. Mr. Minister, the interest 
is now $493 million. That’s the third largest expenditure, by far and away the fastest growing 
expenditure in the budget. Mr. Minister, I would like to know: what is your game plan for dealing with 
this deficit? 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to quote you some of the comments that have been made in the past. In 1982, Bob 
Andrew, in his first budget speech said — talk about famous last words — “This is a minimized and 
manageable deficit.” He said next year, “We anticipate a manageable increase in our combined deficit>” 
 
I will skip some of the intervening years. In 1986 a new minister, the member from Lumsden, took 
place. He said, with ringing confidence, “This government is confident that a balanced budget can be 
achieved within the next five years.” 
 



 

 

Mr. Minister, you’re not going to make it. You’re not even going to come close. In fact the situation’s 
getting worse. What is your recovery plan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, to correct a wrong perception the hon. member 
might have left relative to travel costs, as I said earlier, for the most part the expenditure of, say, $3,552 
to Montreal which … 
 
An Hon. Member: — But you’re not going to give me a breakdown, are you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’ll give you a very substantial breakdown if you’d just listen. The $3,552 cost 
of the Montreal trip was for three individuals. The air fare alone, Mr. Chairman, was over $3,000. So 
that leaves about $550 for the hotel and food and those kinds of things that one might … and the 
lodging, Mr. Speaker, that one would undertake on that trip. 
 
So I would suggest that certainly when a major part of that is air fare — and of course that’s one of the 
costs of business when you’re out West here, having to deal with central Canada — I think it shows you 
that certainly there’s not a whole pile of money being spent recklessly relative to my travel and that of 
my officials. 
 
The larger and perhaps more important question is really the question of the deficit and as well the 
accumulated debt of the province. Certainly, I’m not happy that we continue to run a deficit after eight 
years, it almost seems like we’re stubbornly stuck in that deficit range of 3 to $400 million. I think 
there’s been five out of the last eight years where the deficit has come in in that range, and it seems to be 
hard to get beyond that despite the fact that this year in the budget we did some substantial cut-backs, 
chose not to raise taxes, and as well focused any room that we made by cutting back in other areas, on 
those important areas of health, education, agriculture. 
 
Through the pre-budget meetings that we held, one of the messages that came out consistently and 
clearly was that many people have views on different things that could be looked at and tried and 
perhaps used relative to the deficit and budgeting in general. We’ve had everything recommended from 
a people’s board, dedicated taxes, that is to say, to laying E&H (education and health tax) revenues, for 
example, to a specific expenditure — education or something of that nature would be an example. 
 
I think at virtually every meeting I was at the notion of legislation that would require a balanced budget, 
with the exception, I suppose, of extraordinary events. I think the speakers at these meetings would 
acknowledge that there are times when provinces, faced with extraordinary circumstances — disasters, 
hurricanes, tornadoes, even I suppose droughts — when governments do have to step in and respond. 
 
I think all of these notions have merit and are worthy of further examination. That is what we are doing. 
As well, part of Consensus 100’s mandate is to examine the whole area of financial management. We 
expect a report, an early report, back from them this fall, and perhaps they’ll have some 
recommendations there as well that we can act upon as part of the financial plan of the province. 
 
But the recipe that has worked for us well in the past, we’ll continue to use in the future, and that is very 
much that the public have to be involved in this decision making, because all of the decisions are 
complex and challenging and difficult, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, the public are desperately hoping you don’t use the methods 
you’ve used in the past because they’ve taken this province from a sound financial position when you 
took office, to the brink of ruin right now. 



 

 

 
Mr. Minister, the problem is that there is no attempt to exercise any economy in this province and the 
problem begins with the cabinet. It begins with you and your colleagues, Mr. Minister. 
 
Just let’s take today’s example. Today’s example is the Premier running off to Newfoundland for an 
absolute fool’s errand. A fool’s errand because the problem with Meech Lake is not in Newfoundland at 
all, but in Winnipeg — a city he could have driven to. He’s off to Newfoundland on a fool’s errand. It 
cost $11,000. 
 
Not only, Mr. Minister, is it a fool’s errand; in addition, his position is opposed by a number of people in 
Saskatchewan. That I’ll forgive him for. What I will not forgive him for, Mr. Minister, is wasting the 
taxpayers’ money and going off to Newfoundland when the problem is within driving distance, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The problem, Mr. Minister, is in Winnipeg, within driving distance. If he thinks he 
can sort it out in Winnipeg, he’d probably be welcome to try. But, Mr. Minister, he didn’t. At the cost of 
$11,000, he’s gone to Newfoundland on a chartered jet; that’s a disgrace, Mr. Minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What if he didn’t want to charter, Ned. Does that make your whole thesis is 
wrong? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, it does not, Mr. Minister. You’ll get a chance to respond in a minute, Mr. 
Minister, you said that you had some public hearings, and there was some consensus. Mr. Minister, I 
have some expenditures on which I think there’s universal consensus. I don’t think the public wanted $9 
million spent on the Future Corporation. I think there’s a consensus that that $9 million should have 
spent somewhere else. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, there’s a consensus that we didn’t need some tens of millions of dollars for four 
additional cabinet ministers. I think, Mr. Minister, there’s a consensus which you probably heard a good 
deal of last fall that we don’t need $1.3 million spent by SaskTel, a monopoly on advertising. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, you probably found out that there’s a consensus that we don’t need to spend 
$750,000 on one person’s salary. Chuck Childers; I think there’s a consensus on that, Mr. Minister. I 
there’s a consensus, Mr. Minister, that we don’t need an additional salary of $100,000 paid to a defeated 
minister, Paul Schoenhals. Whatever his qualifications — and by and large he spent it in the sports 
world — whatever his qualifications, he was just not simply qualified to run the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. Kicking the ball back and forth across a field is not very good training, Mr. Minister, to 
run one of the world’s large mining companies. I think there’s a consensus on that. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, there’s a consensus that $97,000 spent yearly for Bob Andrew’s retirement fund in 
Minneapolis is not money well spent. I think you could find a consensus on that, if you tried. 
 
I think there’s a consensus, Mr. Minister, that $97,000 on Graham Taylor’s salary, and heaven only 
knows how much on his office space, is money that should be saved. 
 
There are things, Mr. Minister, on which there is a clear consensus. And, Mr. Minister, if you’re looking 
for the reason why you are in as much political trouble as you are right now, it’s because you have, year 
after year after year, ignored the public’s demand that you clean up your act. Is there no hope, Mr. 



 

 

Minister, that you’re going to clean up your act; or do the public simply have to wait for an election to 
sweep this government out of office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, please. I wonder if we could give the minister a little more peace and quiet to 
arrive at the answer to the hon. member’s question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. The hon. member has raised some spending areas 
where he thinks a consensus exists that they should be cut out, and if we cut these areas out we wouldn’t 
have a problem facing us in Saskatchewan today. 
 
Let’s run through the list and see how much depth of thinking there is in the opposition Finance critic’s 
… in his thinking here. First of all, Future Corporation. As part of this budget process, we put in place 
an early termination of the Future Corporation … (inaudible interjection) … Yes, he’s right. We won’t 
save 9 million as he had suggested, if we hadn’t. But we are going to make some savings here. 
 
But let’s suppose that in all of his arguments, I acknowledge all the expenditures; let’s suppose I 
acknowledge all of them, Mr. Chairman. He identified 9 million at Future Corp; 1.3 million in 
advertising at SaskTel; 750,000 for … 950,000 for some salaries that he thinks are politically tied. I 
think in total he identified $11.3 million in savings, Mr. Speaker, $11.3 million. 
 
Now what does that represent in a four and a half billion dollar budget, Mr. Speaker? Is that merely 
political window dressing that makes good fodder for politicians like himself to stand up and say, if you 
hadn’t done these, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the world would be all right? Or is he 
prepared to get into a serious discussion, the kind of serious discussion that it’s going to take to get the 
world square and to balance the books. 
 
(1515) 
 
Mr. Chairman, to put these numbers in perspective for the average taxpayer out there — this list that he 
somehow suggests that all would be right if we merely hadn’t made these expenditures — what this does 
is run the health system, his total shopping list runs the health care system for about 60 hours. That’s 
what it does, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Now I’m not suggesting that for a moment that $11.3 millions isn’t a large number, because it is. But 
when you put in into perspective, it would run the health system for about 60 hours. 
 
If you’re really going to get at a $363 million deficit or a $12 billion or $4 billion accumulated debt on 
the government side, Mr. Chairman, it’s going to require a lot more thought than that hon. member has 
put into it. I appreciate any recommendations that he brings forth, but really this is nothing more than 
political window dressing what he’s bringing forward here. Some of the recommendations are 
significant enough; and where they are, we have acted on them. But we must go beyond this, Mr. 
Chairman, if we’re going to get really serious. 
 
And you see, Mr. Chairman, there’s another element to his hypocrisy. While he comes forward and says 
cut back here, here, and here — and in some of those areas we have — his colleagues stand up one after 
another and they say, spend more, spend more, spend more, spend more, spend more. And, Mr. 
Chairman, you know that because you’ve heard it virtually every day that this session of the legislature 
has been on. 



 

 

 
What hypocrisy from the hon. member. They don’t want cut-backs, Mr. Chairman, they’re the party of 
big spenders. They’re the party of big spenders and tax increases. Mr. Chairman, they really are 
hypocrites when it comes to financial management, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m amazed that one person clapped, after such a disgraceful response. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to give you some figures. And I know, Mr. Minister, that the former member from 
Thunder Creek, Mr. Thatcher, wrote the book on how a Tory cabinet minister responds to estimates — 
deny, deny, deny. And since I know you would deny the time of day if you thought you were in a place 
without a clock, I have some figures for you, Mr. Minister. I take them from documents which your 
government published. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note from the Estimates in 1983, Mr. Andrew issued in 1991 that your revenues, Mr. 
Minister, over the period — and I’m using actual figures — your actual revenue from the year ending 
March 31, 1982 to March 31, 1989, your revenue, Mr. Minister, went up by 52 per cent at a time when 
the cost of living went up, Mr. Minister, by only 38 per cent. 
 
My point is, Mr. Minister, that your revenues increased significantly faster than the rate of inflation. 
Every time someone asks you how you could have got yourself into such a monumental mess, you say: 
it didn’t rain. As if to suggest, when it doesn’t rain in a climatic sense it does not rain in a fiscal sense 
for this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s not accurate. Inflation has gone up by 38 per cent, a simple calculation of the actual 
revenue for the year ended March 31, 1982, taken from your books; and the actual revenue for the year 
ended March 31, 1989, suggests your revenue went up 52 per cent at a time when inflation was only 38 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason why you’ve got this enormous deficit is because expenditures didn’t go up by 
38 per cent, the rate of inflation; they didn’t go up by 52 percent, the rate of which your revenues 
increased; your expenditures went up by 72 per cent. At a time when inflation went up by 38 per cent, 
your expenditures went up by 72 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, everywhere I go, the public ask me, what on earth has happened to the money? What on 
earth has happened to the money? They know they’re paying more taxes. They also know that the roads 
are deteriorating. Health services are deteriorating, waiting-lists have increased … (inaudible 
interjection) … The member from Lloydminster is so determined to be of assistance; he might try 
dealing with the facts. 
 
Mr. Minister, the public say the taxes have gone up; where on earth has the money gone? My question to 
you, Mr. Minister, is, at a time when your revenue went up by 52 per cent, when your inflation went up 
by 38 per cent, Mr. Minister, where has all the money gone, and why do you have these enormous 
deficits? 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask for leave to introduce some students, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s my pleasure once again to introduce some students 
and their teachers and chaperons that have come from outside our borders. They’re from the town of 
Russell in Manitoba. It’s the Major Pratt School, and they are accompanied today by their teachers, 
Wayne Dunham and Jan Shauer; and chaperons, Diane Lovas and Joan Mills. And their bus driver is 
Mr. Sloan. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity over the last three or four springs to introduce these students from Russell, 
Manitoba, and I want to congratulate Wayne Dunham and their teacher for doing just that. We hope you 
enjoy your stay in the Assembly today and your trip to Regina. I wish you all the best of luck in your 
exams that are upcoming, and have a good summer holiday. 
 
I would ask all members to please introduce these students and teachers and chaperons from Russell, 
Manitoba. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I too would extend a welcome to our guests. 
 
The hon. member’s question is essentially this: revenues have gone up X amount and expenditures have 
outstripped inflation, is what he’s saying. And he’s right. He’s absolutely right. 
 
If you look back over the last nine or ten years, for example, health expenditures over the last … I’m 
using numbers because I don’t have a chart that is up-to-date for the last 10 years. If I go ‘81 through 
‘90, health care expenditures are not up by 35 or 45 or 50 per cent — whatever the inflation rate would 
be for that time; they’re up by a hundred per cent. 
 
The story on education — and I’m taking these numbers from last year’s budget — the story on 
education is much the same, Mr. Chairman, nearly double. I remember there was one five or six-year 
period in education where inflation ran at about thirty-four and a half per cent and yet government 
spending had gone up by about 61 per cent. 
 
And yet hon. members, the colleague sitting beside the Finance critic has raised in this House: why do 
we not spend more, yet more in education? And the need for more money. I have acknowledged time 
and time again that you can always use and spend more money in areas like health and education. Do 
you see what I’m saying, Mr. Member, is you can’t have it both ways. 
 
You see, our spending has been way above inflation in those areas. And it has been because they’re 
important. What did we give in regional colleges this year? —32 per cent increase. Health, something in 
the order of 10 per cent, well above inflation, double the inflation rate Education, well over the inflation 
rate. 



 

 

 
Now, I’m not saying that they shouldn’t have had those dollars. Obviously we felt they should or we 
wouldn’t have put it in the budget. But you see your point is, your logic track is just simply, is … you’re 
not consistent in your logic track. You can’t have it both ways. On the one hand you can’t argue for 
more spending; on the other hand, you can’t criticize us for spending well above the inflation rate in 
these various areas. 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Chairman, I’d once again like to ask for leave to introduce some more students, 
please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McLaren: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you, to all members of the Assembly, 38 grade 4 students from Simpson School in Yorkton. 
And it’s my pleasure to welcome them here this afternoon. I will meet with you a little later on for some 
refreshments and pictures and the opportunity to answer any questions that you might have from your 
observation of the Assembly here. 
 
They’re accompanied today by two of their teachers, Elgin Strocen and Marlene Trebish and I would 
hope that you will enjoy the proceedings here this afternoon. And as I said to the students from Russell, 
Manitoba, I wish you all the luck in your exams and enjoy yourselves, have a good summer holiday and 
I would ask all members to please welcome these students from Simpson School in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you and I could bandy figures around. Suffice it to say that the public 
are the best judge of what has happened to those services. The public know that the education system is 
not anywhere near as good now as it was eight years ago. The public know that the health services aren’t 
as good. You talk about health services increasing. Of course they did. You transferred money … you 
transferred expenditures from Social Services just to inflate the figures, Mr. Minister. That’s what you 
did. 
 
Mr. Minister, the public are the best judge and the public know that the services have deteriorated, and 
done so very markedly. Mr. Minister, in most governments it is the Finance minister who is responsible 
for exercising control and discipline over spending, but that is not apparently true in this case. In the 
case of this government it seems that the Finance minister is responsible for the excuses. 
 
I don’t know how, Mr. Minister, you expect to waste money in the profligate fashion you do by giving 
ex-cabinet ministers retirement packages in Minneapolis and Hong Kong and expect ordinary public 
servants, Mr. Minister, to exercise economy and efficiency with the tax dollar. Economy and efficiency, 



 

 

Mr. Minister, begins at the top. And when the cabinet spends like drunken sailors on themselves, Mr. 
Minister, you can hardly expect the government to operate in an efficient manner. You have to begin, 
Mr. Minister, by setting an example. Your example, Mr. Minister, is an outrage and it is known to be an 
outrage from one end of this province to the other. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s the size of the cabinet, it’s these obscene retirement packages that they get. Mr. 
Minister, it’s the number of executive assistants. It’s the whole gamut of expenditures, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, the reason why your expenditures are running at about twice the rate of inflation is not 
because you have a commitment to better public services. The opposite is patently true and known to be 
true throughout the province. The reason, Mr. Minister, why expenditures have so outrun revenues is 
that you’re not exercising any control, just utterly lacking in this government. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to deal for a moment with taxes, and I want to repeat the plaintive cry of the public 
with respect to their taxes. There is no question but what taxes have gone up very markedly. The same 
two books, Mr. Minister — and again I say, deference to Mr. Thatcher: deny, deny, deny — I am using 
the estimates bearing the signature of your former Finance minister for the years December 31, 1983 and 
the current year’s estimates. 
 
Mr. Minister, personal income taxes have gone up by 66 per cent, a great deal higher than the rate of 
inflation. That is largely, Mr. Minister, the flat tax. Sales tax have gone up by 57 per cent, roughly 50 
per cent greater than the rate of inflation. That’s because the sales tax is roughly 50 per cent higher. 
 
Mr. Minister, the public in this province are complaining and complaining as loudly as they can about 
their tax bill. Do I take it, Mr. Minister, that with respect to this complaint you’re stone deaf, and you 
don’t intend to do a thing about it except to grimly wait till the next election till they get a chance to 
return the favour? 
 
(1530) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there’s no question that, as we heard at the pre-budget 
meetings, the public certainly are not of the view that they can tolerate any additional tax increases. That 
is why this budget had no tax increases, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But I want to — and I’ll return to that in a moment — but I want to pick up on some of the hon. 
member’s earlier observations, where he talked about government and cabinet and this caucus setting an 
example relative to our own salaries and those kinds of things. 
 
Mr. Chairman, that’s exactly what this caucus and this government and this party did three or four 
months ago once again when I announced, as part of the internal government restraint measures, that the 
severance packages for government MLAs would be modified, that ministers’ salaries would be rolled 
back. And I challenge that hon. member to tell me and this House and the public of Saskatchewan if he 
rolled back his salary. I know I signed a form saying roll back my salary. 
 
But has he shown any leadership? Did he become part of the solution, Mr. Chairman? I challenge him to 
stand here today and tell this House whether he or his leader, who receives a special stipend for being 
the Leader of the Opposition, whether the whip sitting beside him rolled back his salary. I challenge 
each and every one of them to say whether they rolled back their salaries, Mr. Speaker, because I know I 
did and it’s this caucus and this party and this Premier and this government that’s shown leadership in 
this area. 



 

 

 
I’m also the first to recognize that while those measures are important, in terms of real dollars, they 
don’t bring in a lot of money. But certainly it’s good political fodder, and if it’s important for us to set 
an example, we have done and we will continue to do so in the future. And I challenge that member 
there to set forth the NDP view on this, because the silence has been deafening, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, when he says we are out of control, I say to you, Mr. Chairman, precisely the 
opposite is true. Because we recognize that if we were to spend more on health and education and 
agriculture and because we didn’t want to raise taxes, that’s why we cut back or held at zero or even in 
some cases eight or nine departments, we cut their budgets by 10 per cent; 22 departments in all had 
their budgets either held at zero or substantially decreased so that we could find money for health and 
education and agriculture. Grants and rebates were eliminated where we could, Mr. Chairman, so we’ll 
have 300 millions of dollars in savings to the taxpayers over the next two years. 
 
But you see, Mr. Chairman, this member here has fallen into the typical trap — the dilemma that exists 
out there. While we’ve been in this estimates today he has argued, no tax increases, decried the spending 
on health and education and said there should be more spent there, and at the same time has argued for a 
lower deficit. You see there is the dilemma. You can’t have a lower deficit, more spending, and no tax 
increases, Mr. Chairman. They simply are not compatible. 
 
It’s very good to pick one of them by themselves at each point in time and make the case, but when you 
put them together you can’t have it all ways. You can’t say more spending in education over and above 
the six and a half per cent that was in this year’s budget — 30 per cent for the regional colleges, distance 
education; 6 or 7 per cent to universities and the technical institutes. You can’t say more spending there. 
 
And then we’ve heard the chorus of cries from virtually every one of the opposition members about the 
cut-backs that occurred in these various areas. Spend more here, don’t cut back there, don’t raise my 
taxes, and don’t run a deficit. You see, there’s no solution in that. That’s the dilemma we face. 
 
And I ask the hon. member to join with this minister, with this Premier, with this party, with this 
government in coming up and meeting the challenges, Mr. Chairman, that faces, and meeting them in a 
very real way. 
 
You can flip out their favourite menu: Future Corporation, Mr. Taylor’s salary, whatever you want. But 
when you really examine them in detail, as I said earlier, they wouldn’t pay the health care bill for 10 
hours, Mr. Chairman. That’s the reality, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So I say, join with us as we continue to put together what will be a realistic and real financial plan for 
the 1990s and beyond, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I would like to join with you and I 
think colleagues on this side of the House would like to join with you. You’re discussing the 
complicated process of reducing the deficit over the years. Indeed this is a problem. 
 
The solution to any problem I think begins with an understanding of the problem, and one way that the 
public of Saskatchewan might better understand the problem before us is to have a more accurate and 
complete accounting of the government’s financial statements. 
 
You will know, Mr. Minister, that over the years the Provincial Auditor has indicated that the 
government carries out its mandate through a number of legal and accounting entities including Crown 



 

 

corporations, boards, agencies, commissions, and funds; that most of these entities provide separate 
financial statements; and that while these separate statements for these separate entities aid in 
understanding of the individual entity, they do not aid in providing what he says is an understandable 
overview of the entire activities of government. 
 
And he states that to fully understand the financial position and economic activities of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, a financial statement showing a complete picture of what is owned, what is owed, the 
source of revenues and the nature of expenditures, is required. He refers to these as summary financial 
statements. He’s been making that recommendation for a number of years, a recommendation that he 
feels is fully in accordance with the recommendations of the Canadian Institute of Chartered 
Accountants. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister, since you’ve been studying this matter since 1984, my question to 
you is: when might we expect summary financial statements for the public so that they might better 
understand the financial problems and situation in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I or my officials continue to actively monitor the research and 
the recommendations of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants and to provide our input, but I 
think it’s safe to say that there’s still a lot of discussion that must go on as to what information should be 
reported in such statements. And that kind of discussion will continue to go on, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if you’re waiting for some definitive guide-lines for 
reporting, I think that you and your officials will be disappointed. These guide-lines and standards will 
evolve and change over the years, as knowledge about reporting becomes clear and concise for groups 
such as the chartered accountants. 
 
My question wasn’t to ask you what problems you’ve had in achieving the implementation of this; my 
question was: when might we expect an implementation of summary financial statements? For you to 
say that we’re continuing to study the matter and trying to understand all the complexities and 
difficulties, again I hearken back to a previous comment made by my colleague, the member for Regina 
Centre, in a different context where it seems that the whole army is out of step except you. 
 
The B.C. government very clearly publishes a summary financial statements. The Alberta government 
provides summary financial statements. The Manitoba government, I understand, has made … 
undertaken initiatives to provide summary financial statements. In fact, all provinces in Canada say they 
provide summary financial statements. 
 
Now it’s recognized that some provinces such as Ontario, although they say they provide summary 
financial statements do not in fact provide statements that ate much clearer than those now provided by 
the Government of Saskatchewan. But the fact remains that many provinces are aspiring to that 
objective and some have made substantial moves in that direction; certainly B.C. and Alberta have and 
Manitoba’s also doing the same. 
 
So I guess my question is that if you really want to provide a complete picture for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan of the financial situation in Saskatchewan, why don’t you provide them with 
the summary financial statements that are now being provided in many other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it is true, at least to some degree, that some other 
provinces do do their accounting differently. My understanding is — unlike the hon. member’s — B.C., 
Alberta and P.E.I. would be those provinces. And as to when we might change our format, obviously as 



 

 

I said before, we are of the view that we need yet further discussion and more questions yet answered, 
more information that has to be shared, so I don’t know as I want to be handcuffed by a time because I 
don’t know how long those discussions will take, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don’t know of any government in Canada, I 
don’t know of any government in Canada that I think needs to move with greater speed and urgency in 
publishing summary financial statements than the Government of Saskatchewan. This is a government, 
that in the course of eight years, has run up a deficit that simply staggers the imagination. To borrow a 
phrase from the ‘60s, it blows the mind, Mr. Minister. It blows the mind: 4.4 billion dollar accumulated 
deficit and growing. We have seen credit ratings for the Saskatchewan government plummet, plummet 
in recent years. If there was ever any greater imperative or any greater urgency to provide these 
summary financial statements, it’s now. 
 
Mr. Minister, for you to get up and provide excuses and to say that we continue to study the problems is 
a sure sign of the problems that we’re in, and that is that you refuse to essentially deal with the problem. 
And again, to deal with the problem requires a complete accounting in the first instance; you’re not 
doing it. 
 
And again can I ask you to just be a little bit more specific than you have been. You say you’re 
continuing to study. Might we expect summary financial statements next year? Might we expect them 
the year after that? What is your timetable? What is your plan, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — As I said earlier, I can’t give you a precise time. We’ll be looking to have 
further discussions as I mentioned earlier. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well I’m sure that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will be resting a lot easier 
tonight, Mr. Minister, knowing that, notwithstanding a $4.4 billion accumulated deficit, knowing that 
credit ratings for the province are plummeting, that you’re studying the question of whether or not there 
should be a more complete accounting of the problem for the people here at home. I’m sure that they’ll 
be sleeping better. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to turn to another concern that the auditor has raised now for a number of years 
since, I believe, 1976 … or no, since 1985. And this is the question of supplementary information. 
 
You will know that the Public Accounts of the province provide a complete listing of all payments made 
by departments where — these are wages and salaries over $20,000 and payments to suppliers over 
$10,000 and travel, I believe, over $2,000 — that that information is provided for every department of 
the government. 
 
(1545) 
 
Now in 1975 the Standing Committee on Public Accounts recommended to the Legislative Assembly, 
and the Legislative Assembly agreed, that the government, in addition to providing this information on a 
departmental basis, should also publish a supplementary volume to give an analysis of payments on a 
government-wide basis. 
 
That is to say that if a supplier received $5,000 from one department, that wouldn’t be reported. If he 
received $5,000 from another department, that wouldn’t be reported. If he received a further 5,000 by a 
third department, that wouldn’t be reported. But this recommendation, which was adopted by the 



 

 

Assembly, suggested, no, there should then be further accounting to show that a certain supplier had 
received in excess of $10,000. 
 
Now this information was provided to the Legislative Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan from 
1976 through to 1984. And this volume now has not been tabled since 1984. 
 
My question to you, Mr. Minister: why hasn’t it been provided since 1984? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, expenditures by payee by 
department are provided in volume 3 of the Public Accounts. Volume 3 information is similar to that 
which was provided in the supplementary volume, except that totals are at a departmental level rather 
than at a total government level. And as was within their mandate, treasury board approved the three 
volume format for public accounts. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Minister, I think you and your government are in contempt of the 
Legislative Assembly. I think you hold the public of Saskatchewan in contempt. 
 
It’s very clear that the Legislative Assembly adopted a motion that said that aggregate information in 
addition to departmental information should be provided, should be made public. And this was done 
from 1976 through 1984. And you’ve stopped doing that. Why have you stopped doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I can only respond with the same answer. The format is different; the 
information is there, as was within treasury board’s mandate to provide that information in that format. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Minister, any one watching at home must be asking themselves: is it 
live or is it Memorex? Because they’ve heard all these excuses and non-answers from your predecessors 
— from Bob Andrew, from the member for Qu’Appelle Lumsden — as to why it wasn’t in the public 
interest to provide a full accounting. 
 
And you stand up again with non-answers, non-answers to simply say yes, this is the way we’re doing 
things, but refuse to answer the question why; on an important point of policy, refuse to tell the public 
why this information can’t be forthcoming. 
 
I want to give you a further opportunity, Mr. Minister, to make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan. In 
light of an accumulated $4.4 billion deficit — which by anyone’s reckoning is a major problem for the 
public of Saskatchewan — in light of this deficit, in light of plummeting credit ratings, why are you 
suppressing, why are you hiding essential information about your spending? Why are you doing that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, we are not withholding information. We are providing what is 
required. Obviously the hon. member disagrees with the format. 
 
I disagree with the use of his adjective, plummeting, when he talks about our credit ratings. Obviously 
we are disappointed that our credit rating was lowered, but I think plummeting is hardly the right 
adjective when those ratings are still very, very respectable by many, many measures — A’s and AA-’s, 
Mr. Chairman, I think still … and based on the market, the real test. You can assign letters to your credit 
rating but the real test is the market-place. And we’ve been into the market in a very substantial way 
since our credit rating was lowered and our bond offerings were very well accepted by the buying 
public, the institutional buyers, Mr. Chairman. 
 



 

 

And I think that speaks well for Saskatchewan’s reputation and those who handle our finance and debt 
management in that area, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well whatever adjective you want to apply, Mr. Minister, and if you want to 
refer to it as the water-torture test, drop after drop after drop, the fact of the matter is that 
Saskatchewan’s fiscal situation is far from being acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan. It’s not even 
acceptable to you. You’ve finally recognized we have a problem and we’re going to turn it over to some 
people to look at. Whatever limitations there might be in that approach, at least you recognize there is a 
problem. 
 
Now I want to just turn your attention again to this question of supplementary information. What is that 
you’re trying to hide? Why are you hiding information? Why can’t you provide the information as it was 
being provided up to 1984? 
 
And if you take the position that you will not provide this information, can I ask you when you might 
change the motion that is still on the books, that’s still before the House, to change that so as to make it 
clear that that information will not be forthcoming again, ever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, we’re not hiding information. As I said earlier, expenditures by 
payee, by department, are provided in volume 3 of the Public Accounts. Volume 3 information is similar 
to that which was provided in the supplementary volume, except that the totals are at a departmental 
level rather than a total government level. 
 
It seems to me one could argue that that is even greater accountability, instead of providing global 
numbers. And I think the conclusion one could honestly and fairly draw is that certainly we are not 
hiding information. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — How disappointed the taxpayers of Saskatchewan will be, Mr. Minister, in 
reviewing the transcript of this exchange because you’ve acted no differently than your predecessors, 
attempting to hide and deny information, attempting to keep secret information which had been provided 
in the past, giving the same old sorry excuses and non-answers to justify your unaccountability. 
 
I think it’s a sad day for Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Minister, that notwithstanding the great hopes that 
they had last fall when you were appointed that there might be a difference now, that it signalled some 
difference in this government’s attitude towards taxpayers’ dollars. You’ve confirmed today that the 
attitude is still the same. Secretiveness, unaccountability and hide information from the public — that’s 
what it’s all about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I just want to say with respect to the very pertinent questions of my 
colleague for Regina Victoria answered, when you disregard a resolution of this legislature to provide 
those statements, as you are, you are being contemptuous, not just of the opposition, you are being 
contemptuous of the legislature. Mr. Minister, when you arrogantly stand in this House and avoid fair 
questions as to why the taxpayer isn’t entitled to this information, you’re being contemptuous of the 
public. And you seemed unconcerned, Mr. Minister, by the fact that with respect to the public, at least, 
that feeling is now mutual. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you a question which I am asked from one end of this province to the other. 
People point out to me, Mr. Minister, that when you took office the total accumulated debt of this 
province was $3.3 billion. It is now in excess of $13 billion. During that period of time, you have been 
selling off assets. Where, Mr. Minister, has the money gone? I am asked that question from one end of 



 

 

this province to the other. How can you go from a $3 billion deficit to a $10 billion deficit, sell off 
assets? Mr. Minister, where has the money gone? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member asks, where has the money gone? If one looks 
at … really what he’s asking is what are the priorities of the government in terms of spending? And 
certainly if one looks at the budget that was delivered in this legislature three months ago or so and you 
look at a particular chart there that talks about the change in government program spending, it clearly 
shows where the money went, where the additional spending was, where the large spending was, where 
the new spending was. And those areas are Education, Agriculture, Health, and other. All those show a 
bar graph with the numbers ranging up as high as nearly $150 million in the case of Health, and the rest 
of government, if you like, showing a decline. And that is a conscious decision by this government. 
 
We are of the view that Health, Education, Agriculture are and were and continue to be the priorities of 
the people And that’s where we’re spending the money: 1 out of every $5 is spent on education; roughly 
one out of every three of the taxpayers’ dollars is spent on health — substantive sums. 
 
And I also ask the question in the budget, whether it relates to Health and Education, Health or 
Education, those large spending departments, the issue that we are going to have to face, the question 
that taxpayers are going to have to face is: can we afford double digit increases in these large spending 
areas? 
 
The taxpayer is of — as the hon. member has stated — are increasingly of the view that they have no 
more to give, and yet their expectations of service certainly do not come down. It raises the whole 
question of value for their dollar. 
 
These are complex and difficult areas, and I’m firmly of the view that the only way we’re really going to 
tackle government spending overall, any meaningful way, is to engage the public in the largest possible 
way in making what are going to be some very difficult decisions, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I only wish there were some element of truth in what you just said. I 
dearly wish there were some element of truth. I wish, Mr. Minister, health services were better, but 
they’re not. They are patently worse. And everybody knows it. Everybody in this province knows that 
health services have deteriorated. 
 
My colleague from Regina Lakeview has given you endless number of examples, endless number of 
examples, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, everybody in Saskatchewan knows the highways, not just health, but the highways have 
deteriorated. They are worse. Mr. Minister, everybody knows that the quality of education in this 
province has deteriorated to a degree which is scandalous. My children are not getting as good an 
education as I did when I was their age. The quality of education has deteriorated. 
 
Mr. Minister … (inaudible interjection) … Yes, indeed, it certainly is. Mr. Minister, we have gone from 
having a total debt of $3 billion, much of it accumulated to provide power to this province, much of it in 
SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation); we’ve gone from having a $3 billion total deficit to $13 billion 
deficit. 
 
Mr. Minister, during that period of time you have sold off assets; quality of services have deteriorated 
throughout the public sector. The question remains, Mr. Minister, what on earth have you done with all 



 

 

the money? And if you cannot come up with some excuse which is a little less crippled than the one you 
just gave us, Mr. Minister, then you’re not worthy of being Finance minister. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, what have you done with the money when the debt has tripled, you’ve 
sold off assets, and the quality of public services in this province have deteriorated very markedly? What 
have you done, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well as I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, the money is being spent in priority 
areas: 1 to $5 in education, 1 to $3 in health; social services and justice are other large areas, Mr. 
Chairman. And that is as people would expect … (inaudible interjection) … And the hon. member for 
Cumberland raises the question of interest rates — sorry, Athabasca, sorry about that — raises the 
question of interest rates. Certainly that’s been another very troublesome area. 
 
The hon. member also talked about the quality of education. I think the word he used is “scandalous”. I 
think he’s overstating by a fair degree there, Mr. Chairman. I don’t think 12,000 teachers across 
Saskatchewan agree with him. I don’t think several thousand trustees would agree with him. I don’t 
think university professors would agree with him, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But even so, there is an example that we can talk about where the spending has far outstripped inflation. 
A minute earlier today he was decrying this government for spending far above the rate of inflation. One 
of the areas where the spending has been probably double the rate of inflation is education, and he 
somehow is of the view that the quality has gone backward. 
 
And so then I ask the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, if we’re spending $888 million in education today in 
Saskatchewan, how much should the spending go up? Should it be 1 .2 billion, 1 .3 billion, and if so, 
where will the money come from? Does the taxpayer want to pay more? Can we can cut back in other 
areas of the budget? Three or $400 million or even 100 or even $20 million is very difficult to find in 
cutting back in other areas, Mr. Chairman. 
 
In the kindergarten to grade 12 area, Mr. Chairman, spending over this last decade has virtually doubled 
and there are less children in our schools today than there were a decade ago. 
 
(1600) 
 
An Hon. Member: — Fewer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Fewer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s wrong with your English? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — The hon. member for Lakeview asked me: what is wrong with my English? I 
guess maybe the education system 25 years ago wasn’t as good as it is today, Mr. Chairman. 
 
But I use the member’s own example to show that an area like education — spending has far outstripped 
inflation. And yet the hon. member says, spend even more, but don’t let the deficit go up and don’t raise 
taxes. You see, that’s no answer, Mr. Chairman. We need to have a serious investigation. I mean he 
threw up a few examples earlier of Future Corp and some salaries and those kinds of things, but as I 
pointed out to him then, that would maybe run the health care system for 10 or 20 or 30 hours. These 
really aren’t serious suggestions. They make good political fodder, Mr. Chairman, but they really don’t 
get at the heart of the issue. 



 

 

 
Stand in his place and tell us — if $888 million isn’t good enough in education, tell us what you want 
spent and where you’ll get it. And then I’ll look at that proposal. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you are hapless enough with dealing with your own department; I do 
not intend to ask you to deal with somebody else’s department. You’re doing a bad enough job dealing 
with Finance; I won’t get you into Education. 
 
My colleagues from Saskatoon dealt with Education, advanced and ordinary, and did so very 
competently. If you had been in the House, Mr. Minister — I do not know if you were or not — you 
might have known where spending priorities in education are. That’s not my point. My point is, Mr. 
Minister, the debt has gone from $3.3 billion. You have been selling off assets and public services have 
been deteriorating. Thus it is a fair question, Mr. Minister: what happened to the money? 
 
I’ll tell you what’s happened to the money. It has been squandered — squandered in one idiotic direction 
after another. Mr. Minister, among the worst examples of your spending are your ludicrous industrial 
development projects. 
 
Mr. Minister, we were outraged a few years ago when you decided to give $20 million to Peter 
Pocklington, a man whose financial problems were that very month a feature article in the Maclean’s 
magazine; talked about the Royal Bank having difficulties with Mr. Pocklington. At that time you give 
him $20 million. We were outraged by it, as well we should have, Mr. Minister. And you have not to 
this day given us any details about that. Far be it from you to lower yourself to give us any facts. 
 
Mr. Minister, that turned out to be peanuts besides what you’ve done since then. Weyerhaeuser, Mr. 
Minister. Cargill. Cargill is an outrage. My colleague, the member from Moose Jaw North, tells me that 
he has asked business men in Moose Jaw: if I give you $3 million, can you create a job? Most of them 
think they could, with $3 million. 
 
The point is, Mr. Minister, as an industrial development project, those jobs are obscenely expensive. For 
close to $400 million, we’re getting a hundred-and-some jobs. We just simply cannot, Mr. Minister, 
create jobs at that expense. 
 
One of the places, Mr. Minister … one of the answers to the question, where has the money gone — the 
money has gone in one fool’s project after another. Peter Pocklington. Guy Montpetit and your famous 
computer project. Weyerhaeuser. Supercart. Joytec. 
 
Mr. Minister, the list goes on and on and on of one hare-brained scheme after another for industrial 
development, almost all of which have got into financial difficulty. There have been some examples, but 
almost all of your industrial development projects have turned out to be insane, and should have been 
seen to be insane when you were getting into them. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is a big part of where the money has gone. The money has also gone, Mr. Minister, 
because patronage was a corner-stone of this government from its very inception. Mr. Minister, 
patronage is normally a sign of old age in a government. When a government has been in office too 
long, patronage begins to creep in. From the very day you took office, Mr. Minister, patronage was a 
central feature of this government. 
 



 

 

I have no idea how you thought governments operate. But you seem to see government, Mr. Minister, as 
one long trough at which the Tories now had an opportunity to fill their faces and fill and fill and fill. 
That’s what you seem to see government as. 
 
Colin Thatcher complained about the unnecessary number of ministerial assistants, and this is a direct 
quote, “at obscene salaries.” Even your own ministers complained about it, Mr. Minister. 
 
You have opened up trade offices for no purpose other than to give cushy retirement jobs to ministers. 
Your ministerial assistants, Mr. Minister, are some of the best paid in Canada. It’s an incontrovertible 
fact. Your offices are more expensive, Mr. Minister. Your travel is lavish. I could go through all of the 
areas of government but I will not, Mr. Minister. 
 
Suffice it to say, where has the money gone? The money has gone in deficits, deficits which were 
unnecessary, deficits which came into being the day you took office because of an irresponsible election 
campaign in 1982 and have gone straight upward ever since. 
 
Where has all the money gone? Well the money’s gone to one hare-brained industrial development 
project after another. If it isn’t Guy Montpetit selling you computers that were outdated years ago, it is 
somebody else selling you people on a packaging factory in Swift Current which is a product which has 
not yet been accepted in the market that it needs to be — the U.S. — before it can be successful. 
 
Mr. Minister, the money has gone to Cargill; the money has gone to Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Minister, to 
Peter Pocklington. Mr. Minister, that’s where the money has gone. The money has gone to patronage 
because you run the most patronage-ridden government in Canada. There’s been no question of that, Mr. 
Minister. That is one area where you are truly world class. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s gone to hare-brained industrial development projects. And the government that 
succeeds you is going to be a long time cleaning up some of those messes. And it’s gone to deficits 
which were unnecessary and were a direct result of bad management. That, Mr. Minister, is where the 
money went. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee, the hon. member 
obviously doesn’t like our economic development and diversification strategy. I don’t suppose I expect 
him to say that he likes it. He was part of that group that in the ‘70s nationalized everything that moved. 
Not many jobs were created when we bought out the potash mines that were already in existence in this 
province, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And he may not like the strategy that we’ve embarked upon in the ‘80s and will continue on through the 
‘90s, Mr. Chairman. He may not like that. His party may not like that, who have the blinkers on and who 
are still hooked to the past and who cannot and will not change even though the entire world around 
them is changing … (inaudible interjection) … I know the hon. member from Lakeview cannot accept 
that there must be changes in health care, and the Murray commission will form the blueprint for those 
changes. I know that she cannot stand to make those changes. 
 
But, Mr. Chairman, I say to you and members of this committee, we will drag the socialists into the 21st 
century dragging … we’ll drag them screaming and yelling if we have to, but the 21st century is coming 
and they might as well accept that. Change is a reality. There’s no sense going on thinking that you can 
just nationalize everything and that that will be your entire economic development and diversification 
strategy. 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman, the reality is the NDP do not have an economic diversification strategy. In the 65 days or 
so that we have been sitting in this legislature, and in the time before we sat in this legislature, I asked 
all members of this legislature, have you heard one member of the NDP stand up and articulate what 
their economic development and diversification strategy is? Have we heard the Leader of the 
Opposition? No. Have we heard the Finance critic, Mr. Chairman? No. Have we heard the critic for 
Economic Diversification? No. 
 
What have we heard, Mr. Chairman? We’ve heard them say, yes, that community bonds idea for 
economic development at the community level in diversification is a good idea, so good in fact, Mr. 
Chairman, that that Bill went through here in a matter of nanoseconds. 
 
And the reason it did is because the opposition knew that that is an excellent tool to help diversify this 
economy. And there wasn’t one objection raised to it, Mr. Chairman, because that’s another part of our 
diversification strategy that is right on the money. If it was so bad, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Critic, why 
not one question? Why did it go through in a matter of nanoseconds? Why is that the case? 
 
Mr. Chairman, they may not like our economic diversification strategy, but at least we have one. They 
may not like our strategy, Mr. Chairman, but at least we have one. And where community bonds is the 
answer, that is what will be used. Where it’s joint ventures — whether it be with the Indian bands, with 
the co-op, with the Federated Co-ops at the upgrader, with Husky and an upgrader, or the wheat pool at 
the malt plant — we will join hands in joint ventures, even when it has to be a Crown corporation to get 
the job. We are not blinded by any ideology. We set up the Saskatchewan Water Corporation, a Crown 
corporation to manage water resource in this province. And where it makes sense to privatize, like the 
potash corporation, and put it back with the people, including the employees, we have done so. 
 
So what I’m saying to you, Mr. Chairman, and the members of the committee, we are not blinded. We 
picked the tool that’s appropriate to the job: community bonds, joint ventures, partnerships, letting the 
market-place work where and when, as always will be the case, Mr. Chairman. 
 
And this member opposite, he may not like it. He may not like our strategy, but the one problem that the 
NDP must wrestle to the ground if they ever hope to gain power is: you must come to face, you must 
face the reality that your party has never been able to come to grips with wealth creation. You are very 
good at wealth distribution, but you have never come to grip with the other part of the equation — 
wealth creation. 
 
That’s why I say, Mr. Chairman, has anybody over there articulated one line of economic diversification 
strategy? Have you ever heard an NDP talk about wealth creation? Have you ever heard the NDP talk 
about wealth creation? Not one word. In fact I think wealth creation is a four-letter word in the mind of 
the socialists. 
 
What we hear from them is what they’re against, and they’re awful selective in what they pick to be 
against, Mr. Chairman. They always raise Cargill and Weyerhaeuser, the old saws. 
 
You see, Mr. Chairman, they’re really … the members from Moose Jaw aren’t really against Cargill. 
We’ve seen that in the local media. They’re not really against them. But you see, the members, the 
socialist cabal opposite are so tied up in their ideology, so hung up in the past that they can’t shed those 
socialist tennet that says, I must be against anything that’s U.S., I must be against anything that’s 
multinational and vertically integrated. And so if it’s U.S., vertically integrated and multinational, right 
away I’m against it. 
 



 

 

(1615) 
 
You see, they can’t cast off their old notions, Mr. Chairman. We will go into joint ventures where 
necessary with multinationals, with Indian bands, with Husky, with the Co-op, with the wheat pool, and 
we will facilitate community bonds across this province because we believe in the people, we believe in 
the communities, we believe in economic diversification. 
 
You may not have a plan, you may not like ours, but I tell you, Mr. Chairman, we have a plan; it is 
working; our economy is being more diversified. 
 
Obviously we’ve had some projects that didn’t go as well as we would like, Mr. Chairman, but I 
challenge the opposition critic to use this opportunity to articulate the New Democratic Party economic 
diversification plan, because we haven’t heard anything to date, Mr. Chairman, and that’s a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to let the facts speak for themselves. When the CCF (Co-
operative Commonwealth Federation) government of Tommy Douglas took over in 1944, this province, 
this government was bankrupt. They left, Mr. Minister, with Saskatchewan people in 1964 and joined 
the highest income in Canada. 
 
The government of Allan Blakeney took over, Mr. Minister, in similar circumstances after a government 
which promised to be open for business, took over in a very difficult circumstances, and left what was 
often described as the best managed province in North America. I’ll let the facts speak for themselves, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in the brief period of time remaining I want you to address yourself 
… Mr. Minister, when we had interim supply in May, I suggested to you that the amount of money you 
were taking from the Crown investments corporation was irresponsible. I said $310 million is not 
something that can be sustained. I recall accusing you of taking in the proceeds of the sale of the potash 
corporation. 
 
I was wrong. You didn’t make money selling the potash corporation; you lost it. It appears I was wrong. 
I admit. You sold the potash corporation at a huge loss. I didn’t anticipate you doing that. I didn’t 
anticipate one of the world’s best mining companies to be sold at a loss. What it appears you did, Mr. 
Minister, was take the proceeds from the sale of SaskEnergy. As a result, SaskPower, Mr. Chairman, got 
a qualified financial statement. I bet it’s the only Crown corporation in Canada that got a qualified 
financial statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, my concern about whether or not the $300 million was unrealistically high was in fact 
repeated by the Dominion Bond Rating Service. In giving the reasons why your rating was lower, my 
colleague used the word plummet — perfectly proper word. I defy you to point to another example in 
the last half century in Canada where a Canadian government’s credit rating has been lowered as quickly 
or as often as this one has. I defy you to point to another example where that would have happened in 
the last half century. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Dominion Bond Rating Service in lowering the credit rating had this to say about the 
$310 million dividend: 



 

 

 
Revenue includes a $310 million expected dividend from Crown Corporations, versus 200 
million last year. This amount is not sustainable in the long run, since it exceeds our estimated 
earnings of (the) Crown Corporations. 

 
How, Mr. Minister, can you pretend it is responsible to take a $310 million dividend from the Crown 
corporations when they aren’t making that much? 
 
Mr. Minister, you said in developing the province of Saskatchewan that you’re not blinded by ideology. 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you, no one has ever accused you people of being blinded by fiscal 
responsibility either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And there is no better example, Mr. Minister, of your lack of fiscal responsibility 
than a $310 million dividend from companies which aren’t making that much. You are clearly dipping 
into the retained earnings, something that is just basic irresponsibility. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you admit that the Dominion Bond Rating Service are accurate, the $300 million is 
not sustainable, and that your actual deficit … that your actual fiscal position is a good deal worse than it 
is stated to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, as I’ve said in this House before, we are obviously concerned 
about having our credit rating downgraded. It did not come particularly as a surprise. We were naturally 
disappointed as … and I said earlier, concerned. But given what’s been happening in our economy, 
particularly the agriculture sector which I think all of the rating agencies acknowledge, and what we’ve 
had to do, what that’s done to our economy and what we’ve had to do to back up farming, which we 
don’t apologize for, whether it’s production loans or spring seeding loans, that too has added to our debt. 
 
But having said all of that, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important to keep it in perspective. The market-
place is ultimately the determinant as to what these downgrades mean. Rating agencies, as is their job — 
and I think they’re generally respected for doing it and provide useful information to institutional 
accounts and others — can assign numbers and letters, but at the end of day it’s the market that really 
gives the true report card. 
 
And even since our downgrade, we’ve been to the market just … I think a week ago now if memory 
serves me correctly, about a week ago. In fact, we went into the market for 10-year money, $200 million 
worth of bonds. We were able to place it at around eleven and a quarter per cent. In fact, the market was 
very receptive to that offering and we ultimately put out 250 millions of dollars worth of bonds with an 
eleven and a quarter per cent coupon. Mr. Chairman, I think that says that not only is our paper still 
highly regarded, but that the market-place was aggressively seeking it out, Mr. Chairman. 
 
So naturally we’re disappointed, we’re concerned, not overly surprised. And certainly there are good 
reasons in so far as why the economy has been hard hit when you look at what’s been particularly 
happening in that agriculture sector in the last two or three years, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to give you yet another example of this government’s 
atrocious waste and mismanagement. 
 



 

 

Right now, Mr. Minister, as I was speaking, I got three annual reports. The 1986-87 annual report for the 
Public Service Superannuation Plan, the ‘87-88, the ‘89-89. How on earth, Mr. Minister, do you expect 
… with information coming three years late, how on earth do you expect your government to do a 
proper job of management, and how on earth do you expect us to do a proper job of calling you to 
account. 
 
What earthly excuse, Mr. Minister, can there be for delivering annual reports three years late? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member makes a good point. I think we rightly 
deserve some criticism here. This is something that the departmental officials are aware of, and 
hopefully we won’t have to see this situation repeated again, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have one more short question after you benefit from the advice 
being given to you. Mr. Minister, I’ve one more short question. Mr. Minister, with respect to increases 
… 
 
An Hon. Member: — Can we have the minister’s attention, please. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I don’t know whether the minister is capable of listening to these estimates or 
whether he’d rather engage in the tomfoolery, Mr. Chairman, he’s engaged in now. I’d suggest, given 
the sums involved, Mr. Minister, it might not be a bad idea for you to pay some attention to your own 
estimates and stop all the tomfoolery. 
 
Mr. Minister, my final question, Mr. Minister, has to do with the public service superannuation. I recall 
them getting an increase, but it is less than the rate of inflation. Mr. Minister, I wonder how you justify 
giving a 4 per cent increase to your own executive assistants who are very well paid, and giving far less 
than that, Mr. Minister, to the retired public servants. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s speaking for them? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who is speaking for them, Mr. Minister, as my colleague says. You gave your own 
executive assistants 4 per cent but you’ve got a lot less than that for the retired public servants. Why, 
Mr. Minister, do they not get, as your own cronies seem to, a figure which is at least equal to if not 
better than the rate of inflation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Relative to superannuates for ‘89-90, as has been the practice as I am advised 
in years past, 60 per cent of CPI (consumer price index) has been maybe not the rule, but the practice. 
And this year the average increase overall was 60 per cent of CPI. But how we distributed that 1.856 
millions of dollars was based on their income, which I think was quite a reasonable approach. 
 
And so what that meant, if the income of the superannuate was 35,000 per annum or greater, the 
increase they received was 1 per cent, whereas if somebody’s income was less than $5,000, they 
received 4.4 per cent. And it was scaled down in about $5,000 increments I think from there — between 
35,000 and 5,000 — with the idea to give more to those at the lower end of the income scale and less to 
those who were making $35,000 and above. And I think even you, in true socialist fashion, would agree 
that that’s probably a pretty reasonable approach to take, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, those are my questions as far as I’m … and I have no questions on 
any subvotes. As far as I’m concerned, the matter can be dealt with in a summary fashion as we’ve been 
doing. 



 

 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 9 — Statutory. 
 
Items 10 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 — Statutory. 
 
Items 15 to 30 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Items 31 to 34 inclusive — Statutory. 
 
Item 35 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance - Servicing the Public Debt - Government Share 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 
Items 1 and 2 — Statutory. 
 

Consolidated Fund Debt Redemption, 
Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Finance 
Vote 175 

 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 

Vote 176 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 

Vote 177 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
(1630) 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Finance 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 



 

 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
Finance 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 1990 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund Loans, 

Advances and Investments 
Resources Division 

Finance 
Vote 64 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 64 agreed to. 
 

Consolidated Fund Loans, Advances and Investments 
Municipal Financing Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Vote 151 
 
Item 1 — Statutory. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’d like to join you, Mr. Chairman, in thanking the officials for having attended 
today and assisted us in these deliberations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Mr. Chairman, I too would like to thank my officials for their help today and 
in the months that I’ve held the portfolio, and I look forward to working with them through the rest of 
this decade and maybe into the next decade. Thanks too to the critic and his colleagues for their part in 
the examination of the estimates of the Department of Finance on behalf of the public and taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Act 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members of the committee. Behind me is Nancy 
Wright, a tax analyst with the Department of Finance; and to her left, Kirk McGregor, director of tax 
policy; and to my left, Art Wakabayashi, deputy minister of Finance. 
 



 

 

Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — A question to the minister regarding some possible changes to this Act, to The 
Income Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, with respect to the long-standing agreement between Germany and Canada about the 
income tax that is not to be charged by those pensioners who are receiving pensions from Germany, this 
year because of the way you implemented the 2 per cent flat tax, they were forced to pay a flat tax on 
pensions earned and being received from Germany and which were paid to in Germany. 
 
I’m wondering whether you’re making any provision for these people in Saskatchewan to receive the 
money … is there any way that they can receive it back? Is there any way that they can apply to your 
department so that they don’t have to pay this tax? Is there a provision in this Act or are you making 
other provisions for that to be taken care of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that all tax treaties, whether it’s — the one you mentioned is I 
think between West Germany and Canada — are going to be reassessed relative to this issue. Revenue 
Canada has agreed, and it will apply to 1989 and subsequent years. There will be no need to apply. It’ll 
automatically be picked up by Revenue Canada. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: — Just for clarification then, Mr. Minister. Does that mean that those people who had to 
pay the tax should just wait and it’ll automatically be returned to them; or will they have to apply to you 
or to the federal government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: — I’m advised that there would be an automatic reassessment, but I mean I 
suspect that if somebody felt they were entitled and hadn’t received something, what, six months down 
the road or after a suitable time, that they may want to have it raised and see where it’s at. But I’m 
advised that it’s to occur automatically. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. There’s an amendment to clause 6. Would the members allow leave to go 
from clause 1 to 6 and deal with the amendment. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 



 

 

Mr. Chairman: — House amendment moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Strike out section 6 of the printed Bill and substitute the following: 
 

6 subclause 7.1(1)(c)(i) is repealed and the following substituted: 
 

(i) was incorporated after March 26, 1986 and before April 1, 1992; and 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
(1645) 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act 
 

Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The officials that I will have with me for dealing 
with item 2, Bill 34, and item 3, Bill 4 are to my left here: Dr. Allan Hansen, who is the associate deputy 
minister; and directly behind me is Richard Hazel, the executive director of family services; and Linda 
Ens, on my right here, Mr. Chairman, the legislative officer. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have one general question for 
you before we go clause by clause through the Bill, and that is with respect to the need for your 
department to be taking more action and providing more financial resources to grandparents to care for 
the children of parents under 18 years of age as an alternative to those children becoming wards of you, 
as Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Minister, I particularly hear this from Indian and Métis people who often do not have the financial 
resources as grandparents to care for their grandchildren in the event that their daughter — it’s usually 
their daughter — if she’s under the age of 18 years, has a child. And what those Indian and Métis 
organizations and individuals have told me is that they do not understand why it is that your department 
couldn’t make financial resources available to them in the same way that they’re made available to 
foster-parents to care for these children, rather than them going into foster homes. 
 
And I wonder if you could indicate today whether you would be prepared to in effect provide financial 
resources to those grandparents at the same level as a foster-parent would be provided for, so that these 
children could be cared by their grandparents instead of having to go into foster homes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, the way we’re developing this Child and Family Services Act 
and the intention of it is that the grandparents of such an infant — and I can understand where the hon. 



 

 

member is coming from — but the grandparents of such an infant are in a position now to make 
application for adoption or a custody order and are subsequently responsible for the maintenance upon 
adoption or upon receiving such custody. 
 
And at the same time, if the need then exists and it is becoming apparent that they have to have some 
kind of support, well these parents then are … the grandparents then who have the custody order or have 
made the adoption, are eligible for any of the social assistance that normal parents would get, such as the 
social assistance plan or, for that matter, the family income plan. 
 
And so because of the profile given in our new Act to the extended family, where children in need of 
protection require some kind of placement outside their normal home away from their birth parents, we 
are developing a program where some form of temporary maintenance until the child can be safely 
returned, if indeed it can be safely returned into its natural home. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, this just doesn’t resolve the problem though because, you know, 
first of all, your social assistance rates are very inadequate, but let’s not get into that debate today. 
We’ve discussed that on other occasions. 
 
The reality is that there are a lot of families, and this is particularly the case in the Indian and Métis 
community, but it applies outside that community as well, where grandparents really cannot afford to 
take on the responsibility of raising a grandchild without some financial assistance. And their incomes 
may not be so low, Mr. Minister, after your eight years, virtually an eight-year freeze on social 
assistance rates that they qualify for social assistance. 
 
But what in practice is happening, Mr. Minister, is that these children then, because their grandparents 
can’t afford to care for them, are being placed in foster homes, and foster-parents are receiving that 
money. And I don’t for a moment deny foster-parents the money that they receive. If anything, they’re 
underpaid as well, Mr. Minister. But it’s just not in the best interests, in many cases, for these children to 
be cared for by a foster-parent when they could be cared for by a grandparent instead. 
 
And I want your department to address that issue, Mr. Minister, and to date you’ve not done so 
adequately. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a known fact that assistance on reserves is available through 
the federal … through the federal government, pardon me. And certainly, I think our programs off 
reserves are adequate for this need, in terms of the description that I made previously through eligibility 
for SAP (Saskatchewan assistance plan) and for the FIP (family income plan) programs that exist. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well I guess we’re just going to have to leave it, Mr. Minister, at the fact that we have 
a major disagreement here. You know a foster-parent obviously gets assistance, financial assistance for 
raising a child whether or not that foster-parent is eligible for social assistance. I mean that’s just 
common sense. That’s as it should be. They deserve to be paid for their work. If anything, as I’ve 
indicated, they are underpaid, Mr. Minister. 
 
But what you’ve set up, you see, is a system in which a grandparent who can’t afford to raise a child 
without some financial help but would like to is deemed ineligible or being able to do that — is denied 
the opportunity to do that by your department. They’re expected to adopt the child and in effect maintain 
them on their own, unless their incomes happen to be so low that they are eligible for social assistance 
from your department. And their incomes indeed have to be exceedingly low before they’re eligible for 
any help, and then, Mr. Minister, and only then do they receive any assistance from your department. 



 

 

 
I just don’t think it makes any sense to be asking foster-parents — and you’re already desperately short 
of foster-parents in this province — to be asking foster-parents to raise these children when you’ve got 
… as long as there’s no danger to the child, for the child to be in the care of the grandparents, as long as 
the grandparents will care for the child well, the child is a lot better off being looked after by the 
grandparents, Mr. Minister. 
 
And time and again, particularly in the Indian and Métis community, you’re denying grandparents the 
opportunity to do that because you don’t have financial assistance in place for them. And I tell you, Mr. 
Minister, for a government that professes to support the family — and of course we’ve long argued that 
you really don’t — this policy just doesn’t make any sense. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m ready to go on to clause by clause. I’ve made my point. I have an amendment with 
respect to the second clause of your Bill, and I’m ready to move to that right now. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 
 
Mr. Chairman: — House amendment to clause 2 of the printed Bill, moved by the member for 
Saskatoon University, section 2 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by adding immediately after the words “as if the parent was 
18 years of age” the following words: 
 
if that parent has first been offered independent legal advice and independent counselling before 
signing the voluntary committal form. 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, my hope is that you will see fit to adopt this 
amendment. 
 
What your Bill is proposing to do, sir, is to make provision for a parent under the age of 18 years of age 
— these will be obviously primarily young women — to voluntarily commit their child to being a ward 
of you, sir, as Minister of Social Services, and to do so without any provision for legal counselling or 
independent legal advice, and without any provision, Mr. Minister, for other forms of counselling that 
may be required over and above legal counselling. I mean, this is a major decision for the young woman. 
 
And under the Act as you’re proposing it, Mr. Minister, this young woman will enter into an 
arrangement with respect to voluntary committal of her child without any requirement at all for you or 
anyone else to offer her either legal advice or independent counselling advice. And that is just not 
acceptable, Mr. Minister, and therefore I urge you to adopt and accept our amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, we currently in the legislation as it stands now … in section 39 of 
The Adoption Act provision is made in that section for the minister to provide or enter into agreements 
for provision of counselling or any other services that would be related to adoption. There’s also 
provision for pregnancy counselling for birth parents, which is provided by Social Services to any birth 
parent who would request service of this type. 
 



 

 

And private adoption agencies will be required to provide pregnancy counselling in order to be licensed 
if they are going to be accessing any of our funding. An existing agreement with the Christian 
Counselling Services in Saskatoon contains this provision as well. 
 
And included in departmental and private agency counselling is the involvement of parents in teams in 
counselling for any adoption planning. So we feel there is a fairly substantial commitment already in the 
legislation to address the concerns that the hon. member is expressing. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, that is just not good enough, and you must surely know that by now, sir. 
I mean, this is really an inadequate answer. 
 
First of all, not all of the children who will be voluntarily committed by their parents will be adopted. 
They may be foster children. In effect, Mr. Minister, many of them will be foster children first before 
being adopted. So, Mr. Minister, just because The Adoption Act makes some provision for independent 
legal advice doesn’t satisfy my concerns and the concerns of members on this side of the House at all, 
Mr. Minister. And secondly, in The Adoption Act, you know full well there is no provisions for 
independent counselling to be paid for by the Department of Social Services or any other agency. If in 
fact, there is any independent advice provided, it’s only requirement for independent legal advice. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I want an explanation now about why you’re refusing to accept this amendment. If you 
are not willing to accept it, we will be opposing this Bill. 
 
(1700) 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, just further to what I was indicating already, that we feel that 
there is sufficient recourse in our legislation for accessing these kinds of services that the hon. member 
is bringing forth. I would like to indicate that in ward adoptions, independent legal counsel is not 
mandatory because the birth mother or the birth father will have extensive contact with a departmental 
worker who’s fully knowledgeable about the voluntary committal and revocation process involved in the 
adoption first of all. 
 
Then also in addition to that, the birth mother or the birth father may seek independent legal counsel 
with respect to consenting to adoption if this birth mother or birth father chooses to do so. 
 
Furthermore, in the case of a Crown ward or agency adoptions, if required, the cost of independent 
advice or independent legal advice to the birth parent will be covered by the department or by that 
particular agency. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
Bill No. 4 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts resulting from the 

enactment of The Child and Family Services Act 
 
Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 



 

 

 
Clause 3 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s amendment to clause 3 of the printed Bill moved by the Minister of Social 
Services. Will the members take the amendment as read? 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Administration of Young Offenders’ Services 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I want to say that we support this Bill in principle 
as I indicated in second reading. 
 
I have several questions about the Bill, Mr. Minister. The first question I have, Mr. Minister, relates to 
the federal Young Offenders Act and the provision in that, in section 69 of the federal legislation, for 
provinces to establish youth justice committees, Mr. Minister, which are groups of volunteers who will 
work with young offenders in the rehabilitation process. 
 
Now many other provinces, and notably our neighbouring province, Manitoba, has very successfully 
established these youth justice committees which I think are a way of helping to ensure that the services 
provided to young offenders will be more culturally sensitive. And I think that’s particularly important, 
given the fact that such a high percentage of our young offenders are Indian and Métis people. 
 
My question to you, sir, is: why have you not established such youth justice committees in this province; 
and why don’t we see a provision in this Bill for these committees to be established? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. member for that question which he 
y indicated to me on a previous occasion, I think, that he was going to ask. And that’s why I’m going to 
look to be fairly efficient and complete in my answer here. 
 
So having said that as a precursor to what I’m going to be saying here, my response to the hon. member 
is that on section 69 of the Young Offenders Act, it allows the establishment of one or more committees 
of citizens to be known, as you’ve referred to it, the youth justice committee to assist — and I might 
add, to assist without remuneration — in any aspect of the administration of the federal Act or in 
programs or services for young offenders. 
 
Now in Saskatchewan, community participation in programs and services for young persons in 
Saskatchewan is strongly encouraged by my department, and is actually already occurring across the 
province. And we will continue to work closely with communities. 
 
We’re committed, first of all, to the principle of community involvement and partnership. And if we find 
that it may be beneficial to establish youth justice committees, we would certainly not be opposed to 



 

 

consider setting up these committees under the jurisdiction of the federal Act. And it would not be a 
requirement that the provincial Act authorize this as it could be done under the federal Act as it exists. 
But up until now we’ve not found it necessary to do so. The spirit of community involvement which is 
the idea behind these committees, however, is one that we certainly and thoroughly support. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Minister, I want to urge you to set up such committees. I think there are 
many communities in which they could function effectively and be a real help to the young people who 
are needing rehabilitative services. I think that’s a shortfall of your department that you have failed to set 
those up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to get some information that I’d be very satisfied if you’d just provide me in 
writing on later. I’m just asking for your commitment right now to indicate, if you could, to us the 
number of young people who are going through the courts who are under 18 years of age; the number 
then who are in closed custody, number en open custody — in other words, the numbers who have 
actually been convicted in both open and closed custody. And if you could give us a breakdown of those 
numbers, also based on their ethnic background. 
 
If you could just then indicate a commitment to provide that information later, I’d be quite satisfied. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think that should be a problem. We have quite a bit of that 
information, not broken down exactly like you were asking, but we can certainly provide that for you 
with no problem. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I’d also like you to provide for us, if you can, a breakdown between the 
amount of money that your department is spending on the young offenders’ program versus — and I’m 
thinking here of the dollars going into young people who are being held either in open or closed custody 
— versus the dollars that you are putting into preventative programs, Mr. Minister, because it is our 
contention that inadequate resources are going into preventative programs, young people who are at high 
risk of getting in trouble with the law. 
 
And it seems that money is rarely to be found for young people in that situation. And yet there is a lot 
more money to be found once young people are in trouble with the law, and we would like to see a lot 
more emphasis being given to preventative programming. So if you could give us a commitment to 
provide those numbers in writing, we would also appreciate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — I could do that. As a matter of fact my officials have just informed me that we 
have quite a sophisticated breakdown of what you’re asking, and I think you’ll be quite pleased with the 
response. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I just want to indicate to the minister there should really be a definition of what a youth 
worker means in this Act, Mr. Minister. I note you failed to do that. You may want to look at a 
definition and an amendment at a future date that would clarify your intention here in the description of 
the term youth worker. I’ve got no further comment. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — I might indicate to the member that our definition of a youth worker is identical 
to the definition given in the federal Act as to what a youth worker is. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I have a question here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I note 
that you are giving private service home operators who are under contract with your department, under 
this section of the Young Offenders Act, limited powers of arrest in the facilities that they operate in. 
And I’m wondering why you see the need for that, Mr. Minister? Why is it necessary for these people to 
have, in effect, police powers? Often they’re not trained to act as policemen. 
 
I can understand that some argument may be mounted for this, but really, Mr. Minister, it would be my 
preference to see this section deleted from the Act. I don’t have any problem with the rest of the section, 
but when it comes to private service home operators having police powers, we really question whether 
that’s necessary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — I could give you a longer description of it. Perhaps the shorter version of my 
answer might suffice to alleviate some of your concerns. And it is that the powers that we’re talking 
about, given to these people, are not only operators or conductors of private service homes, but you have 
to read part 2 of that same section where it says — in other words there’s a rider to it, it’s not just 
everybody, but rather — “whose homes have been designated as places of open custody pursuant to the 
federal Act.” So there is that restriction. 
 
Clause 8 agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 agreed to. 
 
(1715) 
 
Clause 10 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to move an amendment here. And this has to do with the 
provisions for ensuring that young offenders are kept separate from persons over and above the age of 
18 years, whether they’re in remand or in close custody. And, Mr. Minister, it’s our contention that the 
provision in your legislation here is not strong enough. 
 
And I therefore want to move an amendment to section 10 of the printed Bill: 
 

By adding immediately after the words “who is held in custody” the following words: 
 

and wherever there is a lack of separate facilities, the minister shall make every effort to cause to 
be established separate facilities to allow young persons to be held separate and apart from any 
adult who is held in custody. 

 
Mr. Minister, the way you’ve worded this right now, young people only have to be kept apart from 
adults wherever that is practicable. There is in effect no intent in your Bill to ensure that every effort will 



 

 

be made to do this in the event that separate facilities already don’t exist. And therefore I want to move 
this amendment. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order. I find the amendment not in order. The amendment is not in order because it 
would be a money amendment. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, my question to you is: would you be prepared to move this amendment, 
sir? We want to see a provision in the Bill that will clearly indicate that from your department and from 
your government that every effort is going to be made to establish separate facilities for young offenders 
all around this province. And the way you’ve currently written the legislation there’s no such guarantee 
that that effort will be made. Will you therefore support the amendment that I put forward and move it 
yourself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Well first of all, let me say that we certainly agree with the hon. member’s 
viewpoint that youths should be kept as much as possible away from contact with adults, and certainly 
what this Act is doing is heading in that direction to a large extent. And I might just say that if there is a 
period of time that is more than 24 hours or a short period of time like this, then it is incumbent upon us 
to transfer that individual, if he’s going to be charged, to a young offenders’ facility that would be 
separate from any adult contact as such. 
 
And we certainly feel that that is quite reasonable to allow those kinds of practical considerations, 
because to bring it to a head the other way might be going to an extreme when we consider some of our 
northern situations where you have small localities, small holdings, and it would be almost practically 
impossible to implement this kind of a thing. 
 
But in spirit — absolutely, I agree with you. I guess what I’m doing is saying as far as practicality is 
concerned that is what our intent is and anything beyond that 24-hour period of time or short period of 
time, through charges of intoxication and things like this that may occur from time to time, then it is 
incumbent upon us beyond that short period of time to transfer them to a young offender’s facility if 
charges are going to be made by the police. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could indicate then where in Saskatchewan as a matter of 
course young offenders are frequently held in remand with adult prisoners, and have you considered the 
consequences of that, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — In direct response to your question, we are not aware of any place where this 
happens frequently in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well I’d appreciate it if you could give us a written answer on this indicating if there 
are any places in Saskatchewan where young people are held, either in remand or in custody, with adults 
over the age of 18 years. I’d like a written answer on that, please. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, for you to … in your remarks you indicated that this was happening. You just 
indicated a moment ago, in fact prior to this answer, that in fact there were situations where that is 
happening. For you to accept that, Mr. Minister, is intolerable in my view. You’ve just indicated the 
precise need for this amendment. And I’m asking you whether you’ll introduce the amendment, because 
clearly, Mr. Minister, separate facilities should always be in place. It’s just not good enough. 
 



 

 

Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Well I’d just say to the hon. member if we lived in a perfect world, I guess we 
would have those facilities. But then on the other hand if the world was perfect, we wouldn’t need them. 
So it’s a matter of addressing the concern, which I share with you, in as practical a manner as possible. 
 
But for you to demand from me a response now that is going to say that yes, under every circumstance 
throughout the province no matter what the conditions that there will be separate facilities provided at all 
times — no, I cannot make that. I do give you the commitment that we share the concern and as far as 
practically possible we will be doing that. 
 
Clause 10 agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Chairman: — There’s amendment to clause 12, a House amendment moved by the member for 
Saskatoon University: 
 

Amend section 12 of the printed Bill: 
 

(a) by striking out the words “or supposed exercise” in the ninth line; and 
 

(b) by striking out the words “or supposed performing” in the tenth and eleventh lines. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’ll very briefly speak to this. Mr. Minister, the intent here is that you are, in effect, 
preventing your officials and yourself and anybody working in young offenders’ facilities in this clause 
from suit in the event of inappropriate action. And we have no problem with that in so far as the persons 
are undertaking their responsibilities. 
 
But you’ve written this clause in a very unusual way, Mr. Minister, because you’re also ensuring that no 
legal suit can be taken against persons in the supposed exercise of their duties. So in other words, if they 
think they’re performing their duties when in effect they’re not, they’re still free from a lawsuit, Mr. 
Minister, and they’re still free from liability. 
 
Now we think that is inappropriate, and therefore we’re moving an amendment to protect those workers 
when they’re performing their duties but not to provide them with protection when they’re not 
performing their duties. If there’s action for a suit on that basis, Mr. Minister, we think the suit ought to 
be allowed to proceed. And therefore we’re moving this amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Neudorf: — Mr. Chairman, the member has a concern about the liability, but I might add that 
also at the same time, while the minister and all employees are protected from liability in the pursuit of 
their responsibilities and in believing that they are carrying out their particular mandate, it must also be 
done in good faith. The good faith aspect of it is important, pursuant to the Act or regulations. 
 
And I am also told by my officials that this is a standard provision. This is apparently lawyer talk. You 
say, no. But I would suggest to you, Mr. Member, that it’s a standard provision in legislation prescribing 
procedures or dealing with statutory duties and powers carried out by persons. 
 
And I can give you a list right now in Saskatchewan of 10 different Acts that have the identical wording 
as this does. And that goes to The Family Services Act, The Child and Family Services Act, The 



 

 

Summary Offences Procedure Act, The Securities Act, The Saskatchewan Gaming Commission Act, the 
medical … and I could go on and on. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 1 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


