




















































Hansard: December 05, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 85 

 December 5, 1991 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With your 

indulgence, I wish to summarize that portion of my address 

given prior to the adjournment of this Assembly.  As I 

previously stated, I was truly thankful to my constituents for 

having elected me.  Traditionally, Weyburn has had excellent 

representation in this Assembly for the past half century.  For 

example, former premier T.C. Douglas represented Weyburn 

during his years as premier of this province.  Mr. Speaker, I 

will always be indebted to Mr. Douglas for the inspiration he 

has given me.  Mr. Douglas applied the Christian brotherhood 

principle in the implementation of new social government 

programs.  Mr. Douglas's approach has been described as the 

social gospel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I referred to scripture to illustrate and emphasize 

that politicians must be the servants of the people who elect 

them.  I shall now continue with the remainder of my address. 

 

Over 70 years ago, a young Armenian philosopher, poet, and 

artist by the name of Gibran asked the question: "Are you a 

politician asking what your country can do for you; or are you 

a zealous one, asking what you can do for your country?"  The 

late president John F. Kennedy immortalized the words of 

Gibran through the following characterization by stating: "Ask 

not what your country can do for you, but ask what you can do 

for your country."  These two quotations express the current 

expectation of the public for their elected representatives. 

 

The question can be asked, Mr. Speaker, why has the member 

from Weyburn sought political office?  I shall not answer the 

question with a philosophical statement for I am not a 

philosopher.  I am not about to answer the question with a long, 

convoluted statement for I am not a seasoned politician.  There 

are many things that I am not and there are many goals that I 

do not have a burning desire to attain.  One goal is not political 

longevity. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, or I should state, the answer to the 

question why I sought office is pure and simple: I was asked.  

Yes, I was asked to put my name forward in nomination; asked 

not by one person but by several. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the needs of my constituency is great, as are the 

needs of this province.  I wish to be part of the legislative 

process in debating and redressing the problems facing the 

individual and collective needs of our respective constituencies 

in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- As I stated, Mr. Speaker, the needs of 

this province are many, but the people of Saskatchewan have a 

rich heritage to draw upon in meeting the challenges of today 

and the challenges of tomorrow. 

 

Adversity is not new to Saskatchewan.  Adversity plagued this 

province during the '30s.  Some of my relatives packed their 

bags and resettled in the district of the Peace River.  But my 

father's father, like many of our grandparents, had the tenacity 

to tough it out.  It wasn't easy.  Our forefathers experienced the 

hardship and undauntedly faced the rigours encountered in 

settling this great province.  The '30s produced one more 

obstacle to challenge their dogged spirit and will to survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, adversity does spring eternal hope.  Our parents 

and grandparents grappled with the economic problems of the 

day and demonstrated their ingenuity in establishing marketing, 

retail, and financial co-ops across this province.  It is ironic that 

the advent of World War II was the beginning of prosperity for 

Saskatchewan once again. 

 

We, the baby-boomers, representing the generation following 

World War II, have experienced the best standard of living than 

any other generation before us.  This standard of living has 

been achievable through hard work and penny-pinching by our 

parents and grandparents.  Our immediate forefathers' goals 

were to see that their children and grandchildren would have a 

more comfortable economic future.  Their goals were achieved 

during my lifetime.  Now it is is our turn to rebuild this great 

province for our children and great grandchildren. 

 

Agriculture and oil are the principal resources of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, but agriculture is the mainstay of 

our economy.  Attempts have been made by previous premiers, 

with modest success, to diversify our economy.  It is a direction 

that must be explored with greater vigour. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Value-added processing to our 

agricultural products is an absolute necessity.  The small 

country of Holland exports a greater dollar volume of 

agricultural products than Canada, the vast majority of which 

are value added. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the organizers of the concerned 

farmers for hosting the farm rallies at Rosetown, Weyburn, and 

Regina.  These rallies emphasize graphically the plight of the 

farm families and rural communities in Saskatchewan.  I 

further commend the organizers of the on to Ottawa trek, and 

applaud our Premier, our Minister of Agriculture and Food, and 

everyone who attended in support of the farmers of 

Saskatchewan and western Canada. 

 

The Canadian public are now aware of the depressed farm gate 

crisis, the burdensome farm debt, the restricted cash flow, the 

continued depletion of farmers and their families from rural 

Saskatchewan, and the problems associated with the continued 

depopulation of rural 

  



86 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Saskatchewan.  There is hope on the horizon, Mr. Speaker.  

The immediate solution may not be in sight but the will of the 

farmers and rural communities to survive is very encouraging. 

 

In the Weyburn constituency, Mr. Speaker, some of the rural 

communities have declined dramatically, as is evident by the 

closure of post offices and elevators.  Communities within a 

20-mile radius of the city of Weyburn are now satellite 

communities.  But there are vibrant communities still surviving 

-- surviving with difficulty, but nevertheless still surviving.  

These surviving communities are people-oriented communities 

with active sporting organizations, community clubs, theatre 

groups, to name a few. 

 

The larger communities in this province, like the city of 

Weyburn, shall survive as rural service centres and retirement 

centres.  The smaller communities in my constituency can 

survive as communities of people, but not all shall survive as 

commercial centres.  The surrounding smaller communities 

must co-operate with one another in planning their future 

viability as communities. 

 

There is the opportunity of economic diversification in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  The community bond program is 

a vital tool for the continued diversification of Saskatchewan.  

This program permits communities to strategize their future 

development.  For those communities demanding action from 

government, it gives them an opportunity to put their money to 

work in their own communities. 

 

The economic development committee for the city of Weyburn 

is actively pursuing new manufacturing and industrial projects.  

With the expansion of the community bond program to include 

co-operatives, I see a real opportunity for the co 

_op sector to be the primary vehicle for bringing economic 

growth and activity to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, there are other issues, like 

health, education, and other social policies which are important 

to my constituents.  I have met with some of my constituents 

and discussed the funding and delivery of health care and 

education services.  It would be wonderful if the provincial 

treasury could fund our social programs without regard to our 

crushing deficit.  Consequently, the continued delivery of our 

present level of social programming is directly proportionate to 

our ability to create new wealth, new jobs, and new markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the greatest resource that my constituency has is 

its people.  The ingenuity of my constituents and the 

Saskatchewan people will be tested over the next decade, but 

I'm confident that we will develop a plan to foster economic 

growth. 

 

In summary, Mr. Speaker, I state that the future is ours.  We do 

have control over our destiny.  I look forward to working with 

my caucus colleagues, and I invite my opposition colleagues to 

contribute in a spirited and constructive manner during the 

legislative debates that 

shall follow during the remaining term of this government. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 

opportunity that I have to be here to speak tonight on the 

resolution before us.  I want to just say -- I want to congratulate 

you for your role as a Speaker -- and I know you so far have 

done it with a conscientious effort, and I appreciate that, and 

we will endeavour to work together with you on that matter. 

 

The other thing that I want to do is congratulate the MLAs 

(members of the Legislative Assembly) who are new in the 

Assembly.  I want to congratulate them for their win.  I want to 

congratulate those on this side of the House and also to those 

on the other side. 

 

I want to outline for the majority of you, who may not be 

familiar with my constituency, some of the things that I think 

are important in that constituency, and how it has through the 

past 10 years been a part of my life, and before that as a 

contributor -- as an individual -- dealing with a people that 

were there, and working in the municipal association, and 

through the municipalities at that time. 

 

The constituency is made up of small communities and rural 

people.  It's made up of people who have an energy that is 

related to agriculture, basically, and it's driven by a lot of 

goodwill and initiative that has been fostered by years and 

years of hard work and dedication. 

 

We have about 18 different communities that are towns and 

villages in my constituency.  It's been a pleasure for me to work 

with these mayors and aldermen during that period of time -- 

dealing with the various issues that have arisen, Mr. Speaker.  

The reeves and the councillors of the 12 municipalities that I 

have in the constituency has also been a pleasure for me to 

work together with them. 

 

It's through the work of the municipalities -- the mayors and the 

councillors in the constituency -- that I have had the greatest 

reward for my political career, working together with them to 

initiate programs and initiate responses to the various programs 

that have been involved, that the last nine years have been able 

to present to me and to them. 

 

I know that in the community of Cabri we opened a hospital 

there about a year ago.  It was a facility that took a long time to 

get into place.  I know that some of the people on the board 

were there in 1975 working together to try and initiate a level 4 

care facility, and together with the people of that community to 

try and develop a process whereby they could initiate a 

construction of a hospital and a level 4 care facility. 

 

(1915) 

 

The town of Herbert, which is the largest in my community, 

had a nursing home, but it had a serious problem with having 

rooms that allowed to have four 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

patients in one room, and it was difficult for the staff to arrange 

the co-ordination of the different kinds of people in that 

nursing home.  And so it was a privilege to assist them in 

developing the kind of a facility there that could be more easily 

accommodating to the people that were clients there. 

 

The responsibility in this relationship to working together with 

the rural municipalities in the highway system, initiating their 

response in the area that they wanted to have the construction 

occur, has also been a part of where I've been able to work with 

the municipalities, and I want to thank them for their direction 

and the encouragement they have been to me.  Particularly 

highways like 43 that dealt with rural communities that had a 

poor access to road or traffic and now they have an opportunity 

to drive on some very good highways.  And throughout the 

constituency I think that the Department of Highways have 

done a good job there. 

 

I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that even though people 

in the northern part of this province might believe that they 

have the most unique parks, I would just like to say to the 

members of the Assembly here today that I believe we have 

one of the most exciting opportunities for generating a park 

facility that there is in Saskatchewan.  It's along Diefenbaker 

Lake.  It's called Sask Landing, and it's a different kind of a 

park.  It's a park where sailing can be a part of the park 

facilities.  It can be a place where windsurfing is a part of that 

exercise.  And there is excellent fishing there.  People have 

neglected to take the opportunity to come down to the 

south-west part of the province to see a facility that is as good 

as that.  There is over 490 miles of shore line, and I think that 

that is an excellent opportunity for the people to exercise their 

opportunity to come down and visit down in that part of the 

province. 

 

And if the member from Rosetown-Elrose wants to argue about 

which side of the lake is his or mine, it's ours as a part of the 

effort to build and construct a viable opportunity in a park 

facility.  And as a matter of fact, it will be interesting to see 

where the facilities get built.  I know we have worked hard to 

put the marina into the facility there.  They've dug a lot of 

gravel out.  In fact they made hills in his constituency and in 

mine with the unused gravel that's going to be used for the 

highway construction in that area.  And I think that it's going to 

be an asset to him, and it's going to be an asset to the people in 

my constituency in relation to that.  I hope that he can convince 

the minister responsible for Parks that the marina needs to be 

completed. 

 

Anyway there is another area that I want to touch on, and it 

relates to the area of rail line abandonment in this province.  It 

is a very, very important part of the exercise, I believe, of not 

only the Department of Transportation but also the part of how 

we relate to the various kinds of communities we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  As the member from Weyburn just 

mentioned, that the small communities in his area were subject 

to a lot of pressure these days in relation to their size, the 

construction in those communities, the viability of the 

businesses in those communities -- and it's no different in mine 

or probably anywhere else in the province of Saskatchewan. 

They had an experiment in Alberta, and it's called the short-line 

rail system, and we in the province of Saskatchewan initiated 

that some time ago.  And I believe that it is a part of something 

that is really a good program and a good process to maintain. 

 

I want to say that the Southern Rails Co-op down in the area of 

Rockglen to Killdeer, and in the Avonlea area, have initiated 

some very positive benefits to those communities there.  And I 

hope that the Minister of Agriculture will take seriously those 

contributions that are made by that transportation method and 

that transportation system. 

 

There are two communities in my constituency which have 

placed a proposal before the federal government, and they are 

there now negotiating with the federal government together 

with Southern Rails to implement a better opportunity to serve 

those communities in delivering the grain to market.  And I 

think that those are the kinds of things that we need to -- as a 

part of an encouragement to the government -- to say, this is 

what you need to do. 

 

I was struck earlier this week by the lack of initiative in the 

throne speech.  I know that it is the beginning of the campaign . 

. . or the beginning of the term of office for the new 

government, and they're finding their way around and looking 

at various things that were going on.  They were not aware of a 

lot of the things that were in the department so I'm going to 

give them time to breathe.  However, I would like to say that 

it's time to think about how we move forward in this province.  

We can't stand still.  We can't allow ourselves the freedom to 

think that time is going to stand still in relation to the things 

that need to be done in agriculture in this province.  And that in 

my mind, Mr. Speaker, is a very serious and a very intense 

opportunity for the Minister of Agriculture or the minister 

responsible for Rural Development, for these two ministers to 

speak to their colleagues in their government and to make the 

assessments important ones. 

 

I noticed a lack of agriculture in there.  I did note that there was 

some discussion from the member from Weyburn that 

community bonds were a very important part, and I hope that 

what I read in the paper today is not symbolic of what they're 

planning to do because they've run out of money as it relates to 

the guarantee.  And I hope that they will say that there is more 

opportunity for community bonds than just what they have 

already attained.  I hope that they maintain that program in 

order to develop those communities. 

 

I want to say that the Speech from the Throne is generally 

intended to be a document that sets out the framework for 

departments and for the government to go, and I notice that 

there was a lack of anything in it to make it something that 

would be worthwhile. 

 

I noticed a couple of things there that dealt with travel to 

Ottawa.  Mr. Speaker, I had a constituent call me in relation to 

that and asked whether I was going.  It was a woman and I said 

to her, I really believe that I need to be asked if I wanted to be 

on that trip and if it's anything that I can do to help, I'd be 

pleased to.  But I never was asked 

  



88 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

and it was never made available to me.  And therefore, if that 

opportunity presents itself perhaps in the future, then maybe we 

need to be made aware of that as a caucus too. 

 

I want to say to the members opposite that in all of the time 

that I was the associate minister it never became more evident, 

as I travelled around the province, that GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) and NISA (net income stabilization 

account) were probably the beginnings of something that could 

be good.  And I want to say to the Minister of Agriculture that 

there are a lot of things that can be done to that, to enhance it, 

to give an opportunity.  And I will, through my remarks, 

indicate to you some of those areas that I think can be worked 

on and that they can provide solutions because I think that 

that's where we want to go, and I think that's where the people 

of this province want to go. 

 

Before I get into the GRIP and NISA programs extensively, I 

want to point out to the government the responsibility that you 

have in providing the dynamics within those little communities, 

as it relates to transportation, is very significant.  I will say that 

in my experience as a reeve and as councillor in the time when 

I was involved in the municipality we had a rail line 

abandonment in the community that I lived in and it was not a 

good thing to have.  And nowhere in the province are there 

more dynamics that are negative than when the rail line leaves 

your community.  The whole principle of communities staying 

together are bound together by that railroad track and it seems 

like it's almost devastating when that happens.  And I just want 

to point that out. 

 

And it's not only in my constituency, it's going to happen in the 

Shaunavon constituency; it's going to happen in Kindersley; it's 

going to happen in Rosetown-Elrose.  And if we don't stand up 

for the areas of development in that, we're going to be losing in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

It's also my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that with the 

discussions as it relates to the transportation system, there is 

going to be a need for us to, or a need for the province of 

Saskatchewan to very clearly identify how the attack on the 

grain handling system is going to come.  And it's going to be 

the area from Lloydminster to Weyburn that is going to be 

most seriously impacted in a review of the transportation 

system.  And I think that the Minister of Agriculture, who's 

also responsible for transportation, needs to be made aware of 

that. 

 

Going to the area of GRIP and NISA, I honestly believe that 

NISA should be a part of the responsibility of the Department 

of Agriculture in Saskatchewan.  I do not believe that it should 

be the responsibility to maintain that accountability in 

Winnipeg, or that the federal government needs to do that. 

 

As a matter of fact, the commitment was made by the federal 

government to us that they would allow banks and credit 

unions to be the agency of record for the NISA accounts. 

 

And so as I challenge you here today to make sure that that is a 

part of what that opportunity is to present itself, the 

significance is very, very large.  It deals with it from the 

perspective of the impact in that community.  The money 

that is invested could also be invested in that community by 

that credit union and not have it leave to go some place else.  

And I think it would . . . in many of the small communities in 

my constituency it would be a real asset. 

 

Now GRIP is a very complex issue, Mr. Speaker, and I'm not 

going to try and develop the program here today for you, 

although I know that you're somewhat interested because you 

have some land yourself.  I will say that there are a number of 

areas. I have about five of them listed here. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, I think that one of the things that you 

need to think about is the area of soil reclassification in dealing 

with the volume of bushels per acre that that classification 

could represent.  And I think that that is a part of what you 

need to take a look at. 

 

There has to be continuation of no offset between crops, and I 

think that that is an important part.  I went to a lot of meetings 

from Maple Creek to Carlyle and that was the general thrust of 

those people there.  They said no offset between crops, and I 

think that you need to take that seriously. 

 

You need to have a way to target the increase in yield.  I really 

believe that farmers want to farm not for the program; they 

want to farm because they're good at it.  They want to farm 

because they want to have an increase of the capacity of 

productivity.  And we have to set out . . . set up a process 

whereby we can encourage them to deliver it. 

 

And there is a process that has already been partly established 

for irrigators in the province of Saskatchewan, and I know that 

that is a good method in order to help achieve some of that 

production increase without jeopardizing the program, and 

without jeopardizing the opportunity for these farmers to 

deliver a better benefit for themselves. 

 

(1930) 

 

One of the things that was identified by a constituent of mine 

as I was travelling around a little over a year ago, and he 

identified it and I really think it should be considered, and that 

is to pay the premium at the time the grain is delivered. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that in itself has the capacity of doing a 

number of things.  It has the capacity of allowing the producer 

to deliver when he has the cash.  It allows the capacity of the 

government to better schedule their payments in relation to the 

premium.  And it allows . . . That's for the provincial 

government, and it does the same for the federal government.  

You don't have to borrow a whole lot of money to plug it in on 

November 1 to match the contributions given by the producers.  

And I think that those are the very kinds of things that I think 

that need to be done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we deal with the program that is called 

GRIP, it began with two fundamental issues.  It began with 

crop insurance as its base.  It began with a price-fixed 

commodity.  But that price was only there on the basis of a 

short fall in production, and that, Mr. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

Speaker, is exactly the reason why the farmers asked the 

provincial government and asked me if there could be some 

changes made to that. And we initiated some of that. 

 

And as we sit in this House, the lights that we have here today, 

Mr. Speaker, were not invented by Thomas Edison.  He 

invented a lamp, but he didn't invent the kind of lights we have 

here today.  And so as we build on the bricks that are there, we 

build the wall to protect these producers.  And I think that that's 

the kind of thing that we need to consider, as it relates to the 

GRIP and NISA program. 

 

I am actually, Mr. Speaker, very proud of the fact that we 

initiated those.  And I'm also proud of this, Mr. Speaker, that 

we put into place, in the legislation, an opportunity for the 

minister to access the consultative process in relation to 

developing changes in that process.  And I think that that is as 

important as any of the GRIP and NISA program itself. 

 

I just want to say that in the discussions . . . going to Ottawa is 

not always the solution to the problem.  Sometimes the 

problems have to be solved within the framework of this 

jurisdiction here.  I want to point out that many times I have 

travelled there, and many times I've come back empty-handed.  

Many times I've travelled there, and we've gotten a good return 

on the kinds of things that we need to do.  We need to pressure 

the federal government.  I believe in that.  We need to make 

them understand what the resolve of the Saskatchewan people 

is, and we have to get them to understand that. 

 

I want to say though that we can't always throw the solution to 

the problem on the federal government, and I'll tell you why. 

There is a basic reason why I'm going to tell you why you 

shouldn't do that: because for every time that you do that and 

they pay you money, they will want to have some right taken 

and given back to them that we have. 

 

And I don't think that we should freely just go there and say we 

want to have all this money because then they will want to 

have some jurisdiction that they want to control and have 

control over the province.  And I think that you need to be very 

careful, when you're going to deal with those kinds of things, 

that you don't sell yourself and the rights that we have as 

Saskatchewan producers for that added dollar or what it can get 

you.  I think that you need to deal with that in a very 

constructive way. 

 

We have gone through the 10 toughest years in Saskatchewan's 

history, Mr. Speaker, in relation to the weather, the predators 

that hover on the agriculture sector in a natural kind of a way.  

We've had grasshoppers; we've had drought; in this past year 

we had so much rain we didn't know what to do with it.  Parts 

of my constituency had 27 inches of rain this year.  It's been 

incredible. 

 

We have had drought; we have had flood.  We've had places 

that ran water where they haven't run water for 30 years, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is in some ways an asset, but in many ways it 

has become a liability. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we can't sit down and say, Ottawa 

give us everything.  We've got to solve some of these problems 

within ourselves, and I'm going to challenge the members 

opposite who are in government to make sure that they 

consider that they have not only an opportunity, but they have a 

responsibility to do that. 

 

I want to continue on to some of the things that I noticed during 

the campaign that I thought were of interest.  And I noted that 

the plebiscites, Mr. Speaker, were very encouraging for what I 

believe the province of Saskatchewan to represent.  They dealt 

with three areas and I was very pleased with the results of all of 

them. 

 

I believe that the area of balanced budgets is important.  I 

believe that.  I believe that abortion is important.  I believe that 

the kinds of things and the way the people voted during the 

election about abortion, I think that is important.  I think it's 

important for us to consider that. 

 

I also think that we have a responsibility in dealing with these 

kinds of issues and I think that the people of Saskatchewan told 

the legislature here in the province of Saskatchewan what their 

opinion was.  And I think we'd better listen because I think we 

in this legislature have a responsibility to consider that. 

 

And I want to also say that it's interesting that the people of 

Saskatchewan have entrusted the role of government to the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) Party.  I am here as a part of a 

belief that the electorate is always right.  However, I find it 

interesting that as a result of the election that there are as many 

NDP as there are.  And I want to say that they probably should 

all, each on a variable occasion, send a bouquet to the Leader 

of the Liberal Party.  That would assist in brightening her day 

but it would also be a credit to her and give the credit to where 

it's due. 

 

I also want to say that that is a part of what I believe is the 

difference between what's on that side of the House and on this 

side of the House.  We have, Mr. Speaker, had a long-time 

tradition that you were either a right-winger or a left-winger in 

this province, and it's been polarized fairly significantly in 

elections across the province.  And it's been . . . As the member 

from Weyburn -- no I believe it was Meadow Lake suggested 

that politics can be an interesting discussion in his house.  And 

I think it's like that in every home.  You get feisty over 

Christmas . . . or turkey dinner at Christmas time about your 

politics and what you believe in. 

 

And the kinds of things that take place in my home are no 

different than in yours, and the belief is very intense.  And I 

think that it's necessary for us to again, I believe, polarize that 

between right and left and do it on one-party system because I 

think that -- or two-party system, I'm sorry.  But we'll leave that 

for another day to discuss with you. 

 

I want to say that the one question on plebiscite that I didn't 

talk about was the one that dealt with the constitution.  And I 

think that as a person who was born in this country, but who's 

had parents and grandparents who moved to this country, who 

believed that this was the place to live and the place to raise 

their families and a good place to do that, that we need to have 

that opportunity presented to the public on how and what the 

  



90 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

constitution should be like. 

 

And I don't believe . . . and this is a criticism of the Premier, 

that he would in fact say to the Prime Minister, or to the federal 

government, perhaps that there was room for negotiations on 

Canada's constitution in relation to money being paid to 

western Canada.  And I really find that not only difficult to 

understand why he would do that, but also difficult to 

understand why he would limit himself to protecting the 

farmers to what he gets out of the constitution and vice versa; 

because of the relevance that the constitution has to us as 

people in the province of Saskatchewan, why he would put a 

dollar value on that. 

 

And we in this province -- and I heard it over and over again in 

'86 -- stood here and heard people from all stripes saying they 

didn't want to have the United States taking us over on the free 

trade debate.  Well I would say that we need to be very careful 

what we trade off in a constitutional discussion.  And that is a 

serious criticism on what I believe a poor error in judgement. 

 

I want to say something, too, about a concern that I have.  I 

asked some questions earlier about the laying off, relieving of 

responsibilities, firing, whatever you want to call it, of 271 crop 

insurance adjusters.  And I want to make this point, Mr. 

Speaker.  Each time, as the program works in Crop Insurance 

and in GRIP, each time that a farmer is not paid what he is 

entitled to, he is going to lose.  And when are they going to 

catch that up?  If he is in shortfall 1 bushel for every acre that 

he has on his farm, and if he seeds 1,000 acres, he's out $4,000.  

When will that be paid back?  On the final payment?  Or will 

that be somehow measured into the system so that that 

individual can somehow be held accountable for the kinds of 

things that he earned out of the program, he's expecting out of 

the program, and now he isn't going to get? 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is a poor way to handle what 

was supposed to be done fairly and equitably.  And I'm going 

to be raising those as questions later on as a part of what my 

responsibility will be in this Assembly. 

 

I was the minister responsible for the Sask Water Corporation, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I was there when it started; I was there when 

it began.  I helped build it; I helped put it together, and as a 

legislative secretary responsible for that, I saw how it 

developed. I saw how ministers were made responsible for the 

board and how they moved out of that responsibility and then 

allowed the general public to become a part of that 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also was a part of that decision to allow the 

chairman of the board to be a citizen of the province of 

Saskatchewan who was not a politician.  And I believe in that 

system.  And I really believe that the Government of 

Saskatchewan is wrong when they're allowing ministers to be 

the sole members of those boards of directors. 

 

I think that that is an error of judgement, and I think that is 

putting the power into the executive control of this province, 

and I think that's wrong.  I don't believe in it and I never, ever 

have.  I think you're wrong to do that no matter where you put 

it.  We have had a whole lot of these corporations, all ministers 

of the Crown.  And I think that's 

wrong. 

 

As a matter of fact, in Alberta what they've done, they've 

changed the laws to give regular MLAs the opportunity to sit 

on those boards.  And I think that that is a step in the right 

direction.  But I also think to take regular, ordinary people out 

of the responsibilities that they have as a part of their 

contribution to society is wrong.  And I'm going to challenge 

you on that to fix that up because I really think it's a serious 

mistake. 

 

One of the things that bothers me with the suggestion by those 

opposite is that you don't have patronage, we didn't have 

patronage, the next guy is the only guy that has patronage.  

Well I want to point out to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have had 

patronage since politics began.  It's not a part of what we do or 

they do, it's a part of what everybody does.  And you want to 

step aside from that?  You try.  And as a matter of fact, I would 

suggest that there is a whole lot of patronage going on on your 

side of the House at this point in time.  It's a part of what 

governments are all about.  And I think that that's a part of 

what you do and that's a part of what we did. 

 

However, I find it very, very interesting that you would raise, 

as a part of your legislative agenda, to deal with the contracts 

that have been made with individuals who are civil servants 

and who are people who are working for this government in the 

province of Saskatchewan; that you would bring legislation 

into this House that would jeopardize those contracts that have 

been made with those people.  I find that very, very difficult to 

believe. 

 

Because I was in a position, Mr. Speaker, to employ a deputy 

and an assistant deputy and another assistant deputy in the 

Department of Agriculture who are career civil servants.  

They've been there longer -- maybe not longer than you have, 

Mr. Speaker -- but they have been here a whole lot longer than 

a lot of the people who are in this Assembly right now.  And 

that wasn't a disparaging remark on the Speaker. 

 

(1945) 

 

However, I want to point out that you are jeopardizing the 

opportunity for people to come to work in the province of 

Saskatchewan if you deal with it in that light for every one of 

them; because the people will not want to come and work here 

if they can be legislated for a fixed salary contract and it can be 

wiped out at the stroke of a pen by the people in this Assembly.  

I think that that is wrong.  I think you are wrong in doing that.  

As a matter of fact, then I would be able to say to all those 

people who have been employed in government on the other 

side of the House -- whether it's in hospitals, nurses, doctors, 

teachers -- why don't you put your salary on the line the same . 

. . your pension plans and your salaries on the line the same 

way that you're asking these civil servants to do that.  Why 

don't you put that on the line and just say what you really 

should be saying -- your pensions are gone.  That's the kind of 

thing you're doing to these individuals who are career civil 

servants in relation to the kinds of things you're doing here. 

 

And I want to add this too, Mr. Speaker, that we dealt with 

some of those problem areas as a part of the government 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

when we were there.  And did we come to this Legislative 

Assembly and ask the Legislative Assembly with 56 people, 

give that guy that severance and give that guy that one?  We 

never did.  We abided by the rules and the general practices 

established in this province in establishing the severances that 

those individuals got.  And they were done on the basis of a 

contract and negotiated and arbitrated on that basis. 

 

And if you bring that into the House, Mr. Speaker, it is going to 

be very, very difficult for you to achieve the purposes that you 

want to have, knowing and understanding that you are 

jeopardizing many, many other contracts.  I'm going to raise it; 

where are you going to stop in this business?  Where are you 

going to stop?  Are you going to stop at those deputies who 

didn't . . . you don't think work for you and do a good job for 

you?  Are you going to go to the next layer of administration 

and say, I'm going to get rid of those too?  Or go to the next 

layer of administration and say, I'm going to get rid of those 

too?  And how far do you go?  Do you go right down to the 

agents who are there in Crop Insurance and say, he didn't vote 

for me.  He didn't vote for me.  He didn't vote for me, so he's 

gone.  And is that what you're going to do?  Cause I'll tell you 

what, some of the back-benchers are laughing, but in 1971 you 

did exactly that. 

 

And then I want to point out that was wrong at that time.  And I 

think it's wrong today to think about that in relation to that.  

And I want to challenge you to be very careful what you do 

because I wonder if you have the constitutional right to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a couple of things about the 

decentralization.  I know it's been a discussion that has torn 

apart the city of Regina.  I know that it's been a discussion that 

has been felt across this province.  However, what I want to 

point out is not that discussion about whether it's good or bad.  

I want to point out some statements made by various people 

who are sitting on that side of the House. 

 

The member for Humboldt made some statements that are 

clearly not in keeping with the statements made by the 

administration of the government.  He said, we like it in 

Humboldt; we want to have it in Humboldt.  And what does he 

say now?  Oh, it's not bad; we can send it all back. 

 

What about the member from Kelsey-Tisdale, in Hudson Bay, 

for example?  The Premier, the now Premier, he said it was a 

good thing to do.  And if we as Conservatives say that they 

don't believe in it, he said this is not truth.  And there is a 

legislative word, a parliamentary word I can't use, and that's 

what he used.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the kinds of things that 

were said about that program.  It was said in Hudson Bay one 

way, in Regina another way. 

 

And I challenge the people in this province to acknowledge 

that the member from Melville, the member from Melville 

should just ask his whether he wants Crop Insurance moved out 

of Melville.  Ask the member from Swift Current, who's a 

friend of mine, whether he would like to have ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), with $2.5 

million of payroll in that community, moved out.  And that is 

the kinds of things that he, and others, should think about in 

this whole decentralization program. 

 

The next question, Mr. Speaker, is what we have to think 

about, is this: what are we going to do with those communities 

to maintain them if you're not going to do something that has 

some viability?  Are you going to say to Crown Life, go to 

Melville, or Moose Jaw, or to Rosetown?  No, you can't say 

that.  As a matter of fact, are you going to do something about 

Crown Life?  That's the question you've got to raise for 

yourself.  Are you going to allow an opportunity for 

community bonds to be used through Crown Life, and have the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan be able to invest in an 

opportunity for another insurance company.  That's the kind of 

things that we have to ask ourselves -- are you doing the right 

things? 

 

Now one of the things that consistently happened, Mr. Speaker, 

as a part of the discussion back and forth in relation to whether 

there should be more of this and more of that -- more nurses, 

more health care, more education, more of everything -- many 

times I can recall as clear as you can that the Finance minister 

stood in his chair and said there is no more money, you can't do 

it any more.  And then the member from the seat that used to be 

Saskatoon University would stand up and say, yes there is 

more, there is lots more opportunity for you; you just have to 

get rid of this or that or the other thing and then you can have 

all of the opportunity in the world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that we knew that there 

was tough, difficult times and the cupboard was bare.  We 

knew that.  We said that over and over again.  And we will 

continue to point that out, that that is exactly the way we 

handled the government and that's exactly what caused the 

problem. 

 

I want to just close by saying that it has been a privilege for me 

to serve in this Legislative Assembly.  I want to point out the 

other thing that is significant to me.  My family have been 

involved in government in one shape or form since about 1945.  

And I had an uncle who worked in this building, was the chief 

engineer, was a person who designed some of the rooms in 

here in the late . . . early fifties, and it became at that time very 

significant to me to be a part of this establishment. 

 

It was an honour and a privilege.  My uncle served as the 

director of construction within this building and for me it was a 

privilege to have him do that.  And so it became a privilege for 

me to stand in my place here as an individual who believes in 

public service and believes that it is an individual responsibility 

to maintain that in the best decorum possible. 

 

And it will be my intention, Mr. Speaker, to do a number of 

things as a member of the opposition.  It will be my intention to 

provide the best opposition that I can, and the most viable and 

the most credible.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is at times going to 

be reflecting negatively on the government and sometimes it'll 

reflect positively.  But, Mr. Speaker, it will be this member's 

responsibility to make sure that the Queen's business is 

honourably done.  I thank you for your time, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



92 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I merely rise to ask leave of the 

Assembly to introduce guests.  But thank you for the warm . . . 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, members.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my honour today and this evening to introduce to 

you, and through you to the members of this Assembly, 15 

scouts from my constituency, and their leaders, in your gallery.  

They come from the 86th scouting group in the north part of 

my constituency, and it's a real honour for me to introduce 

these particular people because I am an honorary member of 

the scouting movement in my constituency and I've always 

encouraged them to attend and learn more about government 

and how it operates. 

 

With the 15 scouts in your gallery, we have Laverne Moskal, 

Paul O'Donnell, Garth Robson, Bill Miller, and Dave Claypool 

are the names that I have here.  I'd ask all members to join with 

me in welcoming them here this evening.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, while I'm on my feet I'd like to 

introduce as well two other very young members of the 

province of Saskatchewan, residents, in the gallery as well.  My 

son, Matthew, is up there who's seven years of age and he has 

his friend, Chris Braden.  So I'd ask them to ask members to 

welcome them here as well.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to welcome 

these young men from the scouting movement.  If you're ever 

down in the south-west and you want a good place to camp, 

Thompson Scout Camp is right on my land.  If you want to 

come down there and visit, they have excellent facilities there.  

It's part of the great south-west, and you'd be very welcome to 

attend, and I would just welcome you here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker and fellow members of the 

legislature, I'm pleased to stand today to offer my comments in 

response to the Speech from the Throne.  The throne speech 

has outlined new priorities of a government I'm very pleased to 

support.  This speech marks the first steps our government will 

be taking to put the province back on the road to economic and 

social prosperity. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, our government has outlined a series 

of proposals that will be undertaken during this first, short 

session of the legislature.  Perhaps the most important step 

taken by our government will be the democratic reforms that 

we are committed to implement.  These reforms are 

fundamental and represent our desire to bring government 

closer to the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your presence is symbolic of the changes we wish 

to embrace.  You have served this province in many ways over 

the past years: as a member of the legislature, a minister of the 

Crown, and now as the second democratically elected Speaker 

of the Legislative Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, I have every 

confidence that you will represent this Assembly well and will 

further the reforms that are necessary to make the people of this 

province key players in our legislative process. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, politicians have fallen from favour 

with many of the people of this province over the past decade.  

Politicians have become synonymous with patronage, 

nepotism, and a secret government that is not open to ordinary 

people of our province.  I trust that you will act to restore a 

degree of decorum and respectability to this Assembly, and by 

so doing will play a pivotal role in keeping our government in 

touch with the interests and aspirations of our constituents. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Historically our legislature has served the people 

as an institution that was a vehicle for economic and social 

change.  It was a means for people to put their ideas into 

actions.  However, over the past decade it has increasingly 

been seen to thwart the interests of ordinary Saskatchewan 

people.  I have every faith, Mr. Speaker, that with you now, not 

only symbolically but directly responsible to this Assembly, we 

will begin the process of restoring honesty, integrity, and 

competence to the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2000) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I join with you and other members of 

the legislature in working towards this common goal.  I'm 

convinced that through a renewed process of democratic 

reform and open government, that we will be more 

accountable, more accessible, and more in touch with the wants 

and needs of our constituents.  I believe that my commitment to 

these objectives is reflected in my election to this office by the 

people of the Kinistino constituency. 

 

M. le Prsident, je voudrais dire quelques mots dans ma langue 

maternelle.  C'est trs important pour moi d'tre capable de 

m'exprimer franchement et honntement parce que pour moi il 

y a des activits qui sont trs proches de mon coeur. 

 

Premirement je te flicite sur ton acclamation pour la position 

de Prsident.  Comme le nouveau gouvernement 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

de la Saskatchewan on a parl beaucoup des rformes 

dmocratiques et je suis trs fier que ta position est un symbole 

de les rformes dmocratiques qu'on veut instituer dans la 

lgislature dans le futur. 

 

M. le Prsident, mes chers collgues, les membres de 

l'opposition, a me donne un grand plaisir d'tre debout ici 

aujourd'hui dans cette Chambre comme dput pour la 

circonscription de Kinistino.  Je voudrais vous parler un peu de 

les raisons pourquoi j'ai dcid de courir comme dput. 

 

Dans mes yeux depuis 1982 on a vu les priorits dans ce 

province ici toutes mlanges et toutes malplaces.  Comme un 

fermier et un homme d'une petite affaire a me faisait mal de 

voir que des grosses socits comme Cargill et Weyerhaeuser 

taient favorises par le gouvernement oppos. 

 

On a vu, M. le Prsident, une compagnie comme Weyerhaeuser 

qui a t subvente sur les taux d'intrts  huit et demi 

pourcent.  Et galement, M. le Prsident, on avait des petites 

affaires des hommes et des femmes de commerce qui . . . 

(inaudible) . . . C'est une priorit toute mlange. 

 

M. le Prsident, c'est trs important aussi de ramener 

l'conomie mixte dans la province.  Puis quand je parle de 

l'conomie mixte je parle de les lments comme les activits 

dans l'conomie comme les activits prives, publiques, et 

aussi cooperatives.  C'est trs important de ramener a, M. le 

Prsident. 

 

Mais je veux aussi ajouter que c'est trs important pour moi 

dans la Saskatchewan d'tre la voix pour les francophones dans 

la lgislature de la Saskatchewan. 

 

(Translation:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in 

my mother tongue.  It is very important for me to be able to 

express myself frankly and honestly because for me there are 

activities which are near to my heart. 

 

First of all, I want to congratulate you on your acclamation as 

Speaker of this legislature.  As the new government of 

Saskatchewan, we have spoken a great deal about democratic 

reforms and I am very proud that your position is a symbol of 

the democratic reforms we hope to achieve in the legislature in 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my dear colleagues, and members of the 

opposition, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to be standing 

here today in this Chamber as MLA for the Kinistino 

constituency.  I would like to speak briefly about the reasons 

why I let my name stand as MLA. 

 

In my view, since 1982 we have seen mixed-up and misplaced 

priorities in this province.  As a farmer and a small-business 

man, it hurt me to see that the government was giving 

companies like Cargill and Weyerhaeuser preferential 

treatment.  We saw, Mr. Speaker, a company like 

Weyerhaeuser getting interest rates of eight and a half per cent 

and on the other hand small-business people who . . . 

(inaudible) . . . It's a priority that's all mixed up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's also very important to revive the 

small-business sector in this province.  And when I speak 

of the small-business sector, I speak of private, public, and 

co-operative elements.  It's very important to revive that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would also add that it's very important for me, in 

Saskatchewan, to be the voice for francophones in the 

Saskatchewan legislature.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, Kinistino constituency is a vast 

constituency.  It emcompasses some 2,400 square miles.  This 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, was an area where immigrants of 

many countries came to live.  They settled and have coexisted 

with Indian and Metis people for generations.  They have 

continued to share a common history, a history that is far from 

dull and listless.  The history of the constituency as a centre of 

politics in the province sends roots deeper than those of the 

province itself. 

 

It was in this area that some of the most interesting parts of 

Canadian history have occurred.  In 1885 at Batoche, the 

North-West Rebellion broke out.  It was a rebellion that is 

renowned across Canada.  The issues of race, religion, and the 

authority of Ottawa were central to the politics of the region 

and the rebellion, and have helped to shape this province's 

destiny.  Today we are less divided than we were in 1885.  

However, you will find that the hearty spirit of Saskatchewan 

politics continues to live on in this constituency. 

 

Today we are a constituency of farmers and small-business 

people, working people and the unemployed, young people and 

seniors.  We're made up of the two founding people of Canada.  

There are also many Ukrainian, German, Indian, and Metis 

people.  We border the cities of Saskatoon and Prince Albert, 

yet our major communities are neither of these.  Rather our 

activities centre around the communities of Cudworth, Wakaw, 

Birch Hills, St. Louis, Aberdeen, and of course, Kinistino. 

 

Like many people in rural Saskatchewan, we see that our 

communities are being threatened by depopulation and a tough 

economy.  High levels of taxation, heavy debt loads, and low 

prices for our commodities have affected us all.  As a candidate 

in this last election it was brought right to my door -- the 

problems we faced because of the economic malaise in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to define more clearly what rural 

Saskatchewan is going to look like in the future.  We need to 

lay out a plan and we need to strive towards that plan.  As a 

farmer and a small-business man I see the impact the past nine 

and a half years have had on our communities, our businesses, 

and our families. 

 

I ran for a seat in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, because I 

wanted to make a difference.  I believe the people of the 

Kinistino elected me because they wanted a new fresh 

approach, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I want you to know that I believe 

  



94 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

the best way we can bring harmony to the people of this 

province, to heal the wounds of the past nine and a half years, 

is to provide real economic opportunities for the ordinary 

people of Saskatchewan.  Nine and a half years of division, 

misplaced priorities, and lost opportunities is too much. 

 

Let me outline to you what the people of Kinistino are telling 

me they need.  They tell me that we need stability in 

agriculture.  I agree that we must work to restore the strength of 

the agricultural economy.  We need to foster a diversified 

agricultural economy that will keep families on the farm.  But 

we also need to be cognizant of the fact that any strong 

economy must be competitive in the world.  In order to do this 

we need a level playing-field.  We need a means to transfer 

land from one generation to the other.  We need a fair price for 

our products.  And we need a federal government that is 

willing to commit itself and work with the Saskatchewan 

government and farm families to protect the future of 

agriculture in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I know that GRIP must be changed.  

It must better reflect the costs of production of today's farmers.  

I am pleased to support this initiative by our government.  

Farmers need to be included in the process.  I am pleased that 

the Premier invited ordinary farmers and farm families to 

accompany him on the trek to Ottawa.  It was not only 

symbolic, but indicative of a new style of open government and 

participation. 

 

In the past, politicians who portrayed themselves as having a 

great deal of knowledge of farming have been the ones to state 

our case.  The result was a game of politics involving the farm 

gate and farm families.  Our government has provided a vehicle 

for the ordinary farmers to state their case to Ottawa directly.  

We know that the strongest voice is that of the individual farm 

family.  Our government is committed to ensuring that 

individual farm families will always be consulted and involved 

in the decisions that affect their lives. 

 

In addition to agriculture, the help of small business is central 

to the well-being of rural Saskatchewan, and Kinistino.  

Two-income families and off-farm income are growing in 

importance to the sustainability of rural families.  As such it is 

important that we provide a level playing-field for the 

businesses that employ the members of many farm families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you, as evidence, there was a study 

done in 1989 by the Federation of Independent Business which 

indicated that 80 per cent of all the new jobs that were created 

between 1982 to 1989 were created by small-business people 

who employed five employees or less.  Mr. Speaker, small 

business is going to have to be a main ingredient in the 

economic recovery of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- One of the misplaced priorities I have seen since 

1982 is the emphasis of the previous government on putting 

megadollars into megaprojects.  The 

Weyerhaeuser and Cargills were getting special deals.  It is 

especially noteworthy that Weyerhaeuser got an interest rate 

subsidized to a level of 8.5 per cent while the previous 

government was weakening the only small business support 

program, the small business interest rate reduction program.  

Eventually they eliminated it completely, Mr. Speaker.  That 

was unwarranted and shows where their priorities were. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- The interests of family businesses must be, and 

are, the interests of this government.  I'm pleased that in this 

session we will vote to repeal the PST (provincial sales tax) 

imposed by the former government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- The PST, Mr. Speaker, was yet another attack on 

small businesses of Saskatchewan.  It was a tax that would 

have cost our economy as many as 7,500 jobs and would have 

cost the people of this province nearly $400 million a year.  

And I tell you when I went during the election in Main Street, 

Cudworth and Main Street, Wakaw, Saskatchewan, people 

were telling me, we cannot take another $400 million out of 

this economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- It is almost contemptible that this particular tax 

strikes hardest at the lower income families of our province.  

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to ensure 

that no such tax is ever going to be reintroduced.  We believe 

that by removing the PST we will provide a much needed shot 

in the arm to local businesses of all types throughout the 

province, but particularly in the rural areas of this province.  It 

is important for us to put business on a level playing-field to 

stop the leakage of money from our local economies.  We do 

not need the PST adding to the worries of small business 

already accompanying the low prices and cash squeeze of the 

farm economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to briefly talk about Indian and Metis 

people in the Kinistino constituency.  I'm happy to say that 

reforms that we have already introduced will help Indian 

people to become more secure and fulfil some of their roles 

they should play in our society.  We have introduced important 

steps such as helping in family issues.  I'm pleased that we will 

continue to encourage co-operation with Indian and Metis 

people in determining issues that affect their destiny, and I look 

forward to working with Indian and Metis leaders in my 

constituency to begin resolving some of the long-standing 

problems that face them. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to stress the sense of 

privilege I feel to be taking my seat in this legislature at such 

an exciting and challenging time in Saskatchewan's history.  

This historic surrounding has housed many of the great debates 

that have shaped this province and our country.  It has stood for 

generations as a symbol of what our people can do in 

co-operation with each other.  Although it has been sullied 

some over the past decade, I hope that I can lend a hand in 

restoring this important democratic institution and the fine 

traditions it is known for.  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

I hope that I live up to the standards, Mr. Speaker, of honesty, 

integrity, and competence that is demanded by our generation, 

and in so doing help to pass it on to the next.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker.  Merci, M. le Prsident. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of the 

constituents of Yorkton, I wish to take this opportunity to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker of this Assembly.  

Throughout the years I have had the privilege of working with 

you as a caucus colleague and serving as an employee in your 

government many years ago.  And I know that you hold the 

high regard and principles and virtues of fairness, respect, and 

order.  And accordingly, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to serve 

in this House with you as our Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, it is truly an honour and a pleasure to rise 

and speak in this Assembly as a new member representing the 

constituency of Yorkton.  Mr. Speaker, at this time I wish to 

take the opportunity to thank the people of my constituency, 

Yorkton, for their overwhelming support and confidence in me.  

I am deeply moved by the trust they have shown me and I look 

forward to representing them with the same spirit and 

enthusiasm that they sent me to this legislature and Assembly 

with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to congratulate all 

the members who have been elected to this Assembly or 

re-elected to this Assembly. 

 

To my Ukrainian friends in Saskatchewan and across the 

province: 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- (The hon. member continued to speak for a time 

in Ukrainian.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, to my Ukrainian friends and constituents in 

Yorkton and across Saskatchewan, I thank you very dearly 

from my heart for your support. 

 

Today we are in the kind of times where we must work 

together like brothers and sisters, like family and community.  

And that is the way that we can build a better life.  Today I ask 

you for your support for our government so that we can build a 

strong province and strong cultures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the boundaries of the city of Yorkton is my 

constituency, known as the Promise of the Parkland.  

Approximately five years ago we were known as the 

Treasure-Chest City.  Now I can't say for sure, Mr. Speaker, 

why the change, but within the past nine and a half years our 

city has gone from treasure to promise, which is identical to 

what happened to this province.  A population of over 16,000, 

we are a regional centre to many government and public 

services and are 

 strategically located, accessed by five highway networks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are rich in culture and heritage in Yorkton, 

and we are the home of the International Film Festival. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, in Monday's Speech from the 

Throne the initiatives and mood spoke clearly to the tone of the 

electorate's decision of just one month ago.  In my address 

today, Mr. Speaker, it is my goal to relate the situation of my 

constituency and how it fits and meshes into the global picture 

of community which is Saskatchewan, and how past and future 

policies of government will affect and have affected us, and 

how, Mr. Speaker, we, as one constituency and one region, can 

play a part in the new restoration of Saskatchewan and the new 

development plan. 

 

The central theme, Mr. Speaker, of our election campaign was 

to open the books, because in this province, Mr. Speaker, small 

business and farmers and labourers, the poor and the 

unemployed, harmoniously echoed that we had too much 

waste, too much mismanagement and too much patronage, and 

a lack of direction by the previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Within just one month, Mr. Speaker, our 

government has selected a very capable and respected team to 

undertake the magnanimous task of sorting out where the 

money has gone -- with the findings of this commission to the 

public an open, accountable and fully disclosed process which, 

Mr. Speaker, will be the trademark of our government.  Mr. 

Speaker, that trademark has been seriously lacking and sadly 

lacking by the previous administration of the Tories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the constituents of the city of Yorkton are 

applauding the time frame under which our Finance minister 

has established our government's commission and in the time 

frame that he expects to have the commission reporting back to 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we are uncovering from the reviews of the 

Crown corporations and the government departments the many, 

many sweetheart deals that the people of Saskatchewan were 

talking about and that were supporting by their tax dollars and 

the sell-off of many of our Crown corporations -- employment 

contracts, rental agreements, and severance packages that, in 

my mind, border on being criminal and certainly immoral. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Coming at a time, Mr. Speaker, when we're 

faced with the highest level of unemployment, food banks, and 

hungry kids in the history of this province, this kind of 

mentality of freewheeling practice of government must be 

ended.  And I will be advocating and supporting any legislation 

that comes before this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 

these kinds of practices as occurred under the Tory government 

never occur again, 

  



96 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

and that we build in the mechanisms to protect the people of 

Saskatchewan from this type of abuse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during this session our government will be 

formally concluding the business of repealing the expanded 

and harmonization of the provincial sales tax.  This decision, 

Mr. Speaker, has been applauded and supported in the majority 

by small business and consumers in my constituency and 

across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- From our constituency alone, Mr. Speaker, upon 

the introduction of the unfair tax by the Tory government, we 

submitted thousands of names requesting and pleading not to 

introduce this tax.  And it was true, Mr. Speaker, that we have 

names on those petitions not from Yorkton alone, but from 

Kamsack and Canora and from Esterhazy and Sturgis because 

Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, is central to the trading area of nearly 

100 miles radius around our city.  And, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton 

is the third largest trading area in this province.  And we might 

even be second if Saskatoon and Regina could ever figure out 

which one of them were first. 

 

The small business in the city of Yorkton, particularly those in 

the restaurant and clothing businesses of which our city is 

blessed with, were afraid of their livelihoods of which many 

are long-standing family businesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the city of Yorkton, today more than ever, 

depends on our small business.  And the legislation to repeal 

this unfair tax of the previous administration provides a revived 

lease of hope for many of the retail and restaurant owners in 

our constituency. 

 

There is absolutely no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that since the 

election of October 21, whereby the Premier announced an end 

to the collection of the PST, we have saved, in Yorkton, small 

business from closing their doors.  We have saved some jobs in 

our community.  We have witnessed a growth in consumer 

spending and we have seen a reduction of some of the 

cross-border shopping to the south.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 

have seen a return of our Manitoba shopper to our city. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, the repeal of the tax could not 

occur soon enough.  And it will be viewed and remembered as 

one of the most unfair and unnecessary tax grabs by the 

previous government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Monday's Speech from the Throne we will be 

asked to vote supply on the estimate provided to this House on 

April 1, 1991 by the previous administration.  In doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, this will now bring the 1991 deficit up from 265 

million to nearly a billion dollars and an additional burden to 

the already staggering provincial debt accumulated in just nine 

and a half years of Tory government.  Mr. Speaker, when I hear 

and see the reckless abandonment of the previous Tory 

government's spending habits which are being uncovered and 

exposed daily, by the Hong Kong office rental of $1,800 per 

month, executive salaries to board chairmen starting and 

exceeding well into the hundreds 

of thousands of dollars, and severance packages which are in 

the millions of dollars, it appals me.  When I look at what we 

could have done in Yorkton if we had just had a portion of that 

annual allocation, Mr. Speaker, the picture for Yorkton would 

look somewhat different. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in the past year it was necessary for 

us to close 20 regional hospital beds.  And we are one of the 

highest of seven regional hospitals in the province with an 

urban senior population of over 20 per cent.  And we serve a 

geographic population of over 90,000 people through one 

centre. 

 

In 1982 we lost nearly 60 beds.  Since 1982, Mr. Speaker, we 

lost nearly 60 beds.  And we lost nearly the same number of 

employees who have now left the province and are living 

elsewhere.  I know this firsthand, Mr. Speaker, because I sat on 

that hospital board for six years and tried to impact the 

decisions that were made by the previous government. 

 

But more significant to this, Mr. Speaker, is just last Monday in 

our hospital nine people were laying in our emergency 

department because we had no bed space -- and these were not 

just folks from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker.  There was not enough 

money for sick people and jobs in the previous government.  

But we had enough money for high-cost office space and 

inflated executive salaries.  What a series of ill-fated priorities, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As I scan my constituency, Mr. Speaker, those misguided 

priorities are visible in other sectors.  In 1982, Mr. Speaker, in 

the city of Yorkton, we saw the closure of three schools which 

had created an increase to the teacher/student ratio because the 

school boards were faced with cutting back on 11 teaching 

positions.  Today, Mr. Speaker, our school boards are just 

coping in an attempt to manage the problems that are 

precipitated by those kinds of decisions, especially when our 

enrolments have not been proportionally reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, decisions were made, however, in concert with an 

overall integrated plan which included a new facility for a city 

because it encompassed the regional philosophy to educational 

service delivery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that these three school boards, and 

parents, and ratepayers of our city and district, that this new 

billion dollar deficit of the previous administration has not 

jeopardized in any serious fashion the long-term goals and 

collective work of our comprehensive and innovative 

undertaking, because in our city these school boards have come 

as close to achieving the true spirit of co-operation and 

integration and community as can be exemplified, and they can 

do little else without affecting the quality and standard of 

education for the young people in our centre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this deteriorated financial position of our 

province, which was guided by the mismanagement model of 

the previous administration, has created additional hardship 

and hamstrung the work of our urban municipality, while 

during the same period, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of this 

province have had to cope with increased taxes. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

As an example, having sat as an alderman on the city council of 

Yorkton, we have witnessed in 10 years the elimination of the 

capital grants program.  To the urban municipality of Yorkton 

this works out to approximately $750,000.  In the current 

budget year, the city of Yorkton saw a revenue sharing grant 

reduced by approximately $65,000.  And, Mr. Speaker, in 1990 

and 1991 the city of Yorkton lost its per capita transportation 

grant of approximately $46,000. 

 

At the same time, the city has needed to absorb the increased 

costs of the power utility, telephone costs, the GST (goods and 

services tax).  Mr. Speaker, in 1991 when the city council of 

Yorkton reviewed our budget Estimates, we were in a deficit of 

nearly 3 mills and we hadn't even begun the budgeting process 

including all of our priorities.  And that picture didn't brighten 

any even though the previous minister tried on two occasions 

to enlighten the picture with his press budget speech and then 

his depressed budget speech in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, in the urban municipality of 

Yorkton and across this province we have city councils that 

remain optimistic and committed to maintaining the essential 

services for our residents, visitors, and our patrons.  The shifted 

burden of responsibilities to the urban municipalities -- a 

critical issue for our government -- that shift, Mr. Speaker, lies 

clearly on the reckless spending habits of the Tory government 

during the past nine and a half years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the strength and the future of the province 

depends a great deal on our relationship and partnership with 

our urban and rural decision and policy makers.  The city 

council of Yorkton is a major urban centre in east-central 

Saskatchewan, along with the chamber of commerce and our 

economic development commission, have made their 

commitment to work with our government in strategizing and 

planning and dialoguing in order to turn the depressed financial 

position of this province around, because our government 

believes in working with people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an urban member elected to this Assembly, I 

want to state that my boots are still deeply planted on the farm.  

The future and vibrancy of my constituency, and I believe this 

province, depends significantly upon the stability and strength 

of the agricultural sector.  Mr. Speaker, in the weeks since the 

election and as the government in transition, my constituents 

are encouraged and optimistic by the government's action and 

response to the farm rallies and with our trek to Ottawa. 

 

The message that Saskatchewan people are telling me is that 

our government is committed and has a focus in attempting to 

ensure that the Saskatchewan farm families and industry are 

protected and that our government is sincerely committed to 

seeing farmers becoming self-supporting and -sufficient.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, when our Premier goes to Ottawa and sits 

down at the negotiating table with the Prime Minister, he's not 

the 

servant, Mr. Speaker, he's the main course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, in my constituency of Yorkton we 

had two of the largest agricultural manufacturing industries in 

the province, if not in Canada, in the Morris Rod-Weeder 

Company and the Leon Manufacturing Company. 

 

At one time, Mr. Speaker, not more than five years ago, these 

companies employed in the neighbourhood of 700 and 400 

people respectively, who in the majority lived in our city and in 

the surrounding communities.  Today these companies, even 

with some diversification, have had to reduce their work-force 

and operations to the point where they are questioning their 

ability to compete in the industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the effect of their reductions and cut-backs have 

been devastating to the economy of our community and this 

province.  Today our economic development commission in 

Yorkton is working closely with those companies and I know 

that with the co-operation and the attitude and focus our 

government has towards job creation and agriculture, 

meaningful gains and strategies will be achieved in 

rejuvenating the agricultural industries not only in our 

community but across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an urban elected MLA, I want to state that 

more than ever, we must focus as a government on helping the 

Saskatchewan farmers get a fair and immediate return for the 

commodities they provide. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- I know that our government will continue to 

build and maintain the relationship with Ottawa as we have 

started, so that farm support programs like GRIP can be 

reworked, redesigned as a future support program as they're 

required. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, our Premier and our Minister of Agriculture, 

in concert with the federal government, are keeping their 

fingers on the pulse of the international trade markets and 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), because, 

Mr. Speaker, when the agricultural sector of our province is 

humming, so are the folks of Yorkton and, I would suggest, the 

rest of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my city council is pleased to hear of our 

government's expedience in introducing legislation respecting 

the ward system.  This issue has been strongly supported and 

advocated at SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association) conventions from the time it was discarded by the 

previous administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the return of the ward system in 

communities over 100,000, urban ratepayers will be assured of 

stronger and more accessible representation for their areas.  

Furthermore, the municipal elections process will become more 

orderly and less cumbersome for the voter and the 

administration of elections. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that our government will ensure  



98 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

 that in the future a municipal and a provincial election will 

never occur at the same time, as in this province we just 

completed, because the process confuses the public, creates all 

sorts of administration difficulties, and eliminates capable men 

and women from participating in the democratic process of 

running for office to municipal governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a political strategy that thwarts the people's rights 

and privileges must be changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to 

the principles of democracy to ensure that all people of 

Saskatchewan have a voice to this Assembly.  I support the 

forthcoming legislation of by-elections occurring within six 

months of a vacancy.  In this province we had several 

constituencies that had been left unrepresented in this 

legislature for months, as the previous premier awaited an 

appropriate political climate.  This was a blatant abuse of the 

rights and privileges of the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government intends to introduce legislation 

on developing a comprehensive code of ethics and conflict of 

interest guide-lines.  And this is the type of signal, Mr. 

Speaker, that my constituents and the people of this province 

have been waiting for.  Included in this package are guide-lines 

for elected representatives and senior public servants.  Mr. 

Speaker, if there was one single issue in my constituency that 

motivated people to get involved in the election of '91, it was 

the fact that our government would be bringing in fair and 

responsible hiring practices to the public service. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- The people of this province had lost confidence 

in the political process and our political system.  When I 

campaigned at the door on the issues of honesty and integrity 

and accountability, people said that we politicians were all the 

same.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we're not all the same.  I'm not all 

the same and our government's not the same.  I know that we're 

committed to building a team, participatory democracy, 

honesty, and integrity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- And that's the measure my constituents sent me 

to this Assembly with.  And, Mr. Speaker, that will be the 

yardstick that they will measure me by.  Because that's exactly 

the criteria that the previous administration was measured on, 

and the people, Mr. Speaker, were right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Yorkton the spirit of 

community, co-operation, and commitment are well understood 

and practised.  Because for the past 10 years we survived as a 

community only because of those intrinsic characteristics and 

values that the people of Yorkton and Saskatchewan have and 

hold. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Yorkton are committed to the 

philosophy of community.  And as their representative in this 

government Assembly, we acknowledge and accept the 

challenges that face us.  We know they won't be easy. 

But my constituents believe as I do, that collectively, 

rationally, and co-operatively, we will over time reduce and 

eliminate the social ills of poverty and hunger, create jobs, 

manage and reduce the debt, and bring about a quality of life 

and prosperity in this province that we were once accustomed 

to. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, may I have leave to introduce a 

guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I would like to introduce a constituent of mine.  

He's sitting on the government visitors' gallery.  He is Mr. 

Terry Crush from Lone Rock, Saskatchewan.  Mr. Crush has 

been working on surface rights for many years.  He's one of the 

most knowledgeable people on surface rights, and I welcome 

him to this Assembly and I'm proud to have him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me great 

pleasure to participate in this debate, and like other members, 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to begin by congratulating you on your 

election.  Of course historically, the head of the Speaker has 

not always been square on his shoulders and I'm sure you know 

that, but I have every confidence that you can keep yours on 

even in this Assembly.  Also I'd like to congratulate all the 

members of the legislature in their victory on October 21. 

 

I'm very pleased to rise and participate in this debate because 

it's my first opportunity to thank the constituents of Melville 

for placing their faith in me.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, I can 

also claim a first in this legislature.  I believe I'm the first half 

of a brother team to be a member of the Legislative Assembly 

and my brother, Irving . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- . . . was a member of this Assembly from 1971 

to 1975, and I'm honoured to follow in his footsteps. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Melville has a great community and a long 

history and varied history.  It is the home of the Millionaires, a 

training ground for many, many hockey greats:  Eddie Shore, 

John Ferguson, and of course, Syd Able, who played on that 

famous line with Ted Lindsey and Gordie Howe.  And the 

tradition continues today, Mr. Speaker, with Tim Cheveldae, 

Detroit Red Wings number one goal-tender. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

As well, Mr. Speaker, Melville is a railroad town.  It takes 

much of its character from the railroad tradition.  Our name 

comes from Charles Melville Hayes, who was president of the 

Grand Trunk Pacific, who drowned in the sinking of the Titanic 

in 1912. 

 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the city of Melville is only a highlight 

of the constituency and in this day of rationalization and 

centralization we look to other major centres for cultural and 

economic definition.  But in Saskatchewan there is still a 

variety and vitality away from our cities. 

 

Melville constituency has many distinct villages and towns 

within its boundaries.  Each town has its own flavour.  Grayson 

is strongly German; Balcarres and Abernethy are 

predominantly English; Ituna is Ukrainian, and north of 

Melville, Mr. Speaker, where I come from, is a mixture of 

Hungarian and people of Swedish backgrounds.  The people in 

these communities are proud of their separate heritage and 

determined to maintain their distinctiveness.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, they are very proud to be Canadians. 

 

I have saved for the last the first, Mr. Speaker.  Also within the 

constituency of Melville are the File Hills Reserves of 

Peepeekisis, Star Blanket, Okanese and Little Black Bear.  

Historically the full riches of the aboriginal community has 

been lost in the great waves of immigration which has swept 

this country and province.  Canada's first people have been 

denied their rights within society.  And we as well as they have 

suffered because of this apartheid. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- The people of File Hills, Mr. Speaker, have 

been innovators in education and economic programs to enrich 

their lives, but there are still many barriers to be torn down.  In 

defining and building a relationship for the future, I hope that 

we can establish a process that is inclusive and co-operative. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the beginning of a new government should be a 

time for optimism.  The people have spoken for change and 

this government is pledged to deliver, to change for the better.  

But our work is cut out for us in the days and months ahead.  

New programs, new ideas, new policies will certainly come, 

but I feel our first challenge is to restore the spirit of the 

people. 

 

In the past few years I have been . . . seen an alarming change 

in my community.  Saskatchewan men and women have 

always been rugged and self-reliant, and despite great odds, 

they have been optimistic.  We built our communities and our 

farms and churches on sheer determination and effort -- a 

co-operative effort. 

 

During the 1980s we saw that tradition abandoned.  New word, 

ugly words, come into the language: Thatcherism, Reaganism, 

Mulroneyism.  Co-operation became a dirty word, compassion 

forgotten.  Individualism was in and a cut-throat competition 

was the rule of the day.  The results that we know have been 

disastrous.  People have suffered 

economically.  They have suffered in ways deeper than that.  I 

have seen the effects in the Melville constituency, Mr. Speaker, 

and I would wish to share some of these stories with you. 

 

I met a constituent during the campaign who was working on 

putting her garden into preserves.  When I asked her how her 

garden was, she started to cry and told me that she had a 

difficult time looking after it because she was sick.  Then she 

informed me that she'd had a nervous breakdown because she's 

going to be going on mandatory retirement this fall, and when 

she checked into her pension she realized that she was going to 

be retiring into poverty and this was quite a strain on her. 

 

Another family who have two students in university, 

financially were able to look after when their first child left to 

go to post-secondary education.  But when the second child left 

last year, this family, who by their own admission is making a 

good income, felt that when they had to take a second 

mortgage on their house, they were able to do that, they had the 

finances.  And they felt that education in Saskatchewan in the 

'90s are based not on the capabilities of the child but more on 

the thickness of the parent's wallet.  And they felt they had that 

opportunity but they didn't know how less fortunate people 

would be able to cope with that. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I run across an individual who had been 

injured at work a few years back and had not received a nickel 

out of workers' compensation.  And this person was really 

perturbed because the previous government during the 

campaign, the government of the day, was talking about the 

money saved in workers' compensation.  And this individual 

saw that as a direct result on him and the rest of the workers in 

the province who they'd short-changed on compensation and 

had not received any money from it. 

 

Another person was telling me . . . This person was on pension 

and she was always able to, on a monthly basis, put a little bit 

of money away for unforeseen expenses.  But in the last couple 

years with high taxes and in 1991 the GST and the PST, she 

was unable to put any money away on a monthly basis to have 

as a war chest to make major purchases if an appliance broke 

down.  When her fridge broke down this summer, Mr. Speaker, 

she had to rely on her children to make that purchase of that 

fridge for her, and she felt very distressed and hurt also. 

 

Having given you a brief view of the Melville constituency and 

some of the problems within it, I would like to point out what 

is likely the dominant feature of the Melville constituency and 

which is most rural constituencies in the province of 

Saskatchewan and that is agriculture. 

 

Agriculture has always been susceptible to the greed of the 

open market.  We have tried to modify and take the abuse out 

of the system.  On our farms we built shelter-belts to protect us 

against the ravages of nature.  In our industry we designed our 

own kind of shelter-belts: the Canadian Wheat Board and the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. 

 

Our intent was to buffer ourselves and our industry and 

  



100 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

our producers.  The worth of these structures is evident.  

Canadian agriculture has enjoyed the respect of other nations. 

 

Our vision for this industry has now collided with a 

neo-Conservative corporate agenda that has over the past 20 

years increasingly devastated a progressive and fair system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- This agenda is attempting to weaken and 

outright destroy our institutions, and it is going after the 

individual farmer as well.  In 1969 the federal government 

released its report on agriculture.  This report, Mr. Speaker, 

fundamentally changed the policy direction for agriculture.  It 

clearly stated that two-thirds of farmers would be eliminated. 

 

In 1989, Mr. Speaker, the federal government released its own 

paper called Growing Together, which reiterated the 1969 

goals of the federal report on agriculture.  And we all 

remember the former premier's statement that 50 per cent of 

non-productive farmers should be eliminated. 

 

The strategy for agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is subtle.  Through a 

systematic, uncaring, wrongly directed . . . politicians were 

determining the fate of Saskatchewan women and men.  The 

Devine government chose to place its faith in such politicians 

to the obvious detriment of this province.  And the former 

premier said, you're doing a great job, Brian. 

 

The industry envisioned by the former premier is one of 

environmental, economic, and social disaster.  The 

consequences were ably described by the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood.  I would add for your consideration, 

when we cite figures showing the decline from 1981 to present 

day of farmers, we must remember that those figures only tell 

part of the story.  Farmers have spouses and they have families.  

If we imagine that nearly 10,000 farmers and consider the 

additional losses -- the families -- we must see that figure 

greatly increased.  Did we lose perhaps not 10,000, but more 

likely 35 or 40,000 off our farms? 

 

Also, we must consider our towns and villages rely on farmers.  

Businesses, services, schools, churches rely on farmers.  

Without the agriculture industry and the producers, we lose 

much of our reason for being.  We are still very much a 

resource-based economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are resourceful.  It is 

with great optimism that I stand here before the Assembly 

tonight.  We have suffered greatly.  We have faced great 

difficulties.  Many of our problems are man-made.  We have 

the capacity now to put an end to destructive policies.  We have 

the opportunity now to replace them with the policies that will 

economically, environmentally and be socially beneficial. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Mr. Speaker, we saw in the days past an 

initiative that was brought together . . . brought together 

government leaders, parties, farm leaders and ordinary 

people.  They came from across the Prairies in order to, with a 

united voice, carry their message to the politicians in Ottawa.  

They demand change.  It was a first step but a necessary step.  

People acted; they were refusing to be acted upon.  I think this 

initiative is very significant. 

 

Early I described the sense of despair I found.  The crisis that 

led to the despair is still with us, Mr. Speaker, but if the crisis is 

still here the will to overcome it has to be strengthened. 

 

We have been mandated to rebuild this province and I believe 

we will do just that.  I believe we will have to be sensitive to 

more than just politics; we must be sensitive to the process.  

We have only to look at our history and our recent past and see 

the damage of bad process and bad politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm optimistic and I look forward to carrying out 

the responsibilities of this government.  I thank you for the 

opportunity to participate in this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member from Kinistino on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to introduce a guest to the 

House. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure, through 

you, and to you and other members of the legislature, to 

introduce a constituent of mine, Mr. Morris Werezak from Fish 

Creek.  He's a farmer out in that corner of the country, a great 

friend of mine.  I would ask other members of the legislature to 

offer greetings to Morris.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Speaker: -- Why is the member from Maple Creek on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I would beg leave, Mr. Speaker, of you to 

introduce a member of our constituency. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, and Assembly, it gives me great 

pleasure this evening to introduce Bill Kruczko, a fine man 

from the Maple Creek constituency.  Bill has worked hard for 

many, many years over in our area.  He's the president of the 

Cypress surface rights association.  He and his colleagues are 

presently journeying on their way to Estevan for an annual 

meeting and we are happy to welcome him to our city.  And I 

would ask that all of you would welcome him with me. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, sir, hon. members of this distinguished Assembly, 

it gives me great pleasure to address my maiden speech to you 

as the newly elected member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

constituency. 
 

First allow me to congratulate you, sir, on your election as 

Speaker of this House, and I wish you success of it.  My first 

contact with you, sir, was when I represented 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg district medical association on 

Saskatchewan Medical Association representative assembly, 

and you, sir, were the minister of Health.  I cannot say that the 

New Democratic Party was the most favoured political party of 

Saskatchewan doctors at that time.  However, I can say with all 

honesty that your fairness and integrity were well recognized 

and respected, and I know that I can add their congratulations 

to my own. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Draper: -- Let me also congratulate the other members of 

this House on their election or re-election and wish them all 

success in this House.  I have been very impressed by the 

quality and content of the speeches over the past two or three 

days.  So many good ideas, and so well expressed.  It makes 

me feel so humble at my own meagre contribution.  As for 

myself, Mr. Speaker, I am very conscious of the honour 

bestowed upon me by the constituents of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg riding that have elected me to this 

Assembly. 
 

A number of the hon. members will be familiar with that area 

of the province, but for those who are not, please allow me to 

present some information.  The riding extends from Coronach 

in the east to Fir Mountain in the west, a distance of about 80 

miles, and it includes the industrial workers and their families 

of the open pit coal-mine and the power plant on the one hand, 

and the ranchers of the Wood Mountain hills on the other.  

Much of this land will become the Grasslands National Park in 

the near future. 
 

Nearby is the Wood Mountain Indian Reservation, one of the 

most prosperous in the province due to the fine cattle that they 

raise there.  It was near here that Chief Sitting Bull settled and 

struck up his lasting friendship with Jean LeGar, the trader 

whose name is immortalized by the park at Willow Bunch.  

From Bateman and Mossbank in the north the constituency 

stretches for 60 miles or so south to the very edge of 

civilization -- the U.S. border -- where, as Kipling put it, the 

trails run out and stop. 
 

(2100) 
 

Highway 13, the Red Coat Trail, bisects the riding running 

from east to west and intersects Highway 2 at Assiniboia, the 

largest town in our area with 3,000 inhabitants, probably the 

best piece of real estate in the constituency because of the 

confluence of these two roads.  The mainstay of the riding of 

course is agriculture.  And, Mr. Speaker, sir, we are hurting 

badly. 

Gravelbourg of course has a large French population and the 

well-known College Mathieu which attracts students from all 

over three prairie provinces and gives us a very strong 

francophone flavour.  Apart from the usual mixture of farmers 

of British extraction -- English, Scots, Irish, and Welsh -- 

there's also a considerable German Lutheran contingency 

which is rather a surprise in Gravelbourg, and adding a touch 

of more exotic colour, a very successful but small group of 

Laotians, as the result of the Indo-China conflict. 

 

South of Lafleche and Limerick, there are settlements of 

Ukrainians and Romanians.  And in Lafleche itself there are 

many Flemish speakers from Belgium, Scandinavians largely 

out of Minnesota, some Dutch, and of course the Chinese 

whose cafs dot our small towns indicate that we have a very 

varied population.  And I thank them all for their support. 

 

The Speech from the Throne, sir, starts with a very appropriate 

phrase: a new beginning.  This is a particularly poignant phrase 

for me because it was 25 years ago this month -- the 19th to be 

exact -- that my wife and our two small children and myself 

witnessed that most incredible scene: a bright wintery dawn 

over the prairie, brilliant and clear, pink and blue, sky 

stretching from horizon to horizon over startlingly white snow.  

For us it was truly a new beginning, particularly because we 

had just moved from Lagos on the Nigerian coast.  Indeed, sir, 

I may say that it was a metamorphosis, let alone a new 

beginning. 

 

You may appreciate the irony of our position that, amongst all 

that snow which was very deep in that winter of 1966-67, our 

first acquisition had to be a refrigerator.  Of course we had to 

buy a stove, clothes washer and dryer and all the rest, but it's 

the refrigerator that sticks out in my mind.  We were so used to 

putting the bottle of milk out of the window on the 

window-ledge on the north side of the house, and the bottle 

would stay firm all year round.  But in Saskatchewan it's very 

different. 

 

Anyway everything was fine.  We spent three months in 

Wadena, and from there we moved down to Lafleche and 

stayed there for nine years.  Eventually we moved up the road 

to Gravelbourg and -- low and behold! -- the fridge packed up, 

followed shortly to the dump by the washing machine, the 

range, and the dryer.  Not really surprising, they'd all been 

purchased at the same time.  They'd all lasted the 10 years that 

Bernard Shaw described so eloquently in Breakages Ltd., and 

they all died at the same time.  You can imagine, sir, what 

inflation had done to the price of hardware in the meantime. 

 

Under a previous CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) administration, sir, public works programs had 

been initiated in small towns throughout the province: rural 

electrification, water treatment plants, sewage systems, piping, 

lagoons -- the works.  All very important, and all necessary for 

a proper standard of living for our rural residents. 

 

Private enterprise was not prepared to do it.  There was not 

going to be any profit in it.  So we -- or rather you, because I 

wasn't here at the time -- had to do it 

  



102 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

yourselves.  Unfortunately, sir, like my household appliances, 

these public utilities have also succumbed to the passage of 

time, and they're very much in need of replacement and 

upgrading to meet modern standards. 

 

For example, our water treatment plant in Gravelbourg that had 

cost $60,000 25 or 30 years ago needed to be replaced during 

my term of mayor.  You'll be shocked to know that it cost 

almost $700,000 -- a tenfold increase. 

 

And to make matters worse, the technology is such that it 

requires a full-time operator, not just the daily dose of zeolite 

as the old one did.  And although the water tastes much better 

than that of Regina or Saskatoon, it costs us $20,000 a year for 

a man to operate that plant throughout the year, which over the 

next 25-30 years will double the cost of that installation.  And 

this does not include the cost of repairs, because the equipment 

is computerized and requires specialists from Regina, Calgary, 

if major problems arise. 

 

We've also since had to upgrade our sewage lift stations, sir, at 

a cost of $90,000, largely because our water is so good and our 

residents are using so much of it that they are overloading the 

pumps that force the waste into the lagoon.  Now we have to 

add another cell to the lagoon to accommodate the extra water. 

 

And so the problem escalates.  And I'm quite sure that we're 

not alone in this problem, sir; that similar problems must exist 

in Rockglen, Mazenod, the rest of my constituency, and the 

province as a whole.  These, sir, are problems that I suspect we 

as a government shall have to face in the very near future, and 

the cost is going to be enormous. 

 

I remember in 1982, Mr. Speaker, how the leader of the PC 

Party at that time promised to abolish the health and education 

tax, then at 5 per cent.  You probably remember what happened 

to that promise.  The tax went up to 7 per cent.  This 

administration has promised to eliminate the expanded 

provincial sales tax during the last election and it is in process 

of doing so with this throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- It has always been said, Mr. Speaker, that once 

a tax is in place it stays there for ever.  Today, sir, we are 

proving those pundits wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- And reports over the radio at the beginning of 

this month indicate that sales in November have risen 

considerably in this province as a direct result of the 

declaration by our Premier on the day he was elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Not only that.  Prices in my favourite 

Wheatland restaurant in Gravelbourg have fallen to reflect the 

removal of the PST.  It would have been easy for the proprietor 

to pocket the difference and say: sorry, but we would have had 

to put the prices up anyway -- as has happened so many times 

in the past with taxes that have 

been removed.  But he didn't, and I therefore salute him -- an 

honest man -- here today, and through him, the other honest 

traders throughout our province who have also reduced their 

prices because of the removal of this tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- They got an awful bad time from their 

customers when the tax went on, and it wasn't their fault.  They 

deserve a little bit of praise for taking the prices down again. 

 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is a rural riding, sir, and farming and 

ranching of course are its backbone.  And although I cannot 

claim to be a farmer, through my practice I am in constant 

contact with farm families on a daily -- and a nightly -- basis.  I 

do know what their problems are:  they tell me day after day, 

week after week, month after month -- the financial difficulties, 

the stress, the problems with children, the problems with 

repairing and replacing, the problems with debt repayment, the 

number of hospital aides and nurses at our hospitals terrified of 

losing their jobs that keep their farms from sinking into the 

morass of high costs and low returns. 

 

The local business people who are closing their doors because 

instead of one family on a half-section 40 years ago, there is 

now one family on two sections -- basically 25 per cent of the 

population.  Abandoned homesteads, schools, and churches 

abound everywhere in our province.  And these people are not 

just moving into town, sir, they are moving out, out of the 

province all together.  My own four children are gone: three are 

in B.C. and the fourth is in Toronto.  We've no jobs to offer 

them.  And when we lose our population we lose our tax base, 

and with no taxes we cannot pay for services, and the vicious 

spiral begins and we go down and down and down. 

 

We have no choice, sir, and as agriculture is the basis for our 

economy we have to work from agriculture and help the 

farmers, because when they get some money in their pockets 

it'll go to the local business men and the local business men 

will be able to pay their suppliers and their suppliers will be 

able to pay their wholesalers.  And eventually, if General 

Motors and the big corporations get the money, at least it'll 

have paid a lot of bills on its way up to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- This province was founded by small farmers 

and small-business men.  And when you had to break 10 acres 

of land in three years by hand, I don't imagine many people 

started with three or four sections of land.  They worked 

themselves up, literally, from the ground and they succeeded.  

And I suspect that this is the only way that we in Saskatchewan 

can succeed.  We start at the bottom and work our way up bit 

by bit, year by year. 

 

It would be nice if big, important industries moved into 

Saskatchewan and brought their expertise and their order of 

success with them, creating new jobs for our unemployed.  But 

it's pointless to import them on the condition that we the 

taxpayers accept all the risks and let them take all the profits.  

Job creation and diversification 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

are great goals, but there's no point in spending $50 million to 

create fifty jobs or even a hundred.  No one spends a dollar to 

make a dime.  The secret of good business is to spend a dime 

and make a dollar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- The Leader of the Opposition accuses us of 

looking backwards when we should be looking forwards.  

Certainly we'll look backwards, sir.  We'll look back to see 

where we went wrong.  And that backward look, sir, takes us to 

1982 because that is where we went wrong.  We succumbed to 

the blandishments of a TV evangelist who put his hands deep, 

deep, deep into our pockets and kept them there. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition complains that the throne speech 

is hollow.  On the contrary, it is solid.  Hollowness is caused by 

the presence of empty promises like the promise to reduce 

personal income tax by 10 per cent.  Do you remember that 

promise, Mr. Speaker? 

 

The throne speech is short but it is succinct.  We have to clean 

up the mess left when the hon. member prorogued the 

legislature without even passing his budget.  The only thing he 

passed, sir, was the buck and that buck stops here and now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Contrast the negativism of the official 

opposition with the positive remarks by the new member from 

Saskatoon Greystone, sir, who although a minority of one, 

packs more punch than the other 10 put together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- There's a tremendous job to be done, Mr. 

Speaker, but I'm convinced that we can do it.  If I wasn't, I 

could leave the province.  I don't have to stay here.  I wasn't 

born here; I've got no ties here.  My only interest in this 

province is it's given me a good living for 25 years and I'm 

going to hope for the next 25 years. 

 

(2115) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- When the CCF came into power in 1944, the 

barrel was empty and they started from scratch and built up 

what we had.  We are lucky, sir.  Our barrel is not quite empty 

yet.  We still have SaskTel, SaskPower, and Energy -- those 

terrible twins -- and SGI.  And we can start from here with 

them and build up again.  We can do it; we must do it.  Our 

grandchildren are dependent on us to do it.  Thank you, sir.  

Good night. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- It's an honour for me to address this 

Assembly in response to the Speech from the Throne today. 

 

I'd like to describe my constituency a little bit for you if I can.  

Souris-Cannington is the constituency from the very 

south-eastern corner of this province.  We're bordered on 

the east side by Manitoba and on the south by the United 

States.  We're basically an agricultural community: grain 

farming, cattle, hogs.  We also have a major other industry: the 

oil industry.  The oil is as important to our area as is 

agriculture. 

 

Most of our RMs (rural municipalities) receive the better 

portion of their income from the oil rather than from property 

taxes on agricultural land.  This makes our RMs a viable 

operation in our constituency.  We have more roads per mile 

probably than most other places in the whole province, and we 

have good roads. 

 

I would like to begin by saying thank you to the many friends 

in Souris-Cannington that worked very hard on my behalf.  It is 

because of their hard work and dedication that I am standing 

before you today.  It is on their behalf that I bring a strong 

voice to this Assembly.  I intend to look out for the best 

interests of the people in Souris-Cannington and for the next 

four years as a member of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition. 

 

The word loyal is a good word to describe the way I feel about 

my duties here and a good word to describe the people I 

represent.  The people of Souris-Cannington are good, 

hard-working people, Mr. Speaker.  And they are people who 

understand the requirement of having a member in the House 

to represent them.  They understand the need to have a good 

member, not just any member.  The people of 

Souris-Cannington are frugal and realistic.  They were prepared 

to wait and elect the right member from Souris-Cannington.  

They were also prepared to wait in a cost-saving measure 

rather than holding an election immediately before a general 

election. 

 

The people of Souris-Cannington felt they were well 

represented by the member from Estevan and his government.  

The people from Souris-Cannington thought well enough of the 

member from Estevan and his government to elect a member 

for Souris-Cannington from that same party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Souris-Cannington are the kind of 

people who can always be counted on to band together when a 

neighbour is in need.  In addition to strong family roots and 

values, we rely on agriculture, energy, and water.  Yes, Mr. 

Speaker, the Alameda dam of the Rafferty-Alameda project is 

in my constituency. 

 

The people of Souris-Cannington and I have locked horns with 

the NDP because the NDP wanted the Rafferty project 

scrapped.  We have five kilometres of water right now behind 

the Alameda dam.  This was a dam in which there was never 

going to be water, according to the opponents. 

 

Because my neighbours are the type of people that fight for 

what they believe in and don't give up easily, we persevered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- There were a few heated debates along 

the way, but we all know the end result of the fight.  Now, 

Souris-Cannington will be among those benefitting from this 

worthwhile project, despite the opposition of 

  



104 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

the NDP. 

 

We look forward to enjoying the benefits this project will 

provide for our area; the benefits of recreational facilities, 

water for our communities, the economic benefits these will 

provide, and let us not forget flood control. 

 

I look forward to the next four years of working as an MLA for 

the people I believe in, Mr. Speaker, and in turn people who 

believe in me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many years now, I've been a full-time farmer, 

a husband, and a father.  I've had the opportunity to watch the 

political parties from the outside looking in, to watch the news, 

listen to the radio every day with an objective ear. 

 

We have been through some tough times on the farm, but I 

represent a party that went beyond any other government to see 

that farmers got help when we needed it most.  The people of 

Souris-Cannington knew, recognized, and appreciated the 

efforts the member from Estevan and his government took on 

their behalf.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why I'm here today.  My 

family, along with thousands of other farm families, have 

benefitted as a result of a PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government that cared enough to come up with solutions 

instead of saying, good luck; make your payments as best you 

can.  And I am grateful for that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a man with an open mind, I've listened to the NDP over the 

past several years to see what sort of ideas or solutions they 

had to offer.  Mr. Speaker, as a farmer I watched the NDP -- 

and listened -- to see how they were going to help me deal with 

drought and grasshoppers, interest rates, and many other 

problems faced by my neighbours and myself.  Although they 

had plenty of time -- in fact, years -- to come up with some 

answers, I heard nothing. 

 

I shouldn't say the NDP said nothing, Mr. Speaker.  I heard 

complaining, whining, and criticism.  But complaining doesn't 

help me or my neighbours make a payment or give us a tax 

break on a new grain truck.  Mr. Speaker, I believe it's more 

important to get up and do something when you have a 

problem than it is to talk about it or criticize someone who is 

doing something to make things better. 

 

The NDP didn't offer me a thing.  I watched them, Mr. 

Speaker, not only as a farmer but as a father.  I watched the 

NDP to see what they had in store for my children.  I know the 

world is changing every day, and my kids need a different sort 

of education today to compete in the '90s than I did some years 

ago.  Again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP offered no programs or 

alternatives that would make opportunities happen for my 

children, only complaints.  Then I realized it was a pattern, an 

NDP pattern.  After doing my best to be objective and spending 

a lot of time listening, I came to a conclusion--the NDP had no 

plan, Mr. Speaker, no plan.  No short-term plan, no long-term 

plan, and nothing in between. 

 

The NDP had no plan for agriculture, no plan for education, no 

plan for seniors or youth programs, and certainly no plan for 

economic growth in our province.  It 

was hard to believe that a party that wanted to form 

government didn't have anything to offer the people they 

wanted to represent.  And as I stand here today, Mr. Speaker, 

the same holds true -- still no plan. 

 

As opposition, the NDP had no platform and their campaign 

manager, who the NDP have since appointed the new president 

of SaskPower, makes light of the fact.  The article I have with 

me today from the Prince Albert Daily Herald, dated 

November 16, 1991, I would like to quote the first sentence 

from that article: "The NDP won the provincial election 

because it had no platform," said the party's campaign 

manager, Jack Messer.  Basically, what Mr. Messer is saying 

here is that the NDP won in spite of the fact that the people had 

no idea what the NDP can or will do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say the future of Saskatchewan is nothing 

to make fun of.  I say that having no solutions as a government 

is completely irresponsible and unacceptable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP don't have a plan because they're afraid.  

Like ostriches, they are afraid of pulling their necks out of the 

sand and taking a look around, and facing reality.  Instead of 

wanting to build and diversify and grow, the NDP want to 

make Saskatchewan a cocoon; a self-contained cocoon 

province that's run by three NDP politicians who make all the 

decisions -- a troika. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry to say the troika has already 

started to build their cocoon.  Take the closing of our trade 

offices, for example -- the NDP troika wanted to kill two birds 

with one stone.  By closing the trade offices in Hong Kong, 

Minneapolis, and Zrich, the member for Regina Elphinstone 

and his cohorts could carry through with their petty, political 

vendettas and slam the door in the face of business growth and 

trade in Saskatchewan and begin building the cocoon. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they got their chance to eliminate the jobs 

of a couple of former PC ministers at the expense of old foes.  

They severed important links Saskatchewan business had with 

the rest of the world.  And for what, Mr. Speaker?  For politics.  

They certainly didn't do it to help promote Saskatchewan 

businesses. 

 

Ask the many business men who have benefitted from the trade 

offices if they think closing them was a smart business move.  

Ask them, Mr. Speaker, and you'll find they'll shake their heads 

in disbelief -- disbelief that a government in the year 1991 can 

be afraid to move ahead, afraid of tapping into our province's 

potential and competing, and, Mr. Speaker, disbelief that a 

government will put partisan politics ahead of what's good for 

the people. 

 

I understand the NDP is afraid of growth, Mr. Speaker, afraid 

of anything they can't control.  That's proven by their record.  

But it's you and I and our neighbours who suffer because of it.  

The NDP's philosophy is:  if you can't buy it and run it, we hide 

from it. 

 

That philosophy holds true in another example of NDP 

cocoonism, Mr. Speaker.  The recent energy options agreement 

does not force Saskatchewan to build a  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

nuclear reactor.  The purpose of the agreement and the $50 

million it provides is to research all forms of energy:  coal, 

solar, wind, and yes, nuclear. 

 

(2130) 

 

I can see that the mere mention of the word nuclear makes the 

members opposite squirm in their seats.  They don't even like 

to talk about it.  In fact at the November NDP convention, they 

voted to halt all uranium exploration in our province.  Sounds 

like they're afraid, doesn't it?  Sounds to me like the NDP want 

to add another layer to the cocoon and ignore the benefits of 

nuclear research. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although nuclear energy and research . . . through 

nuclear energy and research we could very well see a cure for 

cancer or AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome) in our 

lifetimes.  And the NDP are afraid of it. 

 

I was listening to the Lorne Harasen show during the election.  

The discussion was about nuclear energy and whether we 

should pursue it in Saskatchewan.  One caller, after agreeing 

with developing nuclear research in our province, said, for once 

why can't Saskatchewan be a world leader in something?  I 

want someone to stand up and tell me that we can't.  She was 

right.  Why can't we? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what's wrong with receiving $50 million to 

develop research that Saskatchewan can sell to the rest of the 

world?  What's wrong with exploring every environmentally 

safe energy option available to us?  What's wrong with our 

province being the biggest producer of the best quality uranium 

in the world?  What's wrong with us using the safest, cleanest 

source of energy known to mankind right here, maybe in the 

meantime curing cancer? 

 

I'll tell you what's wrong with these things, Mr. Speaker.  

Nothing.  The only thing that's not right with this whole picture 

is how the NDP are trying to rob Saskatchewan of a 

monumental opportunity.  They would rather pay $4 million 

out of the pockets of taxpayers to break the agreement.  Four 

million dollars, Mr. Speaker.  And they talk about waste and 

mismanagement.  If economic growth under an NDP 

government were any slower, they'd have to speed up to stop. 

 

But as I said earlier, the NDP record proves they're afraid of 

growth.  I guess that's what we have all come to expect from 

them.  Under an NDP administration in the '70s Saskatchewan 

could have been a leader in the oil industry.  We could have 

been a leader in the natural gas industry.  But what happened?  

The member from Riversdale and the NDP government sat 

back and watched while Alberta soared light years ahead of 

Saskatchewan in developing both gas and the oil patch. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they may have made us very slow in developing 

gas and oil during their opportunity, but I'm not going to allow 

them to make Saskatchewan a back seat to anyone in the 

uranium industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'm not going to sit idly by while the 

NDP let yet another chance to develop our natural resources 

slip through our fingers. 

 

I'm also not going to sit by and watch the NDP destroy the 

progress made in the past 10 years in the oil industry.  In spite 

of getting a slow start in the '70s, because of a Progressive 

Conservative government during the '80s, the oil industry grew.  

In south-eastern Saskatchewan, due to our previous 

government's encouragement, we are producing record 

amounts of oil. 

 

The new horizontal drilling technique has proven to be very 

productive.  This new productivity has provided much new 

employment for my constituents and new income sources for 

landowners, the rural municipalities, and the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. 

 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP are doing their best to 

convince the oil companies and their workers that they've 

changed.  But in fact they haven't changed. 

 

I have an article with me today from the Leader-Post dated 

April 11, 1991.  In the first sentence, the NDP member from 

Saskatoon Broadway says the NDP government would: tap oil 

companies for additional royalties in order to boost education 

funding.  And thank goodness she's not the minister of 

Education. 

 

Within this same article, the NDP member from Regina 

Dewdney says: royalty revenues should be used to pay for farm 

safety net programs.  And, Heaven help us, he is the Minister 

of Finance. 

 

Once again, in the same article, the NDP member from Regina 

North West says, and I quote: the NDP is trying to shed the 

image created during the 1970s that the party has designs on all 

profits earned by the energy sector.  And guess who is not in 

cabinet?  The one member over there who actually expressed 

some understanding of the industry is the one who is shut out, 

relegated to the back of the class. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't blame the NDP for wanting to shed their 

image of anti-business, anti-growth, especially since this is the 

only territory in existence that still wants to practise socialism.  

I do, however, blame them for leaving farmers, industry, 

families, literally everyone in the dark as to what's in store for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What are the changes in store for the oil industry?  The people 

of Saskatchewan need to know.  Mr. Speaker, it's easy to see 

why the NDP have no plan for our province.  They can't even 

agree amongst themselves which industry to scare off first. 

 

Their NDP friends in Ontario have managed quite well so far to 

single-handedly chase a good percentage of the business out of 

their province, most of which are looking to the United States, 

Alberta, and Manitoba.  Even investors from the United States 

are plagued by the Ontario NDP.  In fact, The Globe and Mail 

on July 5 of this year read: Quebec replaces Ontario as U.S. 

investors' choice.  Separatism seen as less a worry than an NDP 

government.  Bob Rae should receive some sort of recognition 

other than the fact that an NDP government  



106 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

will never be elected again in Ontario -- like the trophy for the 

most damage done to free enterprise in a single year or less. 

 

Judging from what the Saskatchewan NDP government has 

done in only a few short weeks, I believe the member from 

Riversdale could give Mr. Rae a run for his money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even though the NDP have proven to be 

destructive, they seem to at least think about the environment.  

After all, they're doing their best to be environmentally friendly 

by recycling.  The only problem is all they're recycling are their 

old ideas by even older members.  I say old ideas aren't good 

enough for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  After 

all, the land bank with their recycled name remains the land 

bank, doesn't it?  Higher taxes, even when they are hidden on 

the price-tag, still come out of the pockets of the taxpayers, 

don't they? 

 

An NDP government that had no plan when they were 

opposition still stand today with no plan.  The NDP still think 

they're opposition.  They still keep referring to the member 

from Estevan as "Mr. Premier".  They think if they keep their 

mouths flapping enough and bash Tories enough maybe no one 

will notice they don't have a plan. 

 

I wonder who the members opposite think they're fooling?  I 

know they're not fooling the people of Souris-Cannington.  

They're certainly not fooling the members on this side of the 

House.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think the only people being 

fooled by the NDP are themselves--they're fooling themselves.  

They're fooling themselves if they think the people of 

Saskatchewan, after hearing NDP election promises of more 

money for farmers, more money for education, more money for 

health care, more, more, more, are simply going to forget. 

 

The NDP are fooling themselves if they think people won't 

notice when they no longer have to pay 7 cents on a cup of 

coffee, but instead have to pay higher income taxes.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP are fooling themselves if they think they can 

wish all their problems away by echoing cries of waste and 

mismanagement, and open the books. 

 

Well I'd like to clue the members opposite today of something 

they seem to have forgotten -- you're government now.  You 

have raised many expectations in the people of Saskatchewan, 

and you have to produce the goods.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

think they can make pie-in-the-sky election promises and then 

turn around and say, oops, the cupboard's bare; we can't do 

what we said we could.  That's not good enough. 

 

I'm here to see that the NDP promises of open government are 

evident in proclaiming the freedom of information Act.  I'm 

just getting wound up. 

 

I'm here to see that the people of Souris-Cannington and the 

people of this province are listened to when they express their 

views on balanced budget legislation, publicly funded 

abortions, and the constitution.  I do want a lot, Mr. Speaker, 

but not more than the people of this province deserve.  

Everyone in Saskatchewan deserves to be heard, deserves to 

have their questions answered.  The 

people deserve to hear the member from Riversdale stand up 

and explain why, on June 10 of this year he said, and I quote: 

For the PCs to say that we would cancel Fair Share is an 

outright lie.  And then, just days after becoming government, 

he scrapped decentralization altogether. 

 

What alternatives does the member offer?  Mr. Speaker, I'd like 

to ask the member from Riversdale what plans the NDP have 

for sustaining rural Saskatchewan.  What are you replacing the 

over 1,300 government jobs with? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have other questions as well.  Through the 

harmonization of the E&H (education and health) tax with the 

GST, farmers received a 100 per cent tax break on all their 

input costs.  A farmer purchasing new tools for $2,000 would 

receive $280 back.  Or a dry-waller, purchasing a new pick-up 

for 25,000, would get a rebate of $3,500. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the members not to 

interrupt another member while he's speaking. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Through 

harmonization, all other Saskatchewan businesses receive the 

same tax benefits as well.  Now it may sound complicated, Mr. 

Speaker, but basically with harmonization, a farmer, a business 

man, and a tradesman's occupation became tax free.  

Businesses also received additional competitive advantages by 

collection of the expanded E&H tax at U.S. border crossings.  

The collection helped reduce the discrepancy between 

Canadian and U.S. prices and therefore allowed our local 

businesses to be more competitive. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP and the member from Riversdale 

repealed harmonization.  My question today is:  what are the 

members' plans to replace harmonization? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Is the member going to make my farm 

and my neighbour's farm operation tax free?  Is he going to 

make the grocery store in Redvers or the clothing store in 

Carlyle tax free?  My constituents deserve to know, Mr. 

Speaker, and so do thousands of farmers, business men, and 

tradesmen that are affected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Since Souris-Cannington is located 

directly above the North Dakota border, the business owners in 

my constituency need to know how the member from 

Riversdale is going to cope with cross-border shopping, 

especially since the NDP just revoked the only program that 

ever made their businesses tax free and competitive.  My 

constituents need to know what the member from Riversdale is 

going to do to make Souris-Cannington's businesses more 

competitive.  We need answers, Mr. Speaker, and in many 

cases the livelihoods of constituents depend on getting these 

answers. 

 

I can assure the people of Souris-Cannington and the rest 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

of this province that this side of the House will get answers to 

their questions.  That this side of the House won't just criticize 

and complain, but offer viable alternatives  

_- real alternatives -- solutions to the issues we face as a 

province, whether it be agriculture, the economy, or protecting 

our family lives. 

 

The next four years will prove to be challenging ones.  It will 

be challenging to keep the NDP government on the right track 

since they seem to be wavering to the left track.  I look forward 

to these four years as a member of Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition and the years following as an MLA when we fill up 

the government's side of the House. 

 

It was indeed a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to address this Assembly 

today.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise this evening to 

participate in the debate on this, the Speech from the Throne of 

the first session of the twenty-second legislature of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  This is also an historic first, being 

the first throne speech from the New Democratic government 

led by Premier Roy Romanow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- This is also the first opportunity I have of 

making an address in the legislature, and I would first of all 

like to thank the voters in Pelly for electing me to serve as their 

member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that public service is an honourable 

occupation.  I realize that many people have grown cynical 

towards and indifferent to the political process.  Political jokes 

abound about all political parties.  Some are humorous but 

many are cruel.  Too often, Mr. Speaker, politicians are seen as 

self-serving or creatures who serve the highest bidder.  I hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that when I leave this legislature people will say 

of the member for Pelly, he cared for his constituents, he loved 

his province, and served them both well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- That will be the true measure of success, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my constituency is located in central 

Saskatchewan in the parkland region on the 

Manitoba-Saskatchewan border.  This region has often been 

referred to as "red square" but my constituency has been 

represented by all political parties. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech we return to our past, 

to our history, to our pioneers, and look once more to the 

future, a future based on traditions of Saskatchewan people 

working on behalf of Saskatchewan.  Today, Mr. Speaker, we 

look to the future, the future of people working together, 

building together on the traditional Saskatchewan building 

blocks -- the co-operative movement, public enterprise, and 

private enterprise, a necessary mix for western Canada, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 

This is a history of our province, Mr. Speaker, a history of 

people working to create our solutions for our problems, 

and they did a good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, in the election this past October, 

the people of Saskatchewan faced a fundamental choice 

between privatization ethic expounded by the members of the 

opposition, or a return to the Saskatchewan way put forward by 

Roy Romanow and the New Democrats.  On October 21 the 

people delivered their verdict.  They realized that privatization 

ran counter to the very values held by most people in this 

province.  They knew that privatization did not build this 

province.  Mr. Speaker, the people knew that privatization did 

not build, it wrecked. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people knew who built this province.  They 

knew the architects of Saskatchewan were farmers, workers, 

and teachers, not the kind of people that backed privatization -- 

accountants, bankers, media buyers, investment dealers, 

consultants.  These were not builders, Mr. Speaker.  These 

people made no bones about the nature of their work -- buy and 

sell, up and down, keep them trading, pile up the commissions, 

keep up the margins.  And this, Mr. Speaker, for the members 

of the opposition, was their version of the new Jerusalem, their 

vision of what they wanted for Saskatchewan people. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan rejected that 

government and the members opposite and their philosophy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- They chose, Mr. Speaker, to return to a 

Saskatchewan where people of Saskatchewan, ordinary people 

working together, building together, and creating together 

Saskatchewan solutions for Saskatchewan problems;  our 

future, made in Saskatchewan, for Saskatchewan people, by 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Already, Mr. Speaker, in this throne speech we 

have seen the return to the democratic ideals supported by 

Saskatchewan people.  No longer, Mr. Speaker, will 

Saskatchewan residents be forced to be without a voice for 

months or even years in the Legislative Assembly because the 

members of the opposition were fearful of how the voters 

would act.  No longer, Mr. Speaker, will political expediency 

determine how long people will be deprived of their voice in 

this Assembly.  Democracy will prevail, Mr. Speaker.  The will 

of the people will be served.  This is the right way, the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that anything 

illustrates more profoundly the difference between our new 

government and that of the members opposite than our 

handling of the crisis facing Saskatchewan agriculture.  Mr. 

Speaker, this agriculture crisis facing Saskatchewan has been 

documented, but I do believe I would be remiss if I did not 

touch on some of the more significant problems facing our 

farmers here in 

  



108 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Saskatchewan.  I also believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is important 

that all of the people in Canada should know about and 

understand the desperate situation facing our agricultural 

communities here in Saskatchewan and all across Canada. 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, Canadian grain and oilseed producers face 

unprecedented low prices for their products.  Prairie grain 

producers, Mr. Speaker, will only receive two-fifty a bushel for 

their 1991 crop.  If we allow for inflation, this will be the 

lowest price for wheat in our province's history.  What does 

this mean, Mr. Speaker, to rural Saskatchewan?  It means, Mr. 

Speaker, that long-established farms face prospect of 

foreclosure.  Farm families are under tremendous stress.  And 

as a result, rural communities are disintegrating as thousands 

leave rural Saskatchewan. 

 

How can we solve this tragic situation, Mr. Speaker?  Well in 

the long term, farmers want to earn their income from the 

market-place rather than from government payments.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, until the international subsidies wars end, farmers 

need assistance and they need it now. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, do they need it now?  Because they are 

facing low incomes, high levels of debt financing, and high 

interest rates.  Mr. Speaker, farmers look at a net income of 

$4,000 for the year 1990 and $6,000 a year 1991.  This is the 

money that's left and available for the payments of loans, for 

family living expenses and university education for their 

children.  Mr. Speaker, if other sectors of our Canadian 

economy had to meet all of their needs on an annual income of 

$6,000 a year, surely there would be a revolution. 

 

Small wonder, Mr. Speaker, why farmers are angry and hurt.  

And, Mr. Speaker, only the federal government has the ability 

to provide short-term assistance so that this desperate need at 

this time . . . Mr. Speaker, many farms have worked hard to 

reduce their own problems.  Farmers have adopted new 

techniques, have become more cost efficient.  Farmers have 

diversified. 

 

Over one million acres of specialty crops are now planted in 

Saskatchewan and the livestock production has increased.  

Farmers have taken marginal land out of production, helping 

themselves and helping our environment in the process.  Many 

farm families have taken off-farm income.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

there is still a need for short-term assistance, and only the 

federal government can provide that. 

 

It was because of this, Mr. Speaker, that our government 

recently participated in a unique lobby to persuade Ottawa to 

provide this assistance.  Virtually every farm group and every 

farm organization in western Canada participated in this 

endeavour.  And I was pleased that so many political parties 

from western Canada also chose to participate.  It was with 

regret that I noticed the Conservative government from Alberta 

and the Conservative opposition here in Saskatchewan chose 

not to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this lobby was not seen as an exercise in 

fed-bashing.  It simply attempted to demonstrate the enormous 

extent of the problem facing agriculture and to 

place a human face on this tragedy. 

 

The great achievement of this lobby I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

will not be the federal aid that will result because of it -- 

although it will be gratefully accepted -- but even more 

important, that it will be the first time people across Canada 

and our politicians in Ottawa were able to recognize the huge 

problems facing agriculture today and the extent of the human 

tragedy that it is taking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is also doing all that it can to 

assist farmers.  At the request of agricultural producers, we 

have begun a review of the GRIP and NISA.  We are prepared 

to negotiate improvements in these programs with the federal 

government.  We are also engaged, Mr. Speaker, in talks with 

lending institutions and others to provide badly needed farm 

debt relief for our farmers.  Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note 

that all of these activities involved co-operation, commitment, 

and a sense of community.  No early morning phone calls to 

Ottawa here, Mr. Speaker.  Just people working together to 

seek solutions based on a political consensus. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Because it is morally and humanly right, and I 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the 

opposition, that it is this spirit of co-operation, renewal, 

commitment to community that reflects the historical patterns 

of the Saskatchewan life that will lead us to a success in our 

endeavours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have also indicated in this throne speech that 

we intend to repeal a legislation which provided for the 

expansion of harmonization of the provincial sales tax.  The 

elimination of this tax was widely criticized by many key 

elements of the Saskatchewan economy.  It will not only put 

millions of dollars back into the pockets of Saskatchewan 

consumers, but it will stimulate the hard hit sectors of our 

economy such as the tourist trade, in particular restaurants, and 

will also, Mr. Speaker, remove taxes from books -- a 

particularly stupid measure if I ever saw one.  For our schools 

and universities . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- For our schools and universities . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before I call it 10 o'clock, I 

would like to remind members of several things. 

 

Number one, we do not refer to members in this Assembly by 

their first name or last name, but we refer to them by their 

constituencies.  I would also like to remind members that it's 

unparliamentary to refer to measures taken in this House as 

being stupid.  They are unparliamentary and I would ask 

members to refrain from using those. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


