




















































Hansard: December 16, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 281 

 December 16, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Just 

briefly, I'd like to introduce to you and through you a guest 

from the Sutherland constituency seated in your gallery, Stacey 

Scotten.  She's a first-year university student who has just 

finished exams and has come to sit in on the proceedings of the 

legislature.  Welcome, Stacey. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

would like to direct my question this afternoon to the Premier 

and, in his absence, anyone who feels best qualified to answer 

the question. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you agree that the fundamental principle 

upon which parliamentary democracy has been founded ever 

since the Magna Carta is the principles of grievance before 

supply.  And if you agree with that, how do you justify 

bringing a motion before this Assembly that suspends this 

province's basic law of grievance before supply?  And I refer 

you, sir, to the motion that you have on the blues this 

afternoon. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Quite on the contrary, Mr. Speaker.  

What the motion intends to do is to provide for this Legislative 

Assembly to consider the requests for expenditures for the last 

quarter of this fiscal year, January, February, and March, in 

order that the members of this legislature can approve that 

expenditure as is the appropriate way for that to be done -- 

quite contrary to the way the former government did it where 

they governed and spent a budget which they refused to pass in 

this legislature in the spring of this year and expended public 

money through special warrants. 

 

This process will provide grievance of supply.  It will provide 

unlimited debate and give members of this Legislative 

Assembly the opportunity to ask the questions and to engage in 

the debate on the supply Bill which will be presented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well I say to the Minister of Finance that your 

argument is about as full of holes as is the budget that is 

lacking to begin with.  Now, Mr. Minister, and I direct my 

question to the Minister of Finance then; Mr. Minister, your 

motion claims that you have Estimates and that you have 

calculated necessary changes to those Estimates.  If that is the 

case, then why will you not allow the normal, constitutional 

process to proceed and table those Estimates as is provided in 

the rules that govern our legislative democracy? 

In other words, Mr. Minister, you have a budget.  Will you 

table it so that we can discuss the budget and in Estimates in 

the Committee of Finance be able to ask detailed questions of 

all of the ministers of all of the departments instead of simply 

going holus-bolus, putting everything in a package so that no 

one has a clear picture of what you are actually trying to hide.  

Mr. Minister, will you table your budget? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member opposite, I indeed will table today, when I speak to the 

resolution which is before the House, a document which has 

been provided to the members opposite in advance so that the 

members opposite would -- which was quite different than was 

done in the past -- be aware of what is being presented. 

 

That document, Mr. Speaker, will outline the proposed 

expenditures for the final three months of the year.  It will 

report on all of the expenditures which have taken place prior 

to this since April 1 of this fiscal year.  And it will give the 

members opposite and all the members of the House an 

opportunity to see what has been spent, what has been prepared 

to be spent. 

 

If the member's asking, is this a full-fledged budget like one 

would introduce in the final week of March or whenever a 

budget comes, no it's not.  It is not possible to have a budget 

prepared in the short period of time because of the crisis that 

the members opposite created when they prorogued the 

legislature instead of passing their budget last spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I find it 

rather interesting that on the very same day 218 years later after 

the Boston Tea Party, that this government opposite would do 

something exactly what promoted the Boston Tea Party, when 

there was no grievance before supply, when there was no 

taxation without representation; and here we have a 

government with a massive majority, Mr. Speaker, thwarting 

their will upon the rest of us without due course to the 

legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Let the member ask his 

question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My new 

question is to the House Leader, the Government House 

Leader.  Mr. Minister, your government is about to try to 

suspend the constitution of Saskatchewan and all the rules of 

this Legislative Assembly.  Meanwhile, you ask me in my role 

as Opposition House Leader to nominate opposition members 

to special rules committee to rewrite the rules after you have 

suspended them.  Do you think that there is any value in 

rewriting rules that the government is willing to suspend 

whenever political convenience requires? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



282 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

give this legislature no choice because of their irresponsibility 

in the spring of this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I find it really quite unbelievable 

that the member from Rosthern could now get up on his feet 

after he and his Leader of the Opposition created the crisis that 

we're in now by spending by special warrant, by running away 

from the legislature.  What we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is 

turning it back to the way it should be.  We are coming to the 

legislature, and we're presenting the expenditure requests for 

the remainder of the fiscal year so that this legislature can be . . 

. can approve them and debate them.  That is the appropriate 

thing to do.  It's got nothing to do that's contrary to the 

constitution.  It's got everything to do with democracy, 

grievance of supply, Mr. Speaker, and the right of the members 

of this legislature to vote on the expenditure of supply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question.  And I'll direct 

this question to the Minister of Finance, then.  Mr. Speaker, it's 

amazing that the government opposite does not yet realize that 

they are the government.  Quit blaming the past.  Quit blaming 

others.  You have the responsibility to show leadership and to 

govern this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, in suspending the constitution of the province, 

you are effectively hiding from your own spending practices.  

In particular, you will not have individual ministers answering 

for individual departments so that this Assembly and the people 

of Saskatchewan cannot get answers to questions such as how 

much money are you paying for your political hit men in the 

various departments and agencies.  As the Minister of Finance, 

I want you to tell the people of Saskatchewan whether you 

intend to take Saskatchewan down a course incompatible with 

the parliamentary democracy as your outrageous motion in the 

blues is going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the member 

opposite to clearly understand that what this motion does is 

restore parliamentary democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if it were not for this 

motion, the only option available to the government would be 

to operate the government for the remainder of the year by 

special warrant because there is not time for the new 

government to prepare a new budget.  All we can do is 

legislatively approve the budget of the former government. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, so that's what's happening here, and I don't 

understand where the member is coming from, except when he 

talks about how the past hamstrings this legislature.  I want to 

tell him that later today I will be 

making a ministerial statement which will clearly outline what 

the past has done to the budgetary process when I report on 

what has happened to the $250 million dividend for the Crown 

Management Board, which never existed and which doesn't 

exist today because that gentleman over there misled the public 

of Saskatchewan when he presented that budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the same 

minister, Mr. Speaker.  While the minister is rapidly going 

back into the future, I would like to suggest to you, sir, that 

when you talk about democratic principles and so on . . . I want 

to read, Mr. Speaker, just very briefly on this new question the 

last paragraph of this so-called democratic reform.  And it 

states: 

 

 And that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, and the usual procedures for 

the tabling, referral and consideration of Estimates and for 

the presentation of a budget and the budget debate shall not 

apply to the extent of any inconsistency with the foregoing 

procedure. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you in a democratically elected 

Assembly say that no rule that is contrary to what your 

intentions are, are going to apply in this Assembly?  What are 

you doing to the democratic process, Mr. Minister?  Answer 

that for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- For the information of the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, the democratic process will take place 

in this legislature and the members of this legislature will deal 

with this resolution which will, under the impossible 

circumstances that the government faces created by the 

members opposite, provide a one-time provision where we . . . 

where the legislature democratically can deal with the 

provision of supply for the remainder of this fiscal year. 

 

And we have gone even further, Mr. Speaker.  I will provide 

for the members opposite, as the members opposite already 

have in advance, a report on all of the expenditures which 

already have taken place under the administration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan through special warrant and 

interim supply, which is the responsibility of the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm obviously not getting any 

answers to the questions from the Minister of Finance.  And I 

was going to ask the next question of the Premier, but perhaps 

the Minister of Justice could probably . . . he's a reasonable, 

level-headed individual . . . fellow that might give us the 

answer that I'm looking for. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, a question directed to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, our research indicates that the nefarious 

motion of your Minister of Finance is  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 283 

unprecedented in Canada and probably all of the free 

Commonwealth. 

 

That motion that you have on the blues this morning . . . or this 

afternoon, suspends the constitution of Saskatchewan by 

eliminating the requirement of presenting a budget, presenting 

Estimates, as you well know.  This is the most fundamental 

principle of parliamentary democracy, and your government is 

suspending it. 

 

How would you suggest, Mr. Minister, that the Premier . . . that 

the Premier's credibility in negotiating the nation's constitution 

is going to be upheld while you are busily suspending your 

own constitution here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I remind the member 

opposite that his exaggeration about suspending the 

constitution is absolutely and totally inaccurate. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it also has to be made clear that the time 

when the democracy of this legislature was abrogated is when 

the members opposite presented the budget, were faced with a 

non-confidence motion which they knew that they would lose, 

and they deserted this legislature and did not pass a budget, Mr. 

Speaker, and used special warrants to bring about the 

expenditures on a month-by-month basis, which we are not 

prepared to do.  And that's why we have this motion. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, in my final comment in 

response to the member opposite that this process which we 

have before you today was developed in consultation with the 

Justice department and in consultation with the Legislative 

Assembly Office.  It meets the requirements that have to be 

met, Mr. Speaker, and it's up to the members of this legislature 

now to deal with it in order that the legislature can have an 

opportunity to vote supply for the last quarter of this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to 

the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, you know full well that 

in this Legislative Assembly last spring that a budget was 

presented, that a budget speech was presented, that debate took 

place, and that that particular budget debate was passed in this 

legislature.  What were not passed in this legislature were the 

Estimates of that particular budget before this House shut 

down. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you saying to Saskatchewan people today, are 

you saying today that it isn't worthwhile, given your own 

admission that you have Estimates ready, that it is not 

worthwhile to go through six days of debate on a budget so that 

the people of this province know what your ministers are up to.  

Are you saying that today to this legislature, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

remind the member opposite in the House that when the former 

premier prorogued this legislature, all of 

the matters that were before this legislature were then dead.  

They no longer were valid, Mr. Speaker, because of the action 

by the members opposite. 

 

What we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a request from the 

legislature to pay the supply for the administration of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in the last quarter of this year.  

That is the way it has to be because of the difficulties that were 

created by the members opposite. 

 

There is not an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to prepare a new 

budget because of the time frame that is available.  The only 

other option that would be available would be to run the 

government for the remainder of this fiscal year through special 

warrants.  This government is not prepared to do that, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why we have this motion to the House here 

today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, yes in fact you can run the Government of 

Saskatchewan by special warrants.  And the only reason, Mr. 

Minister, that I suggest that you have brought in a motion that 

would abrogate every rule this Assembly has ever known is 

that you made a great political stance in Saskatchewan that you 

would not do it.  And today you are willing to suspend the 

constitution of this legislature in this province so that foolish 

promises that you made to the public of this province don't 

have to be acted upon. 

 

Mr. Minister, you can bring forward a budget because you say 

you have Estimates.  Bring that budget forward, debate it for 

six days, and do what is right in this province.  Don't hide 

behind the promises, the hollow promises that you made during 

the election campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the choice that was 

made that created the situation which we face today was a 

choice of the members opposite, not the members of this side 

of the House and the new government.  They made that choice 

by not dealing with the budget which they presented, which has 

created the dilemma that we face today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to tell the member opposite he will have, when we get 

into committee, all the opportunity to debate as much as he 

wants.  We're prepared to sit here as long . . . as many hours as 

we need to throughout the Christmas time in order for the 

member to ask the questions he wants.  I will be here . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I gave ample time to the member from 

Rosthern to ask his questions.  He had that opportunity.  Please 

do not interrupt when the Minister of Finance is giving his 

answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was 

concluding.  I just want to assure the member opposite that I, as 

the Minister of Finance, will be here to address the questions 

that he asks.  That's why we're providing the detail that we're 

providing on the request for supply for the last quarter of the 

year.  He will have that opportunity,  



284 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

and I invite him to take advantage of that opportunity and 

engage in debate and ask whatever questions he desires. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  

Mr. Minister, those arguments ring so hollow.  The people of 

Saskatchewan in October made a choice.  They chose a New 

Democratic Party government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- All through our history people have made 

choices at election time.  Sir, they elected your government to 

bring forward your plan; to bring forward a budget.  You 

cannot hide behind what was in the past.  Sir, you have said in 

this motion that you have gone through and made the 

Estimates.  Then present those Estimates in their proper form to 

this legislature, sir, so that your ministers stand one by one and 

account to the people of Saskatchewan how you will spend that 

money because, sir, it is grievance before supply.  It always has 

been.  This motion . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member has 

gone for over a minute, has not asked a question yet.  Does he 

have a question?  If he has a question, please put it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Will the minister 

follow the precedent and rules of this legislature and do what 

always has been done before by new governments, and that is 

bring in your spending requirements in their proper form?  Will 

you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the 

member opposite through you, Mr. Speaker, it is not the 

responsibility of ministers of the new government on this side 

of the House to answer for the wasteful expenditure habits of 

the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This legislature will deal with the 

expenditures being proposed by this government in the 

remaining time left in this fiscal year.  And that is the 

appropriate thing to do. 

 

In the next session of the legislature, or this session if it 

continues, when the new budget is presented, the 

supplementary Estimates and all of the expenditures that those 

members opposite created will be presented for full and 

detailed consideration as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the meantime the choice that the people of Saskatchewan 

made was this.  They said, we don't want you to govern by 

special warrants for the rest of the year.  We want you to have 

the legislature approve the expenditure of the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  We're going to allow the legislature to do just 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  A 

 new question to the Minister of Finance.  It's unfortunate that 

the hon. member gets up and his first act is to set the 

constitutional Assembly of Saskatchewan back 218 years as his 

first act. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want you to clarify something for me.  Because 

of the hubbub going around from your side of the House it was 

difficult for me in the preceding question to get all of your 

answer.  But did you tell me that you had provided a copy of 

the report to this caucus and to the members on this side?  

Would you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, the members of 

the opposition were contacted this morning and told that I was 

going to make the report available to the members of the 

opposition.  I think the member of the Liberal Party availed 

herself of that opportunity.  If the members in the Conservative 

Party did not, I think only they can explain why they might not 

have done that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Are you telling me, Mr. Minister, that you've contacted us, that 

if we came to your office we could come and pick up a report?  

We have no indication of such at all.  I have no report.  None of 

my members here has a report of that.  We don't know what 

you're talking about. 

 

Are you talking about a financial report?  Are you perhaps 

talking about the budget that you should have handed down?  

What are you talking about, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it certainly is not the 

responsibility of this Minister of Finance to deal with the 

disorganization of the official opposition in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the former premier cannot 

organize his caucus so that they can avail themselves of an 

opportunity to access information in a democratic fashion 

which is presented in advance to the members opposite so that 

in co-operation, in the spirit of co-operation, I can't explain 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That information was available to you in the same way as it 

was to the member of the Liberal Party.  She took advantage of 

it.  For some reason, Mr. Speaker, the members of the official 

opposition refused to do that.  I can't explain the reason for 

that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to address 

the question to the Deputy Premier, and the Minister of 

Finance.  I want to briefly point out, Mr. Speaker, that as he 

will recall, he presented a budget in 1982 and shortly after that 

. . . you presented a budget in 1982, if you recall that, and it 

never passed Estimates but there was an election called, and 

there was a new government.  The new government took the 

time, Mr. Speaker -- the minister knows that -- and then 

presented  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 285 

 a brand-new budget to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

The point is, Mr. Minister, that never in the history of 

Saskatchewan have we gone through a whole fiscal year 

without a budget that's passed.  It's your responsibility, Mr. 

Speaker, it's your responsibility to do that. 

 

I ask you today, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I ask the minister today, if when we won the 

election we presented a new budget, why can't you do what is 

the precedented thing to do in any legislature -- once you win, 

present a budget to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

And don't suspend the rules.  Let us debate and ask the Minister 

of Agriculture questions, the minister of Economic 

Development questions, the Minister of Justice questions on all 

his Estimates. 

 

Why don't you just play by the rules and present a budget like 

we do, and every other government in the history of the British 

parliamentary system? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I guess, Mr. Speaker, I can answer 

the question by asking the member who has just rose to ask his 

question why he did not pass his budget and therefore would 

have prevented this province from operating for a whole fiscal 

year without a budget.  That's the question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I also remind the member opposite, 

the Leader of the Opposition, that it took them seven months to 

prepare that budget in 1982.  This government faces a situation 

where there's only three months left in this fiscal year and 

needs to get on with preparing the budget for 1992-1993.  And 

that's why this resolution is here -- in order to be able to 

democratically pass on the supply Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't 

mean to monopolize the process of this House today, but this is 

a ministerial statement which is extremely important which I 

want to make today on a very important matter.  I want to make 

a brief statement on a matter of great concern to the people of 

this province. 

 

Last month, shortly after this government assumed office, I 

revealed to the people of Saskatchewan that this year's 

operating deficit is far larger than we had been led to believe.  

One of the reasons for this is that a projected $250 million 

dividend from the Crown Investments Corporation to the 

general fund could not be paid because the money was not 

there. 

Since that time a number of people have asked why the money 

isn't there, where it went, or why we just can't find it in the 

budgets of the Crown corporations.  In order to be able to 

respond to that question, Mr. Speaker, in an objective way, I 

have commissioned the firm of Deloitte & Touche to take a 

look at the financial situation in the Crown Management Board 

and to present the report.  I will table that report today at the 

conclusion of my remarks. 

 

Briefly, Mr. Speaker, the conclusion of Deloitte & Touche is 

that there is no money in the Crown Management Board to pay 

a dividend of $250 million.  There never was the money 

available when the dividend was included in the 1991 budget 

last spring.  The government just simply decided . . . the former 

government just simply decided that they would put a number 

in in order to make the deficit look good. 

 

The study also concludes that the problem arose at the end of 

1990 when Crown Management Board was forced to pay a 

dividend of $310 million to the government when it did not 

have that money, Mr. Speaker.  Management of Crown 

Management Board recommended against the payment of the 

dividend on the very sound financial reasons that the money 

was not available and being forced to pay such a dividend 

would prohibit any dividend in the current fiscal year and 

likely for some future years as well. 

 

None the less, Mr. Speaker, and regretfully so, the Crown 

Management Board was directed and forced to pay the $310 

million before the end of that calendar year. 

 

As a result of that and other factors such as a loss of $100 

million in the sale of Cameco shares, Crown Investments 

Corporation finds itself in the position of having a negative 

retained earning position for the year.  And it is prohibited by a 

1983 order in council from paying a dividend in a year where it 

does not have positive retained earnings.  There is no dividend 

from the Crown for the government this year for two very good 

reasons:  Crown Management Board does not have the money, 

and it would be illegal for them to pay such a dividend in their 

current situation. 

 

Those are the facts which were, or should have been, known to 

the members opposite in the spring of this year, Mr. Speaker, 

when they presented their last budget.  In the face of those 

facts, we can see that the spring budget contained a proposed 

$250 million dividend from CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) or Crown Management Board 

which never should have been there.  Perhaps the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, can tell us why it was included, 

particularly the Leader of the Opposition who was then a 

member of the Crown Management Board? 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to table now the 

report that has been prepared after a considerable amount of 

work and study by Deloitte & Touche for the information of 

this Legislative Assembly and the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



286 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave to 

introduce some visitors. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I see on the west gallery Mr. 

Winston Bugler, who is a teacher on the Cowessess 

Community Education Centre, and I would like to welcome 

them to the House using one of the languages of the province 

of Saskatchewan, which is Cree, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Scott: -- I'd like to also extend congratulations and 

welcome the students . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

welcome Mr. Bugler and the students from Cowessess Reserve 

to the Legislative Assembly here.  And I would invite you to 

join me for refreshments in a few minutes time, as soon as 

you're ready to leave.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay, I'm sorry.  The member from Thunder 

Creek, yes.  Why are you on your feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, as a ministerial statement, I 

believe the opposition has the opportunity to respond. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, you do.  I wish though in the future, that 

if the member does want to speak to a ministerial statement that 

he get on his feet immediately before another member gets on 

his feet.  I was waiting for you to get on your feet and you 

didn't . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . but that's fair enough.  I 

just say, in the future indicate to me that you wish to respond. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Government Financial Procedure (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly 

appreciate your wisdom in ruling.  Given the nature of the 

introductions, it kind of threw me a little bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has always been a fact of life in this province 

that cabinet makes choices when they are setting their budget 

process.  Mr. Speaker, what this minister is attempting to do is 

foist off on the people of today in Saskatchewan a similar type 

of statement as he did with his wild budget exaggeration some 

month and a half ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ever since 1981, Crown Management Board has 

paid dividends to the Consolidated Fund of the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It was done under previous 

governments.  It was certainly done under the last government, 

the PC (Progressive Conservative) government in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister, because of certain ideological blank 

points, is determined that there is no $250 million dividend this 

year.  And I find it kind of interesting that the same firm that 

has provided us with the chairman of the Gass Commission is 

now the one that the minister opposite takes to provide his 

information to this House. 

 

It is very clear, Mr. Speaker, that this government is taking the 

same tack that they have with the Gass Commission where they 

don't wish to divulge every little thing to the public of the 

province.  They pick and choose of when they will have closed 

doors and when they will not.  They pick and choose of who 

will answer in this legislature and who will not.  The minister 

says today that he has Estimates available, but that only he will 

stand in this House and present the reasons for, not the 

ministers of this government. 

 

I want to ask, and I will at later points, Mr. Speaker, in this 

debate . . . The minister knows full well that there was a $90 

million gain on a currency swap that he hasn't mentioned to the 

public at all.  The minister knows full well that there was 

retained earnings in the Liquor Board account which he has 

chosen not to talk about in this House. 

 

The minister knows full well that there was no hundred million 

dollar loss on the sale of Cameco shares.  There was assets 

which had a value put on by the former NDP (New Democratic 

Party) government.  Mr. Speaker, assets are only worth what 

the market-place will pay. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister knows full well that in other 

provinces in Canada cabinet makes decisions on how the 

budget looks.  Even in Ontario, their Finance minister has said, 

every Crown corporation in Ontario is up for public share 

offerings except Ontario Hydro and the lotteries commission.  

This minister has many opportunities, as does his cabinet, to 

look at the parts of government which may very well provide 

more benefit to the people of Saskatchewan in the hands of 

shareholders than they do strictly within the government realm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing here today, as was mentioned 

in question period, is unprecedented in our history in this 

legislature.  Never before have we had . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member is straying way off the 

topic.  If he has a concluding remark I will accept that, 

otherwise I'd conclude the remarks quickly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister has not told this 

House nor the public where the money from the shares of the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan went.  This minister has 

not told the public where the shares in the sale of IPSCO went.  

And that is precisely the point that we have been trying to 

make today, Mr. Speaker, that what the minister is presenting 

before us is only partially the story of the fiscal position of this 

province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we're saying to the minister, we look  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 287 

forward to him coming clean later this day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to rise today to make some comments on the motion 

which I will be moving at the conclusion of my remarks in 

order to deal with a situation which this government and this 

legislature faces because of the fact that this spring the former 

government presented a budget and then prorogued the 

legislature and did not pass it, leaving very limited time in 

order to provide the supply which is required to complete the 

remaining three months of this fiscal year. 

 

The procedural motion before the House today is brought 

forward, as the members opposite have said, in extraordinary 

circumstances.  When this Assembly prorogued suddenly on 

June 18, 1991, the 1991-92 budget was not passed.  The 

previous government abandoned its budget and the normal 

processes by which the legislature approves the appropriation 

of public funds. 

 

The fiscal year is almost over.  Public moneys have either been 

spent or committed according to the previous government's 

plan without the approval of this legislature. 

 

Members will know that our government stated clearly in the 

throne speech that the primary work of this session is to 

provide supply through the legitimate means for the remainder 

of the current fiscal year. 

 

The government has the greatest respect for the fundamental 

tradition that public funds must be appropriated by the 

legislature and that all members have the right of grievance 

before supply.  It is out of this respect that the government has 

come before this House to seek legislative approval for the 

appropriation in these difficult and complicated circumstances. 

 

The procedural motion asks all members to take special steps 

to vote supply on the basis of the Estimates first presented to 

this House in April of 1991.  And I want to take this 

opportunity to emphasize for all members a number of 

important aspects of the procedural motion and the process 

outlined therein. 

 

First, this motion seeks a one-time exemption to the normal 

budget procedures followed by this House, and members have 

the right and the opportunity of full debate on this procedural 

motion. 

 

Secondly, the government has respected the right of all 

members to grievance before supply.  Members will note that 

the supply process in the Committee of Finance prior to the 

introduction of an Appropriation Bill also allows for question 

and debate.  I will answer members' questions in the 

Committee of Finance in accordance with that, Mr. 

Speaker.  The normal rules and procedures of the Assembly 

with respect to the passage of the Appropriation Bill will also 

apply. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, immediately upon the conclusion of 

my remarks and the moving of the motion I have brought 

before this Assembly, I shall table the 1991-92 financial report 

which includes the proposed expenditures and disbursements of 

the Consolidated Fund and the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 

for the three remaining months for the 1991-92 fiscal year.  

This report will then be referred immediately to the Committee 

of Finance. 

 

As I mentioned in question period, Mr. Speaker, I have made 

this financial report available to members opposite so that they 

would have it in advance.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that members 

will find that the process proposed in the procedural motion is 

the most reasonable and fair approach that is possible in the 

circumstances which we now find ourselves. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words about 

the only alternative to appropriation based legislative approval.  

In recent years the province of Saskatchewan has experienced 

far too much public spending behind closed doors by special 

warrants.  That is not to say that from time to time, Mr. 

Speaker, there will not be special warrants.  There will be 

circumstances under any government in which they're 

necessary, but not on the basis of which we saw them being 

carried out and implemented by cabinet in this fiscal year.  

Most recently, from June 18, 1991, when the previous 

government left the legislature, up to October 21, 

approximately $11 million a day was spent by special warrants. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the government's position that this practice of 

funding the ongoing operations of government through special 

warrants cannot continue.  Therefore I ask all members to join 

us in restoring fiscal integrity in the province of Saskatchewan.  

It is time for a new style in this legislature -- one founded on 

the principles of openness, accountability, and integrity.  It is 

time to rebuild and renew the time-honoured tradition of this 

legislature.  A vote in support of this motion will ensure the 

right of all members to grievance before supply and allow this 

legislature to perform one of its most important functions -- the 

approval of public expenditures. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my firm belief that the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan expect nothing less than legislative approval 

of public spending even in these difficult circumstances.  And I 

therefore encourage all members to join us in this effort to 

begin to restore fiscal integrity in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Before I move the motion, Mr. Speaker, I want to table the 

financial report for the information of this Legislative 

Assembly at this time.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I want to read for the House the 

motion and move it, seconded by my colleague, the member 

for Elphinstone, the House Leader: 

  



288 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

 That this Assembly hereby approves the following procedure 

to facilitate the Legislative Assembly's consideration of a Bill 

to appropriate funds necessary to fund government operations 

for the three remaining months of the 1991-92 fiscal year: 

 

 (1) the Minister of Finance shall table a 1991-92 financial 

report which includes the proposed expenditures and 

disbursements of the Consolidated Fund and the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund for the three remaining months 

of the 1991-92 fiscal year, and which shall be based upon and 

show changes to the Estimates first introduced in this 

Legislative Assembly on April 22, 1991; 

 

 (2) when tabled in the Assembly the 1991-92 financial report 

is hereby referred to the Committee of Finance; 

 

 (3) resolutions shall be introduced in the Committee of 

Finance, authorizing the introduction of an Appropriation Bill 

to appropriate funds for the three remaining months of the 

1991-92 fiscal year; 

 

 (4) an Appropriation Bill based on the resolutions shall be so 

introduced and rule 15 shall apply. 

 

 And that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, and the usual procedures for 

the tabling, referral, and consideration of the Estimates and 

for the presentation of a budget and a budget debate shall not 

apply to the extent of any inconsistency with the foregoing 

procedure. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker, and as soon as I've signed it, I will 

pass it on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if this 

Assembly is to take this minister at his word, given the last 

paragraph in this particular motion and given the rationale that 

the minister has presented to this House, is it fair to say then 

that in all other matters where this particular government does 

not wish to follow the rules and proceedings as normally laid 

down in this legislature, that they will use the same procedures 

to overrule this Legislative Assembly? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see this as a very dangerous precedent for this 

Assembly, not because it simply has not been done before, 

because we all know that our parliamentary process has 

changed over the years, but one thing has always been 

fundamental, Mr. Speaker, is those changes have taken place.  

And that is the question of grievance before supply. 

 

The minister makes all sorts of analogies and tries to bring 

about justification for what he's doing because of what 

occurred in this Assembly in the last year.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

those types of precedents have happened across 

Canada in other jurisdictions. 

 

And in fact we see the case of the legislature of British 

Columbia, the new NDP government of B.C. not bringing 

forward a budget and indeed operating on special warrants 

simply because they did not want to transgress upon the rules 

of the legislature of British Columbia as this member has 

chosen to do here. 

 

When questioned out there, the minister in B.C., the New 

Democratic Party minister clearly said that is why the B.C. 

government would be operating on special warrants until the 

end of the year, because to bring in a process such as we're 

seeing here today would be a transgression of the parliamentary 

process that they were not prepared to go through. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is incredible that this Minister of Finance would 

stand before us today and say that the achievement of a $250 

million dividend from CMB (Crown Management Board of 

Saskatchewan) is simply not there.  If this minister perhaps had 

come forward and said there is only 100 million there or 150 

million, he might have had some credibility. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, for this minister, knowing full well as a 

previous Finance minister in this province of how those 

decisions are arrived at in cabinet, to say that SaskPower who 

have a very good retained earnings ratio, Mr. Speaker, could 

not come forward with anything to contribute to the Crown 

Management Board is ludicrous. 

 

This minister has not come before this legislature, Mr. Speaker, 

and told us about the retained earnings in the Liquor Board 

account.  He has not told us about the gain on the currency 

swap which occurred last summer.  He has not told us what 

happened with the sales of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And most of all, Mr. Speaker, this minister is trying to 

convince the public of Saskatchewan that they are not prepared 

to look at new ways of doing business in this province, that 

they will hide behind some type of ideological curtain and not 

do what other governments across Canada are doing every day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we're seeing here today is clearly 

unprecedented in our history.  This Minister of Finance knows 

full well that the budget that he presented in 1982 was shut 

down by a prorogation of this legislature and that the new 

government operated on special warrants, I believe it was for 

three months, before convening this House again -- convening 

this House again and then bringing in a budget in the 

September-October period of time.  Not seven months as the 

minister said, a much shorter period of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at least a budget was presented in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We have a minister, by his own admission -- by 

his own admission -- who has gone through the books of 

Saskatchewan to the point where he has Estimates which he 

says he has in his motion.  And yet those Estimates, Mr. 

Speaker, are simply not good enough to present to this House 

minister by minister.  He says that he has Estimates of the 

finances of the province of Saskatchewan that aren't legitimate 

enough, Mr. Speaker, 

  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 289 

to withstand a six-day budget debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this opposition would be prepared to sit here till 

Christmas Eve and come back again on December 27 and come 

back again on January 2 to allow this government to present 

those Estimates in the fashion that they normally are done in 

this legislature. 

 

And instead, Mr. Speaker, we have a motion before us that says 

that the rules and procedures will be suspended so that this 

minister -- this minister -- can stand in this House alone and not 

have the rest of his cabinet colleagues answer to this Assembly 

and to the people of this province of how those expenditures 

are going to be made; so that ministers will not have to stand in 

this House and tell us what certain of their political friends are 

being paid in high offices.  He will not have to stand in this 

office and explain the contractual agreements of Jack Messer 

and of Garry Beatty and other people that this government has 

hired on a contractual basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

At least in a budgetary process members on this side of the 

House, as I remind those members did when they were in 

opposition, had the opportunity to stand and ask those 

questions minister by minister.  Never before have we seen a 

process where only the Finance minister will stand in this 

House and answer for the entire Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the government, a New Democratic 

government of British Columbia can recognize the pitfalls that 

go along with the process as outlined by the Minister of 

Finance today, how in the world can this minister stand here 

and tell us that he is going to do what he is proposing today 

with the finances of this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, he refers in his motion to an accounting firm.  

Have we in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, sunk so low that we 

are going to take the word of Deloitte Touche as pronounced 

by the Minister of Finance as the raison d'être that this 

Assembly should grant to this minister supply for the 

remaining four months of the fiscal year of Saskatchewan 

without a budget? 

 

And yet that is what that member stood and said earlier in 

question period, Mr. Speaker, that he has had Deloitte Touche 

look through the books and Deloitte Touche have come up with 

this particular figure and that simply should be good enough 

for the people of Saskatchewan to give this minister unimpeded 

access to four months supply in this province.  The minister 

doesn't like those words, Mr. Speaker, but they are the truth 

and they are what came out of his mouth earlier this day. 

 

He expects farmers in Saskatchewan who may or may not have 

a moratorium placed upon them this year to accept these 

spending guide-lines as laid down by the minister without a 

budget being in place.  This minister and his government said 

in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, that they were going to 

change the way that farm financing was done in this province.  

Well everyone knows, Mr. Speaker, that farm financing is a 

billion dollar problem. 

 

And yet this minister would have us believe that his 

government is going to be proactive in this area, it is going 

to perhaps bring in legislation -- legislation that could amount 

to hundreds of millions of dollars of impact on the province of 

Saskatchewan, and he is going to do it based on a report 

prepared by Deloitte Touche.  Now isn't that something, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

This minister has said that I fully expect to manage the 

province's finances for the next four months basis on one 

accounting firm's recommendations in this province.  If the 

minister had even had the good graces to go to a number of 

accounting firms.  But no, he simply picks one, and that is the 

basis that this legislature is going to grant him supply on 

whatever program this government may embark upon without a 

budget, without members of this Legislative Assembly having 

the opportunity to question, for instance, the Minister of 

Agriculture on what will happen with the expenditures tied to 

ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) if a 

moratorium is brought down upon us. 

 

Or is this minister saying to the public of Saskatchewan by 

bringing in this motion that the farm community is on hold 

until we bring in a new budget some time in April of 1992?  

Because what he has said to this Assembly today leads me to 

no other conclusion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the areas of education, of health care, of social 

services, are all large users of taxpayers' dollars in this 

province.  This minister has said today, basis a report put 

together by Deloitte Touche for this government, that they will 

expend moneys in the next four months in those areas which 

amount to billions of dollars, without members of this 

legislature having the opportunity to question the Minister of 

Health, the Minister of Social Services, the Minister of Justice, 

on how those moneys will be expended. 

 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, no other government in the history 

of our country or, as our research has pointed out, anywhere in 

the freely elected Commonwealth has the procedure that this 

member has brought before this House ever been done before.  

That is why it has been rejected in the province of British 

Columbia and every other province in Canada as being 

unacceptable, because it breaks all of the basic things that our 

legislative process are built upon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would not have been so abhorrent if the 

member had not put the last paragraph in even.  He expects us 

to take the word of one accounting firm and give him supply 

for four months, but that he would have the gall to stand in this 

legislature and say that we are suspending every last rule that 

was ever developed in here through our history, since coming 

into Confederation, Mr. Speaker, anything that stands in the 

road of this government will be trod upon. 

 

If this is the attitude, how can the opposition or the members of 

the public in Saskatchewan not be assured that those same rules 

will not apply to any other legislation that this government 

brings forward? 

 

If it's good enough to spend the taxpayers' money without 

grievance, I'm sure it will be good enough to pass other 

  



290 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

legislation in this legislature without grievance and that 

individuals out there will have their individual rights trod upon 

because this government sees fit to set aside the rules and 

procedures of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to make a motion, an amendment to the 

motion: 

 

 That all the words following the phrase "That this Assembly" 

be deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 

 

 orders the Minister of Finance to abide by the constitutional 

conventions of the province and the rules and procedures of 

this Assembly and further orders the Minister of Finance to 

introduce a budget in this Assembly within six sitting days of 

the passage of this motion. 

 

I so move. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 9:02 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Goulet Sonntag 

Atkinson Roy 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Kujawa 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Upshall Knezacek 

Hagel Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Lyons Carlson 

Pringle Langford 

Murray Jess 

-- 32 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I have a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, and then 

I'm going to make a proposal which I will send over to the 

Deputy Premier and Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am frankly saddened to have to speak to a 

motion that suspends the constitution of the province, and I 

want to make it clear that this motion indeed does exactly that.  

It removes the obligation of the Government of Saskatchewan 

to present a budget.  That's the first thing, Mr. Speaker.  The 

government has been duly elected and it will not present a 

budget in the province of Saskatchewan for 1991-92.  And I 

want the public, and 

the media, and all fair-minded members of the Assembly, to 

understand one simple, reasonable comment: the argument of 

the government that it does not have the time to present a 

budget is clearly at odds with the facts. 

 

They are, in fact, presenting a budget in everything but name, 

Mr. Speaker.  I challenge all members who claim any degree of 

fairness, and honesty, and independence, who claim to have 

knowledge of the process, to go through the so-called financial 

report and indicate where that document departs from a normal 

budget document in any place except the cover page. 

 

The cover page has been changed to say, and I quote, 

"Financial Report" instead of "Budget Estimates."  But look 

inside, Mr. Speaker, and you will find all the contents of a 

budget, up to and including vote numbers and even item 

numbers. 

 

So the truth is, Mr. Speaker -- and I want the public to fully 

recognize this, and members of the media -- the actual honest 

truth, if the government ever chooses to acknowledge it, is that 

they have had time, and they have in fact released a budget. 

They just are afraid to call it that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they want to suspend the constitution of the 

province of Saskatchewan any way they can for obvious 

reasons now.  Now why, Mr. Speaker, would they want to do 

this at this time? 

 

First, and we saw it time and time again, Mr. Speaker, they 

want to hide their ministers from being before the Assembly in 

Estimates.  They do not want the Minister of Rural 

Development to have to justify the spending of his department, 

or the firings of hundreds of people, that he is engaged in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I would just get the co-operation from the 

members from Moose Jaw, I would just say this again, Mr. 

Speaker.  The public would like the Minister of Rural 

Development to justify the spending of his department and the 

firings of hundreds of rural people. 

 

The government opposite does not want the Minister of 

Community Services to justify her budget.  They do not want 

the Minister of Social Services to justify her budget.  They're 

afraid to have the Minister of Agriculture stand on his feet and 

defend his budget for the lack of support for farmers.  Now that 

can be the only reason that they're afraid to table a budget in 

this Legislative Assembly.  They're afraid to have their 

ministers stand and defend their departments and their 

portfolios.  They've got the document. 

 

They have absolutely no confidence in these new ministers and 

they want to hide them, so this move to suspend the rules, go 

around the democratic process, and ignore the very basics of 

the duty of this Assembly. 

 

Grievance before supply, Mr. Speaker, minister by minister by 

minister by minister.  And never in the history of Saskatchewan 

have we had the opportunity to have a government present a 

budget and not have the ministers stand in their place and 

defend it estimate by estimate, department by department. 

  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 291 

Under the administration, Mr. Speaker, that has just been 

newly elected and duly elected by the public, and they're afraid 

to defend their ministers and the budget. 

 

Well that's the first thing, Mr. Speaker -- no confidence in the 

ministers.  We've seen them duck several questions.  We've see 

them duck emergency debate.  We've seen them afraid to 

respond to questions in the legislature, and now they're afraid 

to defend their Estimates.  And one after the other, afraid to 

stand in their place and defend the Estimates that I've 

mentioned so far. 

 

The second is that they do not want to sit in the House and 

work, Mr. Speaker.  Imagine that.  They're just newly elected, 

they're anxious to call the legislature in . . . Mr. Speaker, by 

listening to the members opposite on the government side, they 

should be ashamed of this, Mr. Speaker.  They can chirp away, 

Mr. Speaker, but this has never, ever been done in British 

parliamentary history -- ever been done. 

 

After an election, a new government, Mr. Speaker, after an 

election a new government will not present a budget.  Can you 

imagine that? 

 

Now there's only two reasons, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

they're afraid to have their ministers defend themselves, and 

they don't want to sit in this House and work, Mr. Speaker.  

And we've seen it over and over again because of the 

patronage, because of the mistakes, because of the witch-hunts, 

because of the kinds of things that we brought to the floor of 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They indicated from the outset that they wanted a rapid session 

of attacking the opposition and then going home.  No budget; 

no ministers have to defend their Estimates.  In here, change 

the legislation really fast -- a little bit of retroactive legislation, 

make sure they close a few offices, lots of patronage, and then 

run home for Christmas. 

 

They do not want question period and debate and Estimates 

because these are the means the opposition -- the opposition in 

the British parliamentary system -- must use to expose the 

political manipulation of the government and grievance before 

supply. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and so, Mr. Speaker, they changed the rules of the 

Assembly -- and, Mr. Speaker, you'd be aware of this -- 

without even consultation with the official opposition, without 

even consultation with the members of the Legislative 

Assembly.  They've unilaterally said they're going to change 

the rules so they don't have to have ministers debate the budget 

or defend it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if all they want to do is quickly gain authority for 

spending, there's a method whereby the government can get 

what it wants and the constitution can be maintained at the 

same time. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I'm going to table a proposal to restore 

constitutional order to the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

will ask a page to take a copy across to the House Leader on 

the government side.  And the proposal, Mr. Speaker, will be 

simply this -- and I'm going to read the proposal but I'll 

paraphrase it. 

That you can get full co-operation from the opposition, Mr. 

Speaker, in a very forthright manner.  If they want to present a 

budget, we'll go through the Estimates.  And we'll do it as 

quickly as possible so each minister can stand in their place, 

each minister can defend their departments, their expenditures.  

And we'll have the opportunity to fully debate it here. 

 

And the proposal is very simple, with full co-operation on this 

side of the House. 

 

The proposal is: to restore the constitutional order in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the opposition and the government 

will agree to have the motion which suspends the constitutional 

requirements of presenting a budget and submitting Estimates 

withdrawn without a vote.  And that would certainly give them 

every opportunity -- without a vote, it's easy. 

 

The Minister of Finance would present a budget which he's 

already drawn up.  Just write on there, "budget."  It can be 

basically the budget document he is trying to present as a 

financial report.  The opposition will agree not to debate the 

budget speech on condition that the speech itself not be 

inflammatory or political.  Under these conditions, the budget 

speech could be as little as two minutes and Estimates in the 

government already can be sent to the Committee of Finance. 

 

And it's already there.  You've presented the document.  We'll 

accept the document as a budget and we can get into the 

Estimates. 

 

The government must agree to proceed with Estimates in 

committee so that the Assembly has the actual opportunity to 

question ministers about their proposed departmental spending 

over the next three months.  That is, the government must agree 

to call Estimates on a daily basis so that they may be 

considered, and not simply seek interim supply and continue to 

deny the opposition the right to examine departmental 

spending. 

 

(2115) 

 

With these commitments in place, the opposition would 

consider requests for interim supply while Estimates were 

under active consideration.  The opposition will also be open to 

discussing a specific time frame for approval of interim supply 

to provide the government some assurance that legal spending 

can occur.  If this compromise is accepted, Mr. Speaker, the 

Assembly can move through the budget process with 

reasonable dispatch and the constitutional order of the province 

can be restored. 

 

I believe it is reasonable to ask the government to take at least 

some time to consider the proposal, Mr. Speaker, and I say that 

in all seriousness to the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 

Finance.  Take some time to consider this proposal so that we 

can go through your document and question the ministers.  And 

I ask you sincerely not to dismiss this proposal out of hand.  So 

I now move to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

  



292 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

take this opportunity to comment on this Act to amend The 

Mortgage Protection Act and move second reading. 

 

I rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 14, An Act to 

amend The Mortgage Protection Act.  This Bill serves to put in 

legal terms something that has already been taking place since 

March 1 of this year.  It corrects a situation which the previous 

administration created by putting in a provision in their budget 

-- which we're trying to deal with in this legislature and this 

session -- which was ruled to be illegal by the courts and which 

the courts instructed the legislature to deal with before the end 

of this month. 

 

The previous administration adjusted the mortgage protection 

plan subsidy rate from seven and three-quarters to thirteen and 

one-quarter per cent, effective March of this year.  A Bill to 

amend The Mortgage Protection Act was introduced in the 

Legislative Assembly but died on the order paper when the 

legislature was prorogued last spring.  And this was one of the 

many examples of mismanagement and irresponsibility 

displayed by the former administration.  Without passing the 

budget, Mr. Speaker, the former premier prorogued the 

legislature and put his politics before the interests of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous administration changed the subsidy 

rate on March 1 without the necessary legislative amendments 

being passed.  And since March 1, payments to home owners 

have been made based on the thirteen and one-quarter per cent 

subsidy rate.  This amendment is therefore necessary to 

establish the legislative authority for a program change made 

by the previous administration by regulation. 

 

The effects of this legislation are in place and have been for 

most of the year.  The courts have ruled that this legislation is 

required.  With the magnitude of this year's deficit, Mr. 

Speaker, created by the members opposite, there is no other 

choice.  Current mortgage interest rates are at or below nine per 

cent with one year closed mortgages available at eight and a 

half per cent.  And this change, therefore, has no effect on 

Saskatchewan home owners negotiating new or renewed 

mortgages. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, the province's fiscal situation is 

very serious.  Without this change the government would have 

to spend approximately $25 million in the 1991-92 fiscal year.  

The amount of additional savings in future years depends upon 

the level of interest in those years.  This change, however, will 

reduce future financial risk for the government, but at the same 

time provide an important level of protection if mortgage rates 

were to rise dramatically once again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is time with the coming of a new government in 

Saskatchewan that these kinds of actions which created this 

situation are put to an end.  Government must 

be accountable.  Government must provide legislative authority 

for taking certain actions.  That was not done with this 

mortgage protection plan and many other items. 

 

And therefore it is necessary in this session of the legislature to 

correct many of those wrongs that were put into place when the 

former government introduced a budget, and then, feeling they 

could not sustain a vote of confidence in the House, prorogued 

the House without ever passing the budget; and then delayed an 

election until the very last moment in October of this year, and 

left no other choice but for a new government to put into place 

the former government's budget so that the new government 

could get on with putting in place the strategy and the plan for 

the next four years, and putting together a budget for the first 

budget for the new government, for the 1992-93 fiscal year. 

 

This is part of that process of correction, Mr. Speaker, that we 

are doing here, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

move second reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would just like to 

indicate to the minister that we are prepared to let this Bill go 

to committee as soon as you desire. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 7 -- An Act to 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 8 -- An Act 

respecting the Tabling of Documents and Certain 

Consequential and Other Amendments to Other Acts resulting 

from the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, on this particular Bill we had 

asked that we be allowed time to prepare amendments that the 

Legislative Law Clerk was preparing and he has done so, so 

during the Committee of the Whole we will present those 

amendments at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 293 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- 

An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to raise a 

number of issues that deal with this Bill as it relates to some of 

the things that affect the people of my constituency, and I want 

to do that from a number of aspects, and I want to do that as a 

response to why I think this Bill should not be proceeded with. 

 

I know that, for example, that the people of the province and I 

myself do not like to have tax increases, and that's a 

fundamental belief that many people have, and the majority of 

people.  You don't want to increase taxes and therefore disturb 

the status quo of all of the things that are related to that.  

However, when you're dealing with something as important as 

this is, I want to explain to the members of the Assembly, 

especially those rural members who are involved in agriculture, 

that they are providing their government with an opportunity to 

take back from the farmers of Saskatchewan a significant 

amount of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point this out for this reason.  

Harmonizing the tax, the E&H (education and health) tax with 

the federal government's GST (goods and services tax), put a 

very significant drain on individual members of this Assembly.  

And I think that it's time to consider it.  They have, I think, 

probably been duped by the fact that they are not aware of all 

of the implications of the rebates on the GST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my brother and my brother-in-law and I have 

operated a mixed farming operation.  If it's divided by three, 

Mr. Speaker, it is no bigger than anybody else's in this 

Assembly.  However, in dealing with that on a goods and 

services tax basis, we have in the first two quarters of its 

implementation, Mr. Speaker, had $7,400 come back to us on 

goods and services tax that we paid.  And, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal sales tax which was reduced on most of those 

commodities from thirteen and a half per cent down to seven, is 

exactly what frees the business community and the farming 

community to have that rebate come back. 

 

Now on individual items, for example, Mr. Speaker, if I go buy 

a battery for my car or for my truck . . . There's a significant 

difference between whether it's for the car and for the truck.  

On a rebate, I wouldn't get a rebate on the battery for my car, 

but for my truck, I would; for my tractor, I would.  And for the 

individual in the province of Saskatchewan, he very likely pays 

a goods and services tax on that battery.  He pays an E&H tax, 

Mr. Speaker.  He pays an E&H tax on that same battery and he 

has for a long, long time.  And, Mr. Speaker, under the 

proposal of harmonization where you blend the two taxes 

together, the farmers of Saskatchewan would in fact get that tax 

back. 

 

So what you have really done is taken and jeopardized the 

opportunity in your local community of having that farmer get 

a benefit of having that rebate on that provincial sales tax.  

You've done that, typically done that, Mr. Speaker.  For every 

farm in the province of Saskatchewan, he is going to pay sales 

tax now, which he 

has traditionally done, but next year he would be getting it back 

if you harmonized it.  And if you blend that tax together he'll 

get that tax back.  But you won't do that.  With this Bill you're 

destroying that opportunity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the farmer goes to buy tires for his tractor 

or for his three-ton truck or for his pick-up, he has to pay an 

E&H sales tax on that commodity, right now.  And any 

business man, for that matter, too.  If he has a delivery truck 

and he's buying tires for that, he's got to pay E&H tax.  Why 

not give him the opportunity to have that money to influence 

his opportunity to buy in that community? 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goods and services tax is estimated it would 

give $10,000 return to this farmer's income on goods and 

services tax in one year.  Now, you match that typically with 

your E&H tax because you harmonize.  You would get that 

back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we haven't . . . we've paid that for years.  We've 

paid that $10,000 for years.  And, Mr. Speaker, $20,000 of 

discretionary income in this farmer's pocket is very significant.  

And I don't think the back-benchers and the members of this 

Assembly who are in agriculture have considered that.  They 

haven't considered that $20,000 that I can spend as a 

discretionary item in my community. 

 

Now I'll tell you what happens.  You're going to take that 7 per 

cent and you're going to spend it where you want it spent.  Why 

not leave it with the people in rural Saskatchewan to spend it 

where they want to spend it, at the grocery store, at the 

restaurant.  You're right on; they'd be able to spend it at the 

restaurant. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the 7 per cent sales tax on those goods that 

we put on, you would be able to spend $2,700 with that 

$200-a-child tax credit in that community.  Mr. Speaker, that's 

why it's important for rural Saskatchewan.  That's why it's 

important for business.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  This is about the fourth time, I think, 

that the member from Humboldt has interrupted the member 

from Morse and I ask him to please cease and desist or else I 

will accommodate him under rule 28. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to point 

out one of the things that you really have missed when you 

introduced this Bill.  You have missed the opportunity of 

providing discretionary income to those people to use who are 

establishing jobs. 
 

Mr. Speaker, $10,000 E&H return to the farming community 

on my farm would have allowed me, for example, to put a new 

motor in my tractor that the piston went through the other day.  

It would.  And now what I have to do, Mr. Speaker, is give the 

provincial government that tax.  And what do I get for it?  

Nothing.  I don't get anything returned. 
 

When I can spend it in a discretionary way in my community, I 

get the benefit of it and so does the community.  Mr. Speaker, 

who gets the job when they repair my tractor?  The labourer in 

that community gets  



294 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

the job, to get the job done and to establish that. They've taken 

it away on us.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's an important part. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister of 

Agriculture, we can put in a whole lot of programs that are 

good for the livestock industry, and we have through the years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if I went to build a loafing barn on my farm, 

I would have to pay E&H tax on all of the lumber in that 

building.  Under harmonization I would get it all back.  All of 

the E&H tax, I would get back.  I've paid that for the last 20 

years, and I would get it all back.  Mr. Speaker, for my farm 

that's a significant amount.  And that is the same availability 

for every producer of agriculture products in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, on top of that, the small business would get 

the benefit.  For me to be able to buy an extra $5,000 worth of 

goods in my community would positively impact that 

community.  My neighbours spread that all . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member from Quill Lakes and 

the Leader of the Opposition want to get into this debate, 

there'll be ample opportunity, I'm sure, after the member from 

Morse is finished.  I ask them, please do not continue with the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are a whole 

lot of items that are just exactly like that, Mr. Speaker.  You 

have building materials.  For years we had building materials 

taxed -- federal sales tax, 12 per cent.  And then what the E&H 

did, it came along and said, I'm going to take the commodity 

and the tax, and then multiply that times 7 or times 5, whatever 

the tax was.  And, Mr. Speaker, that was exactly where the 

dynamics of harmonization, blending this tax together with the 

federal GST, would make a positive impact in making money 

available to the rural community to use at their discretion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fact is this, that if the federal government 

would give this constituent of the federal tax dollars an 

opportunity to select the E&H rebate for all of the goods and 

services provided for the business and my farm, I would take 

that to having the payment made of 800 million, because it's 

more in my pocket paying that E&H tax back than what I'm 

going to get from the federal government.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a fact.  That's a fact for every one of your rural 

constituents, and it's a fact for every one of your businesses, 

too.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's important, because it gives me 

the control and the discretion.  And that's the reason why I 

fundamentally believe it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to raise a point here about the construction 

of a business in the city of Swift Current.  That business went 

into making springs and had a project developed for about $3 

million.  And that company, and I won't name it here, but you 

can go and ask them.  They got a grant from the provincial 

government when they built that.  And do you know what that 

was equivalent to?  The E&H tax on the building, the E&H tax 

on the equipment in the building, and the E&H tax on the 

commodities that went into that building. 

I'll tell you something else, Mr. Speaker.  They got a grant from 

the federal government.  And do you know what that grant was 

equivalent to?  That was a grant equivalent to the federal sales 

tax.  And were they happy about that?  Yes, sir, they were.  

They were grateful to receive that from the federal and 

provincial government. 

 

As a matter of fact, it was that provincial government that did 

that.  They gave a rebate.  When they were in government prior 

to '82 they gave that rebate.  And, Mr. Speaker, it is equivalent 

to almost a half a million dollars.  That is the context of what 

they did to get a business going. 

 

Now why wouldn't you do that with small business in Swift 

Current, in Humboldt, in Rosthern, in Saskatoon, and in 

Regina?  Why wouldn't you do that?  Why wouldn't you give 

that an opportunity to have that happen? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I believe that 

blending these taxes together has a significant importance in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  It will provide added jobs.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, I have the capacity to use that as 

discretionary items, money to spend in my community.  There's 

no question about it. 

 

For every dollar I get from GST, if you men and women across 

the way would figure it out, you would get exactly the same 

thing in your E&H back.  And, Mr. Speaker, every one of them 

would qualify.  The member from Shaunavon, the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose, they would qualify.  And if they haven't 

figured out how much GST they're getting, they should do that 

because they would have been able to get the equivalent in the 

E&H tax.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is important for this 

Assembly to consider. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to talk a little bit more about an 

industry in my constituency that has suffered more because of 

taxes than anything else, and that's the oil industry.  The oil 

industry in my constituency is made up of small producing 

wells.  And they don't produce the 250 to 300 barrels a day.  

They produce 5, 8, 10, 12; these are the kinds that they 

produce. 

 

Now, Pat Smith, when she was minister of Energy, had a 

significant representation to her about the fact that Alberta 

people living in Medicine Hat, all the way along that western 

boundary, would always have access into the community and 

would be able to bid more competitively than we were able to.  

And I had that told to me for nine years. 

 

This is the first time that they would have been able to bid 

competitively because their tax would have been exactly the 

same as Alberta's -- exactly the same.  And now they're having 

it taken away.  So you're going to have to set up policemen 

over on the other side in order to control exactly what this 

would have delivered to you, an increased opportunity for the 

benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had rigs in Swift Current that were outbid in the 

sand hills for natural gas.  I had oil fuel servicing companies 

outbid by people in Medicine Hat because of 

  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 295 

the E&H tax.  They didn't have to put up 7 per cent sales tax on 

a hundred-thousand-dollar piece of equipment.  But the people 

in Swift Current had to. 

 

And why would they be able to bid competitively?  Because 

they would get that all back.  Mr. Speaker, they would get it all 

back.  And then they would be at zero tax on that equipment, 

just like the people in Alberta.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why 

this tax is important for the people in my constituency, if it 

would have been rebated to them on a blended, harmonized, 

synchronized, -- whatever you want to call it -- basis.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is what the value of this is to the people of my 

constituency. 

 

I have about 3,000 farmers in my seat.  And if each one has a 

thousand acres, they probably would have netted 2,500 at least, 

rebate per farming unit.  And, Mr. Speaker, if they would have 

received that, that is larger than any other single grant given to 

my constituency.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is significant. 

 

And where would they be able to spend it, Mr. Speaker?  They 

would be able to spend it where they wanted to.  They could 

spend it in going to the rink.  They could spend it in going to 

buy the hamburger. They could spend it in going to the Met 

store or Zellers.  They could spend it in the barbershop.  They 

could spend it in necessities.  But now it's gone.  It's gone into 

the government's hands, and there it's going to be used. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was a way to relieve them of some of the 

problems that they had in the farming community.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is very very significant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we met with some of the agriculture 

manufacturing industry prior to the election.  And I want to just 

point out to you, Mr. Speaker, about the fact that IPSCO, for 

example, would be able to be just a little bit more competitive 

in the material that they bring in because they could be rebated 

for the cost of bringing that material in, on the basis of being 

able to go a little further to get that material and also be able to 

deliver to a community that would bid on it a little further away 

than they are today. 

 

And that, to IPSCO, was a significant advantage.  I didn't tell 

them that.  They told us that. 

 

And the Leader of the Opposition and I were there, and they 

told us that.  I'm not going to discount that -- because they told 

us that.  Leon was there.  Leon said that for every one of their 

tax benefits they would be able to . . . for one whole year -- 

their benefit was $50,000.  And, Mr. Speaker, that isn't a 

benefit necessarily to the larger community, but to that 

business it was. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was significant enough because that's on 

the profit side.  It didn't reduce their expenses to the place 

where they could have that cost saving going to something that 

was going to cost them anyway.  This was on the profit side.  It 

dealt with a profit capacity of that company.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that meant perhaps they could put one more man on 

the road, maybe two more men on the road, selling equipment 

all across this province, or in Manitoba or in Alberta.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that's important.  That's important to the job 

relationship 

of the people in those areas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make a point.  As I was listening to 

some of the discussion earlier on about the various opinions of 

people, and I was struck by the discussion of the member from 

Lloydminster.  In that discussion the individual  

_- the member from Lloydminster -- said that this tax was a 

negative tax to her constituency.  Mr. Speaker, the city of 

Lloydminster, Saskatchewan side, has not paid tax, E&H tax.  

And if she would be able to visualize that for the whole 

province, on E&H tax, wouldn't that be significant advantage to 

the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, on the business and the functions of business, out 

of that town, they could be an example of what you could do 

when businesses are exempt from paying E&H, when gas is the 

same price as Alberta's.  And I was through there this summer; 

it is the same price.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is significant. 

 

It's important, Mr. Speaker, for building and growing in this 

country, if we want to take and make a significant impact.  And 

I believe that it's necessary to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's important in my constituency for agriculture; 

it's important for the growth in agriculture; it's important in my 

constituency for the oil industry -- very significant.  And it's 

important for the growth and development of the agriculture 

processing and manufacturing industry in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have stood quietly by for the last 40 years 

waiting for Alberta to develop a processing and manufacturing 

industry, and they have.  Let's take one example in the alfalfa 

cubing industry.  Alberta's developed an industry.  What have 

the people in this province done? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have encouraged the development of a few 

plants in the north and the north-east.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 

need a whole lot more of that kind of processing and 

manufacturing.  And if they were to get a grant of the 7 per 

cent sales tax back in the cost of that construction, wouldn't 

that be significant.  Wouldn't that be a significant grant to that 

processing plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's important for the people of this 

Assembly to understand that.  And the people of the Yorkton 

area, from the people of the Nipawin area, and all of the people 

in that area where there is a large opportunity for growing 

alfalfa and marketing it, those people would have a significant 

benefit if they could get that 7 per cent sales tax back on that.  

One million dollars, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of sales tax.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, would be a significant grant to that 

community development bond, or to that community. 

 

Feature, for example, if the industry were to become involved 

in, as some was discussed, the tractor building thing that the 

people of Canora wanted to build.  They were interested in 

going to Europe and finding this tractor to build.  If they were 

going to put a plant together and they would get 7 per cent 

sales tax back, wouldn't that be 

  



296 Saskatchewan Hansard December 16, 1991 

significant advantage to that community, and reduce the cost to 

make it more competitive? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's why, Mr. Speaker, in 1975 about, Sask 

Wheat Pool moved to Alberta to build a natural gas fertilizer 

plant.  Why do you think they set one up in Medicine Hat and 

Calgary?  Because they wanted to get rid of tax -- because they 

wanted to get rid of tax, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now if we would have had the Co-op upgrader have an 

opportunity to have harmonization and put that 7 per cent 

rebate on $500 million, wouldn't that have been significant in 

providing an opportunity for this province for Federated 

Co-op?  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why it would have 

been good to blend these taxes together. 

 

Now you may disagree about whether GST should be 7, or 3, 

or 8.  You might disagree with the E&H being at 7, 5, or 4.  

But the principle is there and, Mr. Speaker, I can clearly recall 

the member who used to have the seat for Regina Centre, 

Churchill Downs.  He said in this Assembly more than once, he 

said what you need to do is harmonize the tax; give the break to 

the consumer.  Give the break to the consumer. 

 

In fact he was sitting right there when he said it, or standing 

right there when he said it.  And, Mr. Speaker, he was right 

then and if he would have the courage he would tell the rest of 

his caucus the same thing.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a rational way 

of thinking about it.  And he was standing right there when he 

said it, and he said it more than once.  He even said it outside 

the House in various places.  He said co-operate with the tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that, the administration costs would be 

reduced by $5 million -- $5 million, Mr. Speaker -- and that 

would be on a regular annual basis.  Mr. Speaker, if I took and 

calculated the benefit of the blending of the two taxes together, 

let the federal government collect it, let us audit it, that 5 

million would have gone a long way to providing aid for 

people in the city of Regina who are at the food banks.  It 

would have given a lot of advantage for the farming 

community.  It would have paid the interest on the difference 

between what the federal government is going to give today 

and what they're going to give in spring.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is significant to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, time after time we have been 

told about waste and mismanagement.  And, Mr. Speaker, that 

is waste and mismanagement.  If you have a good idea and 

don't put it to use that's a waste, Mr. Speaker.  And that 5 

million is a waste in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's a waste 

no matter which way you slice it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we could take that and add it to the 

financial report that we got here today as a benefit to the people 

of Saskatchewan, ACS would dearly love to have that $5 

million to enhance the opportunity for lending in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  And the Minister of Agriculture should 

stand there and defend it because it 

not only helps him it would give him an opportunity to collect 

on some of the arrears in ACS besides.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

would be significant. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I would get the $2,500 a farmer back, it 

would annually make my ACS payment for the next four years.  

And that's a fact.  And he sits there and laughs about it.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is not the way that the Minister of Agriculture 

should respond.  And that is why I think you're in error in 

doing it the way you're doing it. 

 

You might say, well the expanded E&H is right or wrong.  

That we can debate a long time.  But the fundamental of 

putting it together, as your former Finance critic said, is as 

fundamental then as it is today.  And, Mr. Speaker, it makes all 

kinds of sense for my farmers, for my ranchers, for my oil 

industry people, for my small business in my small 

communities, it makes a significant difference. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I believe, Mr. Speaker . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And the member over here said I 

lost the election.  Well I didn't lose the election, Mr. Speaker, I 

won.  And that's why I'm here.  I went around and I went on 

that basis.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had less 

votes in this election, in my seat, than they did the last time.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason I went 

around and I told them the truth about it and they believed me.  

And that's the truth -- as your member from Churchill Downs 

said it here prior to the election, and as I'm saying to you here 

today. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is just a whole lot about this that I think 

could benefit the people of my constituency.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, you can pass it off, they can jest about it, they can 

think it's insignificant.  But, Mr. Speaker, $200 million-plus to 

the business community in this province would have made a 

significant difference.  As a matter of fact, it could have built a 

few.  And that's why I think it's wrong for you not to 

harmonize. 
 

Now let's talk a little bit about what comes across the border 

from the U.S., which is exactly the same as what comes in from 

Alberta.  How many homes in the town of Maple Creek have 

their furniture in their houses purchased out of Medicine Hat?  

A significant amount of them, Mr. Speaker.  And why do they 

go there?  Why do they go there?  They go there because there 

is no tax on it.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's the reason.  As a 

matter of fact, they go there to buy lumber.  They go there to 

buy all those kinds of things.  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because it's 

E&H tax free. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn't those lumber stores or lumber 

yards and the hardware stores in Maple Creek be able to 

survive?  It's because they go to Alberta to buy it.  Wouldn't 

you? 
 

Mr. Speaker, the rebate would keep them here.  Mr. Speaker, 

the people . . . I just want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Finance doesn't even understand it, and that's why 

it's a serious problem.  And that's maybe why we have a 

financial report today instead of a budget  



December 16, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 297 

like he should have brought forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency, the people 

throughout the province would have benefitted.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the people on the west side understand what a level 

playing-field is between Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is why I think that not harmonizing is 

one of the most foolish things that this government could ever 

do.  It jeopardizes the opportunities in my constituency and the 

Maple Creek and Wilkie of businesses being able to establish. 

 

And that's why it's wrong.  It's fundamentally wrong, Mr. 

Speaker.  On those things that we could increase the jobs, give 

more benefit to the people in my constituency, the small 

business in my constituency in order to be competitive. 

 

We have talked a lot of times, Mr. Speaker, about the benefits 

that agriculture has received by being tax free.  That's a myth.  

Because in fact we do pay a lot of taxes. 

 

We pay taxes of goods coming in from the U.S. that is 

equipment that is attached to our tractors or trucks, our farm 

machinery -- we pay tax on that.  We always have.  But now it 

would be rebated. 

 

And the member from Shaunavon should really realize that.  

The people moving the equipment from Havre into Shaunavon 

constituency -- is there a reason why his Ford dealership quits?  

Is there a reason why John Deere is the only implement 

dealership that he has left in his constituency?  Is there a 

reason?  And, Mr. Speaker, it's this: if the farmers were getting 

their E&H back in the town of Shaunavon, which is right 

adjacent to my constituency, they would be able to benefit. 

 

Now just look at the oil patch in his area, if they were able to 

do that.  But I'll bet you, Mr. Speaker, the oil patch didn't 

support him.  It didn't support his stand in the election process.  

Mr. Speaker, that's the fundamental reason why I am not in 

favour of this Act nor will I be, because it seriously jeopardizes 

the farming community and further jeopardizes the farming 

community in my constituency. 

 

It jeopardizes the oil industry.  It jeopardizes the small 

business.  The co-ops -- why were the co-ops, Mr. Speaker, in 

favour of this?  Why was the chamber of commerce in favour 

of this?  Why were the boards of trade in my small 

communities in favour of this?  Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because 

the delivery trucks, the fridges, the stoves, and all of those 

things, they were going to get the 7 per cent sales tax back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, small business, the mechanics, have complained 

for years about not having their tools being able to be tax 

deductible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the first time they would have been able to 

get a sales tax rebate on anything that they purchased to repair 

your tractors and mine.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I'm not 

in favour of this proposal that you have in this Bill.  It flies in 

the face of benefitting rural Saskatchewan.  It flies in the face 

of doing it in my 

constituency and every one of yours.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is 

a fact.  That's a fact that you have not considered. 

 

I'll tell you why.  Because you didn't want to tell the people.  

You said . . . as a matter of fact I've got a number of appliance 

people in my constituency and they do a significant business in 

my constituency.  And they had people come in and said on the 

22nd we're going to buy these commodities tax free -- no tax.  

We're going to wait until the 22nd and we'll go in and buy that 

fridge and that stove tax free.  And he said no you're not; no 

you're not.  You're going to pay tax because that is what is 

fundamentally wrong . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10 o'clock this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 

 

 

 


