




















































Hansard: December 05, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 59 

 December 5, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 

shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

questions: 

 

 Regarding the contract with the College of Dental Surgeons 

to supply dental services to the children of Saskatchewan: (1) 

When does this contract expire? (2) Has the government held 

discussions or corresponded with the College of Dental 

Surgeons or the dental therapists in this regard? If so, what 

were the contents of the discussion or correspondence? (3) Is 

a review under way or planned? Who is conducting the 

review, and what is the mandate of this review? 

 

I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask the government 

the following question: 

 

 Regarding Carol Bryant: (1) Who did this individual replace 

upon being appointed the secretary to the SaskPower board 

of directors? (2) Details of employment including 

compensation and job description; (3) details of employment 

including compensation and job description of individual Ms. 

Bryant has replaced. (4) Is this the same Carol Bryant 

previously employed by the New Democratic Party of 

Saskatchewan? (5) To whom does she report? (6) Under what 

authority was she hired? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Don Ching: (1) Details of employment including 

compensation and job description. (2) To whom does he 

report? (3) Under what authority was he hired? 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding David Bucsis: (1) Was he fired? If so, was he fired 

with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he held 

filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of David Bucsis's employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of employment including compensation and job 

description for his replacement? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Claire Watson: (1) Was she fired? If so,  

was she fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the 

position she held filled by a replacement? If so, name the 

replacement. (3) What were the details of Claire Watson's 

employment including compensation and job description, and 

what are the details of employment including compensation 

and job description for her replacement? 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on Monday next 

ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Doug Deegan: (1) Was he fired? And if so, was he 

fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he 

held filled by a replacement and if so, name the replacement. 

(3) What were the details of Doug Deegan's employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of employment including compensation and job 

description for his replacement? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on Monday next ask the government the 

following question: 

 

 Regarding Jim Martyn: (1) Was he fired? If so, was he fired 

with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he held 

filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of Mr. Jim Martyn's employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of the employment including compensation and job 

description of his replacement? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Monday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Gloria-Faye Ronahan: (1) Was she fired? If so, 

was she fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the 

position she held filled by a replacement? If so, name the 

replacement. (3) What were the details of Gloria-Faye 

Ronahan's employment or what were they, including 

compensation and job description. And what are the details of 

employment including compensation and a job description 

for her replacement? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Monday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Mark Weigers: (1) Was he fired? If so, was he 

fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he 

held filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of Mark Weigers's employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of employment including compensation and job 

description for his replacement? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask  

 

  



60 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding George Young: (1) Was he fired? If so, was he 

fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he 

held filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of George Young's employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of employment including compensation and job 

description for his replacement? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 

on Monday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Rod Hiltz: (1) Was he fired? If so, was he fired 

with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he held 

filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of Rod Hiltz's employment including 

compensation and job description, and what are the details of 

employment including compensation and job description for 

his replacement? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday next ask the 

government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Brenda Barootes: (1) Was she fired? If so, was she 

fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position she 

held filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement. (3) 

What were the details of Brenda Barootes' employment 

including compensation and job description, and what are the 

details of employment including compensation and job 

description for her replacement? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and to all members of the 

Assembly through you, a group of eight teenagers who are 

attending school at Dales House in the constituency of Regina 

Rosemont. They're sitting in your gallery today, Mr. Speaker. 

I'll be meeting with them at 2:30 on the stairs for pictures, and 

afterwards for refreshments. They're accompanied by their 

teachers Pam Metz and Roshnie Thaver. 

 

And I would like all members of the Assembly to welcome 

these fine people here this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Implications of the Milgaard Case 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question 

today to the Minister of Justice. Yesterday you indicated to us 

here in the legislature that your view was not that of the 

member from Regina South regarding the Milgaard case. Now 

I want to ask you a question regarding the Milgaard and the 

Fisher case: have you 

taken the time to review these files to this point? 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the minister answers, we don't have a 

member from Regina South. There's a member from Regina 

Albert South. I want just to remind all members. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the question, 

yes, I have informed myself of what I think are the relevant 

aspects of both files. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to apologize for that. I 

haven't tuned myself into all the new names yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, considering that the Fisher files 

have been said to either have been lost or not available, and 

given that the member from Regina . . . the new seat from 

Albert was involved in both the Fisher and the Milgaard case, 

and given that the attorney general at the time was the member 

from Riversdale and now the Premier, and given that the 

Justice department must always be an independent arbiter -- 

would you consider an independent legal review of these files? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Yes, I have not considered that. I want 

to say that we have looked at both files, and I'm satisfied on the 

basis of the information that I have obtained that there was 

nothing untoward about it. They were both handled in an 

appropriate way to the conclusion. 

 

The Milgaard matter had been through the trial and through 

appeal prior to my leader becoming the attorney general. And 

in the case of Fisher, that was of course a Manitoba proceeding 

initially, and he pleaded guilty to four offences in 

Saskatchewan in December of 1971. But on the basis of what I 

know about the files, I can't think of any reason why we would 

want to review them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Another question regarding the Fisher files. Is 

it true then that the files were not destroyed or are not 

available? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, our files from the 

Department of Justice on both those cases are complete, and 

they are there. We have made them available, for example, to 

the federal authorities if they want to look at them in 

connection with the Milgaard case. And we're prepared to 

continue to do that. We have nothing to hide on those files at 

all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question. We have a 

situation I believe that is very serious and it's serious for our 

judicial system. We have the prospect of the Supreme Court of 

Canada looking at this and deciding whether or not in fact the 

trial was correct, and the aspect of the guidance from both the 

member from Alberta . . . Albert South and the minister from 

Riversdale -- it's easy for you to say. 

 

We do know that the answer to the . . . we do not know the 

answer to that question yet. However, because of these 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

gentlemen's involvement and because of their involvement in 

the government and in order to protect both them and the 

Legislative Assembly, would you consider that? You said no 

before, but I really want to say again: would you reiterate that 

you don't think a legal counsel is necessary because of this to 

protect both them and this Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the matter is of course 

before the Supreme Court of justice in connection with the 

review of the Milgaard case, in the terms stated by the federal 

Justice minister with which the member is familiar. Our files 

are open and available to that process, to the lawyers involved 

in that appeal, or that review, by the Supreme Court. I'm not at 

all certain what it is that we would be looking for if we had 

somebody come in and look at our files again. I'm not rejecting 

it out of hand. Perhaps the member and I can chat about it 

informally to see just exactly what it is he has in mind. 

 

I reiterate on both the Milgaard and the Fisher matters, we have 

nothing to hide. All of our files will be available to the 

Supreme Court and the people involved in that hearing. And as 

we see it, we just let that process take its course, play whatever 

role is considered appropriate for us to play in that, and let 

justice handle it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Another question to 

the Minister of Justice. I have a reference here about the 

responsibility to the court and to the Department of Justice by a 

definition of a prosecutorial responsibility, and a general nature 

of the position by a Mr. Beck or whoever that is, quoting from 

criminal law of Canada. And he says this: 

 

 that the position of prosecuting counsel in a criminal case is 

not that of an ordinary counsel of civil law or a civil case, but 

that he is acting in a quasi judicial capacity, and ought to 

regard himself as a part of the Court; that while he was there 

to conduct this case, he has to do it at his discretion, but with 

a feeling of responsibility, not as if trying to obtain a verdict, 

but to assist the Judge in fairly putting the case before the 

jury and nothing more. 

 

And I wonder if that in fact was done in this case by the 

member from Albert South and the member from Riversdale? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. 

member, I think that he has found a good reference so far as the 

duties of a prosecuting lawyer are concerned. I agree that those 

are in fact the elements of a good prosecutor and I certainly 

agree with that statement. 

 

So far as the way in which the Milgaard case was conducted is 

concerned, that matter has already been to the Saskatchewan 

Court of Appeal and to the Supreme Court of Canada following 

the original trial, and it is a question that has to be before the 

Supreme Court on this review. The question is whether or not 

David Milgaard received a fair trial, whether there isn't any 

new evidence that pertains to it so that . . . The member from 

Regina 

Albert South is one of the most respected prosecutors that this 

province has ever seen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- In the unlikely event that there was 

anything remiss in his handling of that trial, no doubt the 

Supreme Court will take that into account in reviewing the 

Milgaard case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Were the files in 

Saskatoon that are not there, that are held by the police and are 

gone, are those files in the Department of Justice or are they 

not in the Department of Justice? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Those Saskatoon files are not and were 

not in the Department of Justice. They were in Saskatoon. I 

think I take no different view of this whole situation than did 

my predecessors in my office, Mr. Lane and . . . (inaudible) . . . 

You know as far as what happened in Saskatoon to those files, 

I can't speak for that. We know what we have read in the 

newspapers, and I can't stand in this Assembly and answer for 

the city police department in Saskatoon. But I can say that so 

far as we're concerned, our files are intact and are available to 

the process that's going on in the Supreme Court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Saskatchewan Works Program 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I direct 

my question, Mr. Speaker, to the new Minister of Social 

Services, and I think it's obvious the line of questioning that I 

will be pursuing, following media reports, in particular the 

Leader-Post this morning, that I was reading about some 

concern that she has with the previous administration's welfare 

reform package, and particularly singling out . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I expected no other response than that from 

members opposite, Mr. Speaker, but in particular the Sask 

Works program where she did make the comment that it did 

not have enough counselling, that it did not have enough 

training component, that it did not have enough educational 

component, and then effectively scuttling the program, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I would like to ask the minister now: why would you 

choose to eliminate and terminate a program such as Sask 

Works which is an integral part of the entire welfare package 

that we have been . . . reform package that we have instituted? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, could I correct the hon. 

member first? We have frozen the program because the 

program has run out of money and we can't continue to spend 

money which we don't have. 

 

I would also correct the member opposite in saying that we 

have not cancelled any program. What we have said is we want 

that program reviewed, and we want it  



62 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

reviewed for one simple reason. What we have seen from that 

program is that it is a cycle. People go from social assistance to 

short-term jobs to unemployment, back to social assistance. 

The approach of this government is to have long-term solutions 

to poverty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We want to see these people move 

from social assistance, out of poverty, into long-term jobs. But 

what I have said, and I have said consistently, is that we are 

reviewing it so that there will be an opportunity for the people 

who deliver the program, the recipients, and for the community 

to participate. And I invite the member opposite, if he has 

strong views, to participate in our review. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, we'll come to the answer about 

the termination of the program and I will be pursuing that line 

of questioning in a moment, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But first of all, a direct question to the minister: and that is that 

are there any civil servants that have served both the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) administration, the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) administration, such as Dr. Allan Hansen, who 

was summarily dismissed without cause? And we'll take up that 

issue in a little while. But other than that, are there any civil 

servants that have been fired without cause in your 

administration in Social Services or related agencies? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I refer to a gentleman by the name of Dave 

Bucsis that was fired summarily last week, the man who was in 

charge of employment services, director of Sask Works, who is 

no longer now with the Department of Social Services. And I'm 

surprised, Madam Minister, that you would not be aware of his 

summary dismissal. 

 

And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, at the same time, with 

his dismissal and your comment, I found kind of intriguing 

when you said that there was no money thanks to us in the Sask 

Works program. My understanding, Madam Minister, is that 

there . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. The member was asked one 

question, which one does he want to ask? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The question I want to ask, Mr. Speaker, and 

I'm sorry for carrying on, is: what has happened to the 

$300,000 that was left in the program as of last week? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I was informed by the 

deputy minister that the program has . . . the budget for the 

program has been expended. His recommendation to me was 

that we should not go beyond the allotted money. That is, we 

should not be overspending. So that was his recommendation. I 

accepted his recommendation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Further supplement to that question, Mr. 

Minister. Three hundred thousand dollars in the budget left 

over. My information, Madam Minister - and I would suggest 

that you check this out very, very carefully -- is that that money 

is no longer with the Sask Works program but rather has been 

transferred to income security. And, Madam Minister, income 

security is that which pays out social welfare cheques. 

 

Is this what you're interested in more is paying out social 

welfare cheques than giving individuals the opportunity to have 

training and jobs? Is that your intent, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what we are interested 

in, in terms of people who are on social assistance, is to work 

with them to get them off social assistance and to provide them 

with long-term employment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- That's what we are interested in. In 

order to do that, what they require is a variety of things. Often 

it's counselling. Often it's job training. Often it's educational 

upgrading. But if you want, as our government does, a 

long-term solution to poverty, you have to have those elements 

involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I am just shocked at the idea 

that you are . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- . . . is this a new question? And will you 

address the Speaker . . . 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- This is a brand new question, Mr. Speaker. 

And through you, Mr. Speaker, I address the question to 

Madam Minister. 

 

And the statement I would like to precede that with is: I am 

shocked to hear that you are now more intent on putting people 

and keeping people on social welfare than in pursuing the 

legitimate purpose for which Sask Works was created -- to give 

training, to give counselling, and to give these people the 

opportunity to become productive members of the work-force 

instead of relying upon that safety net that you people like to 

trap people into and keep them there. Rather than that, Madam 

Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Does the member have a 

question? Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister was 

-- and I thought I put it rather quite directly -- what is your 

direction? Your direction seems to me to be to put people on 

the social welfare form, keep your thumb on them, keep them 

under social welfare, instead of giving them the opportunity to 

become productive members of society. Is that not your intent, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, the members 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

opposite were in power for nine years. What we saw in this 

province was a dramatic and a disgraceful increase in poverty 

rates. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We saw more and more people 

going on to social assistance. The members opposite believe in 

a bottom line. In terms of a bottom line in that account, you've 

failed miserably. We are trying to remedy the damage that you 

have done to this province. We are trying to take people who 

live in poverty and develop long-term programs to get them out 

of poverty. We have announced a review of the major 

programs. If you want to participate with us in using the benefit 

of your past knowledge and experience, we welcome that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister. Madam Minister, a further quote in the article from 

the Leader-Post and you are quoted, Madam Minister, as 

saying: 

 

 If the program were to be revived, (which obviously means 

that it's been cancelled) MacKinnon said (that) the 

department would not threaten to cut people off welfare if 

they refused to work. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, could you tell this Assembly and could 

you tell the people of Saskatchewan what you mean by that? 

Are you saying -- and I'll just paraphrase this and you can react 

to this as the question -- are you saying that if there's an 

able-bodied man who is capable of working, and a job presents 

itself for that individual to accept and he refuses, that you are 

now prepared to say to the people of Saskatchewan that you are 

not going to cut him off or hold him accountable for himself, 

but rather hold the taxpayer of Saskatchewan responsible for a 

person who refuses to work if he can and if a job is available? 

Answer that, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I will gladly clarify 

that point. We have programs in this province in which people 

on social assistance work and do various public works. They 

are fine with me because they are voluntary. One of the things 

the members opposite did in their nine years to the poor in this 

province, was they not only deprived them of the means to 

make ends meet, they also deprived them of their dignity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Because the members opposite have 

left the cupboard so bare, there is no money left. We may be 

able to do very little for these people in terms of helping them 

make ends meet. But I'll tell you one thing this government will 

do, we will restore to these people as much as we can their 

sense of dignity and self respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Help for the Ukraine 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, first I would like to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker, and through you 

I would like to ask the minister of economic development and 

trade . . . Mr. Speaker, my question is, as everyone in the 

House knows, the Ukraine has recently proclaimed 

independence and countries around the world are recognizing 

that independence with whole-hearted support. As the minister 

will know, the previous government initiated a special advisor 

to the Ukraine, Dr. Peter Woroby, who was a nominee of the 

Ukrainian community. Will the minister today tell the House 

what his government plans to do with this special advisor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to say that the Premier of the province has congratulated 

the Ukraine in its new-found position in the world and we wish 

them the very best. 

 

In regards to the position in the government that you refer to, 

we'll obviously be looking at keeping that position and 

expanding it. I've met with the ambassador from 

Czechoslovakia recently and intend to meet with him again 

soon in Ottawa, because I think eastern Europe has opened up a 

whole new area of market and technology that we can be 

sharing with those people and in turn creating jobs in 

Saskatchewan, and we'll be looking at that very closely. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker. My 

question is also to the minister of economic development and 

trade, and it involves a response to the cries for help and 

co-operation by the people of the Ukraine and by Ukrainians 

here in this province. Will the minister consider establishing a 

professional managerial exchange program with the Ukraine 

that would answer to some extent the calls for help in 

establishing modern, up-to-date management training, technical 

training and professional techniques in a country desperate to 

succeed in the global economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 

say that the new Premier of the province has been involved in 

many ways in the process of helping with the opening up of 

eastern Europe. We look at all areas, not only Ukraine but 

many other areas. I know that, and I believe that people from 

SaskTel International for example, are meeting with people in 

Czechoslovakia right now in terms of exporting some of our 

technology in SaskTel. 

 

I also know that there are ongoing discussions at the embassy 

level. For example, with Czechoslovakia dealing with dry land 

farming, that we might be able to share and possibly look at 

creating employment in terms of exchange between eastern 

Europe and Saskatchewan. I think the idea warrants merit. 

We're working on that. 

 

I want to say as well that any opportunity for economic 

development that comes from the opposition, either the 

Conservative or Liberal caucus, is very much appreciated. 

  



64 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Provincial Policy on Agriculture 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I may, Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to also congratulate you on your appointment 

as Speaker. I've known you since 1978 when I was first elected 

to this House, and I'm sure you'll do a good job. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture and I'd like to ask him . . . or just congratulate him 

on his appointment as Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I'm sure that he'll do a good job as Minister 

of Agriculture because he comes from . . . especially when he 

knows that in the province of Saskatchewan that we have a 

critical situation with the farmers. He knows that; he comes 

from the grain belt -- the main grain belt of Saskatchewan. He's 

also in an area where the farm debt is at an all time high since 

1939. I'm sure he's well aware of that. And especially I'm sure 

he must understand, Mr. Speaker, that there's 60,000 farmers in 

Saskatchewan and there's 15,000-plus at the board level in 

serious trouble. 

 

In light of all this, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say to the minister . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . There's lots of time, Mr. Speaker. 

In light of all this, Mr. Speaker, at election time and prior to 

election time, you and the NDP went throughout this province 

saying that there will be a plan for farmers, to save all the 

farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: can you tell us and 

this House and all the farmers in Saskatchewan what is that 

plan and is it in place in its entirety? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you for . . . I thank the member 

opposite for his remarks and I want to assure him that we do 

completely understand the financial situation in agriculture, 

one that each of us who is part of the farming sector feel very 

strongly and have made a point of communicating to Ottawa in 

a very strong way along with the farm groups that have 

expressed their concern. 

 

The situation in agriculture is not simple and the member 

opposite is clearly aware of that. We have international 

situations that have created a particular crisis right now and we 

support the national initiatives in terms of resolution of the 

problems there. We are involved in the continuing programs, 

which we have expressed our concerns about, but which were 

established in the terms that the members opposite were in 

power, that have major weaknesses which we have recently 

established a committee to review. 

 

We have taken the initiative that we promised in terms of 

beginning discussions with lending institutions about a 

co-operative approach to debt restructuring, and it's certainly 

our intent to exercise our responsibilities of the provincial 

government to encourage others responsible and to challenge 

ourselves to deal with the questions of income and debt and the 

continuing development of the agricultural enterprise in 

Saskatchewan in an integrated 

way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 6 of this 

Assembly, it is my duty to rise today on a point of privilege 

both in my capacity as member of this Assembly and that as 

chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. Pursuant to the 

rules, I provided Mr. Speaker notice this morning that I would 

be raising this point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point is a complex one and goes to the heart 

of the legislature's privilege, so I ask the indulgence of the 

Assembly for me to outline the research that I have undertaken, 

Mr. Speaker, so that this case may be made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my contention that the privileges of the 

Assembly, the privileges of the Public Accounts Committee as 

a delegated authority of this Assembly, and the privileges of 

individual members of this legislature have been breached by 

the following: (1) an order in council that seeks to establish a 

body that usurps the rightful, traditional, and constitutional 

responsibilities of the legislature for oversight and 

accountability functions; (2) an order in council by the 

executive government that seeks to inappropriately attach the 

Provincial Auditor to a creature of executive government; (3) 

Mr. Speaker, arising from both of these orders in council, an 

attempt by the executive government to impair the ability of 

the Public Accounts Committee to conduct its mandated 

business and particularly to interfere with the ability of this 

Assembly's chairman of Public Accounts to successfully 

execute his duties. 

 

Mr. Speaker, without going through the usual remarks 

reasserting what constitutes privilege, let me just say that the 

impairment of a member, a committee, or an officer of this 

Assembly are all prima facie cases of privilege, as is an attempt 

to derogate the powers of the legislature without its consent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first order in council under question is that 

which purports to use the authority of The Public Inquiries Act 

to establish a body of executive government designated by the 

order as a financial management review commission. 

 

Schedule A of that order sets out the terms of reference of this 

body which, for convenience, I will refer to as the Gass 

tribunal, given that the appointed chairman is one Donald Gass; 

the terms of reference, Mr. Speaker, set out in items 3 through 

5, with particular emphasis on item 5, a process to hold the 

executive government itself accountable. In effect, Mr. 

Speaker, the executive government has tried by order to replace 

the accountability functions of this legislature. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, let me review the history of parliament's 

unquestioned right and indeed need to be the sole agent of 

accountability for the executive government, and indeed, with 

the exception of the judiciary, the sole unit properly able to 

exercise oversight over the activities of government. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

In his book, The History of the English Constitution, Dr. 

Rudolph Gneist writes about how the Magna Carta came into 

being as a result of the desire of the people to have control over 

the funds collected and expanded by the government, and to 

hold the government accountable for its actions. He describes 

the growing move toward outright warfare and then says: 

 

 In this crisis negotiations for peace are made upon the 

meadows of Runnymede in which the King, with his small 

retinue upon one side, and the rebellious barons in full 

martial array upon the other, treat together, the Earl of 

Pembroke acting as mediator. The barons had originally 

drawn up in a formal article the grievances of the country, 

articles which, revised and completed, were recognized by 

the King by affixing his great seal, and being then formally 

issued, were raised to a royal charter. 

 

There are many other quotes, Mr. Speaker, of the same vein all 

the way through English parliamentary history which confirm 

Magna Carta in the duties of king, the duties of Executive 

Council, and the duties of the legislature very clearly. If Mr. 

Speaker wishes, I can go through them, but I think for the 

Assembly and expediency, I will not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in a very real way, the very first test of this 

session is for a confirmation of what was laid down in Magna 

Carta. For the executive, the cabinet, to presume to take on the 

role of holding itself accountable, no matter how admirable the 

move, motives of the day might be, it is a profoundly 

dangerous thing to do. This action, this attempt to combine the 

powers of the legislature with the powers of the executive have 

received much imminent comment in hundreds of years, as I 

have said. 

 

People need to understand, Mr. Speaker, that this tribunal has 

been given the power by the Premier to force any person, 

including members of this Assembly, to appear before and 

testify against their will, or any business to deliver to it their 

business records or any other information it in its wisdom 

decide it should have. These are judicial powers to be wielded 

by partisan appointees of the executive government in the 

pursuit of a mandate. At least as stated, Mr. Speaker, these are 

things that are reserved by this Assembly to the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

(1445) 

 

One eminent person by the name of Montesquieu says this 

about the issue, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Again, there is no liberty, if the judiciary power be not 

separated from the legislative and the executive . . . Were it 

joined to the executive power, the judge might behave with 

violence and oppression. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I have listened very carefully to 

the member in making his point of privilege, and I want him to 

summarize very quickly now the arguments that he wishes to 

make. I've listened to you for six minutes and I'll give you a 

few more moments to make 

your point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

will do my very best to reiterate the points that I've made. 

 

I will say, Mr. Speaker, and give a recommendation to this 

House on the points that I've already raised. My 

recommendation would be today that to accomplish the tasks 

set out by Executive Council, then I think it is appropriate for 

this Assembly to appoint one person to take charge of such a 

review and use his judgement and authority derived from this 

legislature to decide who else needs to assist him. My nominee, 

Mr. Speaker, for that job would of course be the Provincial 

Auditor himself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I sent a letter to the Premier on this particular 

subject and was not answered in substance by him. 

 

We cannot have accountability from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I've asked the member to make 

his point of privilege. I have now listened seven minutes. I 

want the member to make his point immediately. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very quickly. The 

Premier by his order in council is attempting to derogate the 

Assembly's ability to hold the Executive Council accountable. 

The Premier by his order in council is attempting to prejudge, 

indeed poison the independence of the Provincial Auditor in 

the exclusive relationship of that office with the Assembly. 

And the Premier through his order in council is attempting to 

gut the responsibilities of the Public Accounts Committee and 

prejudge the relationship between the chairman of that 

committee and the Provincial Auditor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in concluding my point, which I think you will 

see I have studied with great care if I had been able to talk 

about all of it, and not treated frivolously, Mr. Speaker, I want 

to emphasize the basic construction of our system of 

democracy in this province. 

 

It is the dual process where the government asks for money and 

the House assents to those requests on the most vital condition 

that the House shall have the power to hold the government 

accountable; that in no instance shall the government construe 

itself to be its own examiner. And whether the motives of the 

Premier are in fact partisan or not . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. Order. I have listened for 

eight minutes or nine minutes to the member to make his point 

of privilege. I believe I've heard sufficient. I thank the member 

for giving me notice of this question of privilege which was 

received in my office around 12 noon today pursuant to rule 6, 

for which I thank the hon. member. The notice while sufficient 

under rule 6 did not however contain the information to make 

the member's case, and therefore I will be deferring my ruling 

on this question today. 

 

But before doing that I wish to hear the views of other hon. 

members on this matter. If there are any other views, I will 

listen to them now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Other views. 

I have heard sufficiently from the member from 

  



66 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Thunder Creek. I want to hear the views now of other members 

in this House. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would be pleased to table my presentation to 

the House if it so wishes. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think that's in order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

respond to the motion of privilege and to the remarks that the 

member made opposite in addressing that motion, I might add, 

at some length. And I want to say the following. 

 

First of all, it is not a motion of privilege, although you will 

decide that, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, what has 

happened with the appointment of the independent Financial 

Management Review Commission is not new in Saskatchewan 

or in this legislature. 

 

I want to remind the members opposite that the members 

opposite in 1982 did precisely the same thing with the 

establishment of the Wolfgang Wolff commission which 

exercised this kind of process as well, Mr. Speaker. I ask the 

members opposite, where was he . . . or where his colleague, 

the Leader of the Opposition, when he sat over here on this side 

of the House when that kind of an inquiry was established. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, the other point I want to make is this. 

The Financial Management Review Commission has the 

sanction and approval and the support of the Provincial 

Auditor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Provincial Auditor was 

involved in the drawing up of the terms of reference of this 

commission. The Provincial Auditor has agreed and by order in 

council has been appointed to act as a special advisor to the 

Financial Management Review Commission. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee will 

function as it always has. It will probably function better now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It will function even better now, 

Mr. Speaker, because it will have presented before it all of the 

information that the Provincial Auditor and the committee has 

a right to know, far different from what was the case under the 

former administration who used to not provide information to 

the auditor . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. The comments are not to be 

argumentative or debatable. I wish you to make your points of 

privilege. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me conclude by making 

reference to my last point again, and that is that the rights 

of the Public Accounts Committee are not being infringed on. 

In fact the work that is being carried on will enhance the work 

of the Public Accounts Committee because it will have 

available the information that is provided through the work of 

the Financial Management Review Commission. 

 

We said that it's important for the government of this province 

to be open. That means the books need to be opened. That 

means the public has a right to know where their tax dollars are 

being spent and whether public policy has been administered 

on their behalf in an appropriate way. 

 

So I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is not a point of privilege; this 

in fact enhances the accountability of government, and that is 

the right thing to do and that's why the government is doing it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had not 

anticipated getting involved in this discussion, but we do 

believe very sincerely on this side of the House that the 

question of privilege that is before this House is of paramount 

importance. And to do that, I want to summarize some of the 

major salient points that we feel that we have to make. 

 

One of them is in addressing the Wolfgang report that we have 

in our submission to and our response to that. There is no 

resemblance to the Wolfgang report in relationship to what is 

happening here. That report did not deal with holding the 

executive accountable, but how the executive should actually 

organize itself. And more importantly, even if the Wolff report 

did do so, what is being attempted here, it would not make it 

right and it would make it no less a breach of privilege for this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on a personal note, what I am really concerned 

about is that the Executive Council now is going to be taking 

the role of the Provincial Auditor -- a creature of this 

Assembly, if I may use that term -- because what they're doing 

is turning the Provincial Auditor into a creature of the 

Executive Council. That is wrong. The Provincial Auditor must 

be a servant of this Assembly. He cannot sit on the Gass 

Commission, make recommendations about the accountability 

process, and then later on sit in Public Accounts and advise the 

members on Public Accounts as to whether the reporting 

procedure of the Gass Commission was relevant. This is 

compromising the role of the Provincial Auditor, and it sets an 

extremely dangerous, dangerous precedent, Mr. Speaker. It 

cannot be allowed to happen. Thank you for your indulgence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take just a 

couple of moments and no longer, to outline why I think the 

privilege motion is not in order and should be rejected. First of 

all, in Beauchesne's on page 25, in dealing with the raising of a 

question of privilege, I want to quote in the area of how 

privilege should be raised in the Assembly, under section 82: 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

 A question of privilege must be brought to the attention of 

the House at the first possible opportunity. Even a gap of a 

few days may invalidate the claim for precedence in the 

House. 

 

I believe this is our fourth day of sitting here in the Assembly. 

Obviously on the first day, the throne speech being read, we 

probably could argue that that wasn't an opportune time for 

privilege. But I think the time lapse, what has happened here is 

caucus research people are scrambling to keep the opposition 

with something to do, have come up with this brilliant idea of 

privilege. I think it should be treated with that amount of 

consideration. 

 

Having said that, I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition 

that I remember very well back in 1982 when Mr. Wolfgang 

Wolff was doing his review of the state of the economy and 

found out that the books were balanced. And there was a 

statement signed by Mr. Andrew that there was $39 million . . . 

$139 million. After the review was done it was found that there 

was a surplus of $139 million. 

 

Now I want to say to the leader opposite that we know why 

these people don't want the books opened. We know very well 

why they don't want the books opened. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Has the member got a point to raise in 

fact, or is he being argumentative? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes I do have a point to make and 

it's first of all, Mr. Speaker, the time lapse, as I indicate, I think 

is a relevant consideration that you should consider; but 

secondly, the auditor who has indicated that his involvement in 

the opening of the books is an important part of the process. He 

has made the argument, and auditors in the past few years have 

made the argument that they get about 50 per cent of the 

information from the Conservative government at that time, led 

by the member from Estevan, and that's why he is involved in 

opening the books. 

 

And I say that this process . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I say one other thing, Mr. Speaker, 

that this issue was raised before the public of Saskatchewan 

during the last election and leading up to the election. 

 

We indicated we're going to open the books. We held an 

election on the basis of opening the books. We are now 

opening the books. The only people opposed to the opening of 

the books are the 10 . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I thank all hon. members for 

their comments, and I will reserve my decision and of course 

have a look at all those comments and bring back a decision on 

a later day. Thank you very much. 

 

Are there any other items on orders of the day? 
 

(1500) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as relates to questions 

put by members, item no. 1, I would ask that this question be 

converted to order for return. 
 

Mr. Speaker, in the event that there was some confusion, I want 

it as an order for return debatable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the question put by members, item 

no. 2, I would ask that this question be converted to a motion 

for return debatable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer put by members, item 3, I would wish 

to table that at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as it relates to questions put by members, item 4, 

I would ask that this question be converted to order for return 

debatable. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member makes a statement on 

question 5, I have a statement to make. Question number 5, I 

want to refer all hon. members to rule 38(1) Rules and 

Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan which 

states that: 

 

 Written questions may be placed on the Order Paper (only so 

long as they seek) . . . information . . . relating to public 

affairs. 

 

Similarly, Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th 

Edition, paragraph 428 states as follows: 

 

 "A question . . . must not: 

 

 (dd)  deal with matters not officially connected with 

Government or Parliament, or which are of a private 

nature. 

 

The political contributions and political activities of individual 

citizens is not a matter of administrative responsibility of any 

minister in this Assembly. 

 

If such matters have a relation to public affairs, then that is a 

subject for debate and not appropriate in the form of a written 

question. Members cannot ask ministers to report on matters 

for which they have no official responsibility. For this reason, I 

rule the question out of order. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 
 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, my first words in this House 

are to you. As the New Democrat member from  

  



68 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Regina Wascana Plains, I wish to congratulate you on your 

successful election to the revered chair of Speaker of the 

House. 

 

I will do my best to abide by the rules of this Assembly, and 

I'm confident that you will rule with fairness for all members 

and you will serve to maintain this Chamber as a respected 

home of constructive debate. 

 

As we all know, the office of Speaker is an extremely vital one, 

an office of critical importance to our legislative system. Being 

the Speaker is not an easy job. I wish you well in the 

discharging of your duties. 

 

At this time I would also like to offer my sincerest 

congratulations to the mover of the throne speech, the member 

from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, and the seconder, the hon. NDP 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Both members did an exemplary job. They have demonstrated 

the high calibre of individuals who bring their expertise to our 

government. We know we have a lot to accomplish but we are 

all more than willing and able to tackle the task. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I wish to extend my best wishes to all the 

new members of this Assembly as well. Being an MLA is an 

honourable pursuit. We must demonstrate to the public we 

serve that being a politician is a very high calling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Being an MLA in these times brings with it 

some unique challenges -- challenges we as a government, as a 

unified New Democrat team, will work to achieve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also wish to thank the first speaker of the 

opposition who demonstrated yesterday so clearly why the 

people in Wascana Plains worked hard for positive change in 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- For me this is a personal privilege and a very 

special honour to be chosen by the people of south-east Regina. 

I sincerely thank them for their trust. I am proud to represent 

their views and their desire for fair, open, and accountable 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- My constituency is located in the south-east 

corner of Regina. It is bordered by Victoria Avenue on the 

north and Park Street on the west, the city limits on the south 

and the east. My riding contains the Plains Hospital, the 

Victoria Square Mall, the Wascana Centre, and the SIAST 

(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 

Parkway Campus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I stand before you, I would like to say that 

Wascana Plains has been home to me for most of my life. 

In actual fact I'm now living six blocks away from my 

childhood home. I grew up in my constituency and have been 

witness to the many changes it has undergone over the years. 

 

Regina Wascana Plains is a leading edge constituency, a 

reflection of all of society, a cross-section of the mixed cultural 

and social fabric that makes our province great. 

 

The neighbourhood that I grew up in is home to many single 

parent families and to the working poor. The working poor are 

nuclear families with the same values as you and I, the same 

desires and dreams for their children. To realize these dreams 

however, often both parents must work to meet their family's 

demands. The sad thing is their combined incomes only barely 

address the essentials. Although both parents work, many of 

these couples struggle to live on incomes well below the 

poverty line. For them it is difficult, if not impossible, to find 

accessible, licensed, and reasonably priced child care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency brings new meaning to the term 

neighbourhood. Their spirit and mutual caring is what my 

family and I have experienced first hand -- extraordinary 

compassion and caring, people making time for others despite 

the busy routine of all our lives. The people of my 

neighbourhood constantly remind me of a quote from J.S. 

Wordsworth: 

 

 Every unjustly treated man, every defenceless woman, every 

neglected child has a neighbour somewhere. Someone is 

responsible! 

 

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, my neighbours know we are all 

responsible, and the next decade will prove that our 

commitment is to the community spirit that personifies each 

and every one of my constituents in Wascana Plains. 

 

I bring to this Assembly many years of experience in local 

government. As a past member of the Wascana Centre 

Authority, I acknowledge with pride the Authority and the 

Legislative Buildings that are a product of past government 

vision and long-range planning. 

 

I know I am now part of a government that cares enough to 

continue this vision and will return to long-range planning, that 

won't be side-tracked by immediate short-term greed and gain 

of the past government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- As a former member of Regina City Council, 

I supported and encouraged Regina's economic development 

strategy as a model that has brought together business, labour, 

civic and provincial governments, to formulate a 

community-based plan of action for sustainable development 

that can easily translate into a provincial strategy. 

 

I bring to this Assembly personal experience dealing with 

women's issues. I chaired the first municipal task force on 

women's issues for Canada. Saskatchewan's women have a 

proud history of outstanding contribution to their families, their 

communities, and the development of our province. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- The NDP government recognizes their 

accomplishments and understands their concerns. Understands 

that the issues facing them are not just women's issues but 

issues affecting all of us -- issues that need to be addressed to 

achieve economic and social equality; issues that pertain to 

women and family violence, safe and affordable housing, vital 

public transportation; issues that affect the very fabric of our 

communities. 

 

Tomorrow we will remember the women who are victims of 

violence and fear. We will remember our women who are not 

in transition houses or second-stage housing, and we will 

remember women and children who live the fear of violence 

every day. 

 

The people of Wascana Plains and myself have witnessed a 

province that had been dismantling the vital programs and 

services over the past nine years. With that in mind, I have 

been committed to the second phase of health care, the 

preventative wellness model of health care. 

 

And therefore I'm committed to our government who will work 

with communities to establish local, community-controlled 

health centres which will include health care services and 

programs for those with special needs. I am committed to this 

positive new vision for Saskatchewan health care in the 1990s. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, we're proud of our seniors, our 

pioneers. Their hard work and gritty determination built our 

communities, built this province. They have earned the right to 

a retirement with dignity and security, not a retirement that 

under the former government meant decisions between 

much-needed medication and food; not a retirement of neglect 

and unregulated and unlicensed care homes. 

 

It is with a heavy heart that I bring to this Assembly experience 

with the mayor's task force on hunger. I witnessed first hand 

the devastating effects poverty and hunger have on our 

children, indeed have on our future. We want and we need 

strong direction to overcome this disturbing phenomenon, a 

phenomenon created by the economic strategies of the 

provincial and federal Conservative regimes. 

 

We will strive to achieve the goal of full employment for 

working people in the province, strive to eliminate the need for 

food banks, strive to provide adequate funding for lunch 

programs in schools and child care centres which identify the 

needs of hungry children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- It perhaps sounds like we have a long way to 

go after the cruelty of the past administration, but we already 

know what needs to be done. We have a clear understanding of 

the issues, with thanks in part to people, people who helped 

prepare a working paper under the guidance of Peter Prebble. 

Knowing the issues, knowing 

the long-term solutions, as our minister presented today, is half 

the battle, a battle that we fully intend to win. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- At the civic level and on behalf of every 

citizen, I fought for public involvement in government. And 

I'm now truly excited to be a part of a government that is 

working for public involvement, working to be more 

responsive to the people that we serve, and working toward 

democratic reform. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- We must always strive to make our 

provincial government sensitive and in touch with people and 

their needs. Only by doing this will we be able to become 

effective and efficient in delivering people programs. These are 

exciting times, Mr. Speaker, spiced with challenge for the 

future, something I personally am looking forward to. 

 

It is for me, however, also a time of sadness as I think of my 

father, a strong CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) 

New Democrat supporter, a man with a special sense of pride, 

who worked to see his daughter continue the traditions of 

Tommy Douglas, Beatrice Janet Trew, and Majorie 

Cooper-Hunt. A week before the election I lost my father to a 

tragic accident. But I know in his heart that his spirit of hard 

work, his sense of determination and community, of neighbour 

helping neighbour, lives on with me today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- These thoughts of my family also remind me 

of my heritage, of my Ukrainian mother, a daughter herself of 

pioneer farmers, mother of four, and sister of Fred who lost his 

life during a farm strike a number of years ago -- a humble 

background, Mr. Speaker, that makes me determined to work 

for a society that will provide a good quality of life for all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, the middle income earners of 

Regina Wascana Plains are deeply concerned with the 

ever-increasing tax burden they bear. In response to those 

concerns, while I was a member of city council we achieved 

the unprecedented accomplishment of an increase of less than 2 

per cent over the last five years -- no small feat with the former 

government stripping the cities of much-needed dollars for 

jobs, for infrastructure repairs and maintenance, for transit, for 

inner-city revitalization; no small feat some years in the face of 

$9.2 million in one year withdrawal of funds, and not in a 

timely budget process that should come before the legislature, 

but halfway through a year when cities are least able to 

determine and to deal with such a withdrawal. 

 

Local government knows about the need for tax reform, reform 

that does not further push major increases onto the property 

taxpayer; knowing that it's the least fair way to collect taxes 

because it does not reflect anyone's ability to pay. 

  



70 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Council members fought for and succeeded in establishing a 

comprehensive audit purview and process under an 

independent city auditor. They succeeded in obtaining a double 

A plus credit rating for the Queen City, and they did this at a 

time when we all know what the former administration was up 

to here to discredit the provincial independent audit process 

and the auditor. 

 

(1515) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- We all know what the mess of the previous 

government is now doing to our provincial credit rating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I felt it was time to translate some of the hands-on 

experience into something concrete at the provincial level. Tax 

reform and deficit reduction are critical for the future of this 

province. I am proud to be chosen and to serve as a chairperson 

for the Municipal Law standing committee for this legislature. 

 

As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, my constituency lies in 

the south-east edge of Regina and although recent housing 

starts have dropped to the lowest levels since CMHC (Canada 

Mortgage and Housing Corporation) began keeping statistics, 

it's a growing area. Wascana View, Varsity Park, Gardiner 

Park, and other subdivisions in the neighbourhoods boast some 

of the largest homes in the Queen City. The people who live 

there are professionals: doctors, lawyers, teachers, and public 

servants; tradespeople, artisans, and union members. The area 

is also home for small- and medium-size business owners and 

operators. Some are farmers who have retired from the land 

and families who are still on the land, and some are injured 

workers who have been denied recourse to benefits, medical 

care, and retraining that they should receive. We are partners in 

our very diversity. 

 

Taxation, economic growth and development, access to 

post-secondary education, the agricultural crisis, are vitally 

important to every person in our riding, and indeed to each and 

every person in this province. My constituents have responded 

to adversity and hardship in creative and innovative ways. 

They are people driven by the desire to ensure their children 

have a viable future here at home. They were deeply hurt by 

programs like the now defunct Fair Share Saskatchewan, 

shocked and bewildered that a government paying lip service to 

families under a Family Foundation could be serious about 

such forced relocation of people and such disruption in their 

lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an intrinsic part of all of Saskatchewan to 

look to its capital with pride and with hope. I will continue to 

hold that bright new vision for the future for tourism, for trade, 

for telecommunications, to maintain what our forbears carved 

out of the prairie under similar circumstances. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Wascana Plains also knew and support 

our move to remove the harmonized PST (provincial sales tax). 

It was the final tax straw that broke all of our backs. They 

pulled together to support me, 

support our government, in a process of change, to set the 

wheels in motion for a new vision in the '90s. I will continue to 

demonstrate that our government has vision, a strong, bright 

vision and a plan -- a plan for the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- It's a vision and a plan that draws all people 

together and eliminates the divisive nature of pitting rural 

people against urban people, pitting labour people against 

business people, pitting one group against another group. 

 

We will continue to build a lasting partnership where we will 

demonstrate our strength in our diversity, the ability to come 

together. We will again become a true reflection of our 

multi-cultural mosaic. We will again go down in history as a 

government that turned things around, turned a province 

around from a province where wealth and privilege once 

accorded to a relatively few will become a secure, bright future 

for us all. 

 

I know my constituency well. Its people have a strong sense of 

community and of neighbour as Wordsworth once stated. They 

know we are all responsible to make Saskatchewan the best 

place to live, to work, and to play. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a privilege to 

take my place in this Assembly and in so doing I look forward 

to faithfully representing my constituency and my government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 

indeed an honour for me to rise before the Assembly and speak 

in response to the Honourable Lieutenant Governor's Speech 

from the Throne. I would also add my congratulations to you 

for your election to the Speaker's Chair. 

 

It is a great privilege for me to represent the people of 

Kindersley constituency in this Assembly. The people of that 

constituency have placed their confidence in me and that is 

why I am here today. The people of the Kindersley riding 

elected me and I am committed to them. As member for this 

legislature, I'll be looking out for the best interests of my 

constituency throughout my tenure in opposition. In four years 

time when our party again forms government, I will be proud 

to represent them on the government side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I would like to take this opportunity to talk about 

my constituency, Mr. Speaker. There are a number of new 

members on both sides of the House. I would like to share with 

those present here today some of the information about the 

good people of the Kindersley constituency. 

 

My riding is located in the west-central part of the province. 

We are blessed with a strong oil, industrial, and agricultural 

sector. My constituency relies heavily on the agriculture and 

energy sectors. They are truly key in 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

ensuring our economic future. I assure you, Mr. Speaker, that 

I'll be watching this government's handling of those two areas 

with keen interest. 

 

We in the Kindersley riding are also blessed with dynamic and 

hard-working citizens located in a number of progressive towns 

and villages throughout the constituency. We are proud of our 

communities. We are not only proud of how hard our citizens 

work, we are also proud of how our communities' recreational 

participation. 

 

My home town of Eston is always ready to boast of our 

provincial and national champions. We have been successful in 

a number of areas, the most recent in wrestling. Baseball is also 

a popular sport. Members may recall when Kindersley 

constituency hosted the world youth baseball tournament, the 

Pacific cup of baseball. Kindersley, in managing and securing 

this event, proved its ability to compete with centres much 

larger than itself. The entire constituency has a reputation for 

interest and involvement in sporting and recreational events. I 

look forward to working with my constituents on all levels, 

whether it be a recreational, an education, or in a personal 

capacity as their MLA. 

 

This is my first opportunity to participate in a Speech from the 

Throne. I must say that I am disappointed with the contents of 

the NDP's first throne speech. This speech offers the people of 

our province nothing. It contains no vision, no future goals, no 

plans for Saskatchewan. The only solid commitments we have 

heard from the government side of the House are those that 

have been announced through press conferences before this 

House was reconvened. The public knows the NDP 

government will not make good on any election promises. 

 

One of the things they have managed to achieve, though, is 

bloating the provincial debt. How did they accomplish this 

move? They managed to get our province's credit rating 

lowered to a triple B. Good work. 

 

What else have they managed to achieve? Well they are on 

their way to breaking the energy agreement as well with AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.). What did this accomplish? 

Well the people of Saskatchewan now have to cough up 

somewhere in the neighbourhood of $2 million for breaking 

this agreement. We have to pay AECL not to study energy 

options. Our province must pay because the NDP does not 

want to learn. Despite what the NDP would have the general 

public believe, the energy agreement did not require our 

province to build a reactor. This simply is not true. 

 

This agreement was in place to study and research all energy 

options, thus the name of the agreement. Among others, the 

environmentally friendly use of coal, wind, solar, biomass, and 

nuclear energy would have all been analysed. But because of 

the NDP's most recent convention, they are burying their heads 

in the sand and giving up $50 million in research and 

knowledge. 

 

I repeat, we must pay millions not to learn. This is a shame, 

Mr. Speaker, a shame. I'm embarrassed for the members 

opposite. Knowledge is a wonderful thing, Mr. Speaker. I'm 

sorry that they are depriving our province of 

what could have been so valuable. Not only are they throwing 

away money, the government is throwing away jobs for our 

young people. Highly professional and technological jobs are 

lost because of its decision. 

 

Shame on this government, Mr. Speaker, shame. After 

claiming they'd create jobs, Mr. Speaker -- I quote the NDP: we 

will create real jobs -- they're dismissing a golden opportunity 

for this province. Kindersley would like to know, Mr. Speaker, 

what will they do to create real jobs for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

The town of Kindersley was fortunate to be chosen a while 

back as the location of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. 

Speaker. As the people of Kindersley . . . pardon me, ask the 

people of Kindersley if those jobs were gladly accepted. Those 

jobs were and they are real. Ask if those jobs had an economic 

impact on the community, Mr. Speaker. Ask the people of 

Kindersley whether they want to lose this government 

department, Mr. Speaker. I doubt if you will find one resident 

of Kindersley who doesn't appreciate that recent addition to 

their community. 

 

Ask them if they would like this decentralization initiative 

reviewed. I say with confidence as their MLA that they do not 

want to lose their fair share. They know, as I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that the NDP will not review anything. The NDP 

promised to review each and every Fair Share announcement 

on a case-by-case basis. This resulted in a general quashing of 

the entire process. 

 

What do we see today, Mr. Speaker? Well the NDP is on the 

road to centralizing all previously decentralized departments. 

We on this side of the House take decentralization seriously. 

The members opposite have been quoted as saying they are not 

opposed to decentralization. As a matter of fact it runs from the 

top of the heap on down. The member from Riversdale was 

quoted as saying that he felt decentralization was a good thing. 

The member from Humboldt was also quoted in this regard. If 

the NDP government was sincere in its belief in 

decentralization why isn't it responsible for the government's 

side of the House? We have no cabinet minister responsible for 

this important issue. We on this side of the House are 

committed to it. 

 

(1530) 

 

I have been appointed as an opposition critic and one of my 

responsibilities includes decentralization. I have also been 

appointed for the critic for the New Careers Corporation. 

Therefore I have a particularly vested interest in what is 

happening in Kamsack. How do you think that community 

feels about the government's thoughts on forcing this 

department back to Regina? 

 

I would like to know where the member from Pelly stands on 

this issue. I would like him to stand in this House and explain 

to his constituents, particularly those of Kamsack, where he 

stands on this issue. The constituents of Pelly are used to strong 

and honest representation that they have enjoyed for the last 

four years. 
 

What do they have now, Mr. Speaker? They now have the 

member from Pelly. Where was the member when this 

proposed move was being perpetrated? Was he allowed . . .   



72 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

or even informed of the discussions? I, unlike the member from 

Pelly, would like some details on this proposed move. Is the 

government going to pay for all relocation costs? Is the NDP 

government breaking lease agreements in Kamsack? Is the 

move to take place immediately? How will the children of the 

employees' families cope with the school process, the break in 

the school process? 

 

A number of employees in that department were born and 

raised in Kamsack. Do they want to be torn from their homes 

and moved to Regina? Does this community approve of this 

decision? Ask the mayors of Kindersley, Melville, Swift 

Current how they feel about this recent decision. I would 

suggest that at very least they are frightened, frightened at 

losing populations, jobs, and economic stability for their towns. 

 

Well the NDP talk a good line about creating real jobs. What 

they are actually doing is attempting to steal solid jobs from 

small town Saskatchewan. This is despicable, Mr. Speaker. It's 

a hypocrisy at the highest level, the level of government. 

 

They owe it to small town Saskatchewan to explain what real 

jobs will replace Fair Share. What will they institute in Eston, 

in Humboldt, in Blaine Lake? We're all waiting for the 

announcements, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we have is an arrogant government. They expect the 

towns to lie low until the NDP government is ready. These 

towns need assistance now, Mr. Speaker. This government is 

taking away instead of giving to the people of our province. I 

have lost count of how many individuals, previous board 

members, that this government has fired -- crop insurance 

people just as an example. 

 

Arrogance, Mr. Speaker. No debate. No debate on the 

emergency resolution on agriculture. How did the Minister of 

Agriculture vote? How did the Minister of Rural Development 

vote? How did the Liberal leader vote? I'll tell you how she 

voted. She voted against debating this important motion. In fact 

she stated . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In fact she stated that it would be irresponsible to 

debate this important motion on farm aid. She felt it would be 

more important to debate the throne speech -- this empty throne 

speech, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of the Liberal Party felt the 

vague throne speech was more important than our farm 

families. 

 

Further to this, the president of the Liberal Party of 

Saskatchewan, one Sylvia Kish, stated last night that the farm 

families didn't need any more money. As a matter of fact that 

statement was repeated on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 

Corporation) this morning. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the farm families of Saskatchewan feel the 

agriculture crisis is important. I believe the people of 

Rosetown-Elrose, Canora, and all farmers would like to know 

how their members voted on the first chance to debate 

agriculture. How did each and every rural NDP member vote 

on their first chance ever to debate on 

agriculture? They debated . . . they voted against debating on 

farm aid. This is indeed government arrogance. 

 

This government has dismissed private citizens of 

Saskatchewan and replaced them with politicians. What we 

have now is a minister of everything, the minister from Regina 

Elphinstone heading up the whole operation. He's taken on a lot 

of roles. That member from Elphinstone has even determined 

how long this House will sit, Mr. Speaker. He has decided it 

will last two weeks. I say this House will sit as long as it is 

necessary for this side of the House to drag an economic plan 

out of the NDP government. I am prepared to sit here as long 

as it takes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP cabinet essentially consists of three members: the 

members from Regina Elphinstone, Regina Dewdney, and 

Saskatoon Riversdale -- a dictatorship of three, Mr. Speaker. 

Perhaps that title is more timely, Mr. Speaker, would be the 

three wise men. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, these three people 

believe that they are the source of all wisdom in this province. 

Perhaps a more appropriate designation would the the three 

wise guys. 

 

As critic for Community Services I take particular interest in 

what the member from Melfort has to say. I have been 

disappointed. I had hoped she would say some . . . she would 

be fighting diligently, be an effective advocate for the people of 

Saskatchewan. After all, while mayor of Melfort she came out 

strong; while mayor of Melfort she made repeated demands for 

money. 

 

I must say she has certainly become more frugal in her short 

time as Minister of Community Services. Now we hear her 

state there is no money. This was an overnight occurrence, Mr. 

Speaker. I have heard that excuse from the members opposite, 

were shocked that there were not exorbitant funds available to 

them when they formed government. 

 

I feel our previous government made this point exceedingly 

clear. Of course, we mustn't forget that when the Minister of 

Community Services was the mayor of Melfort, she actually 

had some power and influence over what she said and did. She 

must now pay homage to the . . . and bow to the troika. 

 

It must be quite an adjustment for the individual as a member 

from Melfort. The troika has effectively gained control and 

gagged not only the members of their cabinet, but also the 

majority of the province's public utility boards. It's interesting 

that Saskatchewan's public utilities are now run by a board of 

politicians rather than a board of directors. The members on 

this side of the House and the public will watch that situation 

unfold with some interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The minister of everything certainly has an over-abundance of 

administrative responsibilities. My colleagues and I agree that 

the NDP government has no plan for this province. We are just 

starting, I think, maybe to see what their plans are. I believe 

there is a plan from the member from Regina Elphinstone to 

oversee all aspects of this NDP government. This certainly 

takes responsibility away from the Deputy Premier, the 

member from Regina Dewdney. His schedule will now 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

be free for him to fly to New York whenever he feels necessary 

to explain the bloated deficit projection to our creditors 

whenever he desires. Talk about waste and mismanagement, 

Mr. Speaker; we now have him flying to New York on a whim. 

 

We have the Gass tribunal headed by one Donald Gass. His 

annualized salary totals 120,000, Mr. Speaker. He has been 

hired at a cost of $31,000 to the Saskatchewan people for three 

months work. What are his duties? What are his duties? To find 

dirt on the previous administration, and the members opposite 

cannot deny it. 

 

What are the terms of reference for the Gass tribunal? They are 

to examine specifically PC government's years in government. 

The NDP government is spending a total of $300,000 on the 

witch-hunt. The Gass tribunal will be holding secret meetings, 

closed to all, Mr. Speaker. Even the Joseph McCarthy hearings 

were open. The media was not allowed to sit on the secret Gass 

tribunal meetings. No one is. It will be closed, Mr. Speaker. 

The meetings will be closed to everyone. This is shocking. 

 

The NDP say they want open government -- open it all up then. 

Let's not have private meetings, particularly when the right of 

the public is to know what is happening. After all, 

Saskatchewan taxpayers' money was used to commission the 

Gass chambers. 

 

Continuing on this line, why is the NDP government wasting 

more money hiring a private consulting firm to pretend to find 

a president for SaskPower? How much are they spending on 

this farce? How much . . . would the NDP allow Mr. Messer to 

be replaced? Or are they a bigger and better job waiting for him 

to accept? 

 

The NDP promise to do away with political patronage has not 

been fulfilled. I would like to know how much one Marg 

Benson is being paid. Who the heck is Marg Benson anyway? 

As far as I can tell she is a special advisor to Mr. Gary 

Aldridge. And who is Gary Aldridge? He's special advisor to 

the member from Riversdale. Since when does a special 

advisor need a special advisor? Open the books. What are we 

paying people like Ms. Benson? I'm sure the public is 

interested in knowing what they are doing with their money. 

 

I think the member from Regina Dewdney added these 

patronage appointments to the projected deficit figures; I hope 

he did. Then perhaps the numbers might add up. 

 

Another empty promise of the NDP was revealed last week. It 

was announced that the three trade offices would be closed. 

Throughout the election campaign I heard the NDP speak out 

in support of small business in Saskatchewan. They were going 

to assist small business in every way possible. By closing the 

trade offices the NDP have openly attacked small business in 

this province. They've successfully squashed any potential in 

existing trade links this province had for small business. 

Growth into the United States, Asia, Europe -- all these 

markets have been abolished. 

 

Saskatchewan's exports of non-traditional goods in January to 

September of 1990 was 1.1 billion, Mr. Speaker. This amount 

was the level for all of 1989. Don't 

tell me that our trade offices which were closed down don't 

have a hand in stimulating that tremendous amount of money 

for our small-business sector. 

 

I suppose the NDP may make good on their promise to 

re-establish these trade offices and staff them with marketing 

professionals. I'd be more comfortable with this concept if 

someone from that side of the House would explain what a 

marketing professional is. Or are we perhaps referring to 

someone like Jack Messer and his potash experience? 

 

I recall a certain Jack Messer flying to India, to the United 

States, to China, Mr. Speaker, all in an attempt to sell 

Manitoba's potash; putting, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's 

industry . . . potash industry out of business. Is that what the 

NDP government would call a marketing professional? I would 

hope not. I would say not. 

 

Tell the Saskatchewan taxpayers what your plans are. The 

NDP's evasion tactic that was so useful as an election platform 

won't wash any more. People are tiring quickly of this 

duck-the-issue government. The ducks of the Minister of 

Agriculture, the ducks of the Minister of Rural Development. 

Ducking their first opportunity to debate agriculture. Maybe 

they were told to leave the Assembly; advised by the troika. 

The government cannot be run effectively by three members 

who rule the roost. 

 

I assure my constituents and the rest of this province that we'll 

be on . . . on this side of the House we'll get some answers. The 

NDP troika cannot win the people's trust by thrashing the 

previous administration. The taxpayers of Saskatchewan want a 

plan and they want it soon. 

 

In my capacity as MLA for Kindersley I promise to work for 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I promise to work 

hard in devising new policy and alternative policy that will 

assist in stimulating our province's economy. I will look 

forward to the next four years. It will be both a delight and a 

challenge to keep the NDP government on the straight and 

narrow. 

 

It was truly an honour to participate in the throne speech 

debate. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And may 

I start by adding my congratulations to you for the very 

important, very, very important post which you so properly 

occupy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- I was particularly pleased to hear your 

comments on the opening day of how it is your objective to 

raise the decorum, the behaviour, in this House. I find that it 

was part of the throne speech as well. That's one of the reasons 

that I am here and I will try to help do both of those. 
 

While I am congratulating you, I'd like to congratulate all of 

the people here who have received the vote of their   



74 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

constituents and the trust, and who bring with them the 

responsibility for being here and trying to provide some 

leadership, some government. 

 

I want to thank the people in Regina Albert South for their 

support, their vote. Regina Albert South is my constituency. 

And the reason I repeat it is to show to even the very slow 

learners that one can master the term. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you, people of Regina Albert South. 

And besides the votes I want to thank the people from that 

constituency for their advice, for their ideas. And one of the 

ideas that I heard a great deal is, I wonder if there are any 

politicians we can trust? What makes you different? How 

should I believe that you're not like those other guys? And that 

does make one think, because these are intelligent, capable 

people. 

 

And it's partly because of that and partly because I, as a rookie, 

feel that I should reminisce about my many, many, many 

decades on earth and give you some of the ideas because you'll 

not likely ever hear an older rookie in your life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- I don't wish to stress this age bit, but let me 

assure you that being old is an extremely desirable state when 

you consider the alternative. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- The people in my constituency who said: how 

can we rely on you; how do we know we can trust you; what's 

going on; it seems everything's getting worse and worse, 

caused me to do a lot of reflecting. And it was interesting 

reflecting because I think that I have lived in the most 

interesting half a century or more since history of the human 

race has been recorded on this earth. 

 

I started at four miles an hour, that's how fast I walked my four 

miles to school, that's how fast my horses pulled the plough. 

From that to jets, to flying out to the planets, to going down 

seven miles into the ocean to find a little piece of metal as 

evidence for a case. That is a magical happening on this earth 

that, so far as we know, has never happened before. And I think 

that this had a major impact on all of us, on our very 

civilization. 

 

And I have some views on this which are so far beyond me that 

I don't want to push them on anybody, but I do sincerely ask 

you to consider them with me. I will not continue to repeat, I'm 

not sure but I think, because in this area I'm certainly not sure. 

But I do think along these lines. 

 

It seems to me that when we went into the physical sciences 

and created absolute magic on this earth, everybody had to look 

at why. And I think everybody quickly concluded that we'd 

found a different way of approaching things -- the scientific 

method, the cause and effect. That transformed the planet and 

that was immediately brought into the area of social science, of 

humans. And we're going to apply the same thing to us as 

we did to our machines, and we're going to absolutely 

transform the world and improve it that much. 

 

Have we? I think this study has discovered an awful lot of 

good, has created a lot of wisdom. But when I went to the 

university, there were about three social science classes of 

philosophy, psychology, political science 107, and about one 

other. Now since this trend, if you go to the same university 

and you can list the social science classes, they'll give you at 

least a B.A. (Bachelor of Arts). That's where our learning has 

taken us. 

 

And yet I suggest to you that all of this has been created 

without any new understanding into humanity -- no law of 

gravitation, no E equals MC squared, nothing on which to base 

it. And yet the graduates of this sort of thing, the scientific 

method, cause and effect -- we make no value judgements -- 

the graduates of this have replaced the customs of our times, 

the elders, the preachers, the churches, and replaced it with 

what? The law of reason. Now I suggest to you that man does 

not live by reason. We live by faith, love, trust, and the helping 

of each other. You cannot live by reason alone. 

 

For a person who thinks, as I do, along these lines, it's kind of 

interesting when a few years ago I ran into a quotation. It 

immediately caught my eye. I wrote it out on the back of one of 

my best envelopes, and I think I've memorized it. I'm going to 

try and quote it to you for your consideration. 

 

It says: purely logical thinking cannot yield us any knowledge 

of the empirical world. All knowledge of reality starts with 

experience and ends in it. Propositions arrived at by purely 

logical means are entirely empty of reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- This last part especially: propositions arrived 

at by purely logical means are entirely empty of reality. It 

sounds like it's written by a guy who fell behind the class and is 

rationalizing, is making excuses. The guy who wrote that is 

Albert Einstein who, in my opinion, was reasonably good at 

pure scientific thinking. 

 

I think that should be considered. And yet we follow the great 

trend of the United States of America, and whatever they do we 

bring in here -- whether it is in music or in games or in justice 

system or anything else. We're going to bring it into Canada -- 

we always have -- unless we watch. 

 

Now I don't want to be unfair to the United States of America. 

One of my first heroes in America was a guy . . . well, he was a 

very good pool player. He was a professional baseball player. 

He married a movie star. Why wouldn't he be my hero? But 

what's the most famous thing that Leo Durocher left for us? 

The saying: nice guys finish last. 

 

Now he was replaced by a greater hero. And I talk about sports 

because I think sports is . . . no part of society's severable from 

any other part. And it's simple and it illustrates what's going on. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

The next hero was a greater hero -- Vince Lombardi. After all 

he won three national football championships in a row. You 

can't be a bigger hero than that. And what's the greatest thing 

he left us? The saying: winning's not the important thing; 

winning is everything. 

 

All right. So you say, well this is the United States. And what's 

this kook -- this rookie, I'm sorry -- what's he saying about . . . 

that doesn't apply to us. All right. Next time there's a hockey 

game turn on your TV and you'll find our greatest hero in 

Canada today financed largely by taxpayers' dollars. And Don 

Cherry will come on and during the intermission will tell you 

how you can break the rules without being caught. He will go 

on to explain how you can injure your opponent without being 

penalized. 

 

And once when I happened to be listening and they asked him 

about the Pat Quinn contract and was it honest, Don Cherry 

said, well what are you asking me about honesty for; this is a 

million and a half dollars we're talking about, a million and a 

half dollars . . . (inaudible) . . . Now that's one and a half 

million, not 1.3 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- And besides this, Don Cherry is the most 

racist person on television and speaks the worst English and yet 

he is one of our heroes. Don't tell me that this is something that 

we should not consider when we ask ourselves are we really 

progressing, are we really educated. 

 

I suggest for your consideration that probably the best test for 

civilization is to assess how considerate are these people one to 

another. And for a fellow who walks around a great deal, 

because I don't have a car, I am curious. Here is one example. 

Last spring -- the weather was good and people were into the 

better clothes; I've still got my parka on, etc. -- there was a 

great snowfall, a whole lot of nastiness, coldness, and there's a 

little path on the sidewalk. I walk out at noon and people go by. 

I stand on the side, let them pass me. And I did this for about 

15, 20 minutes; there were a lot of people around, and I was 

doing an experiment. Any time anyone came along I stood out 

into the deep snow and let them go by. And I didn't count them, 

but a great many people went by. And exactly two looked at 

me and said thanks as they walked by. The others -- just as if 

you weren't there. I think we should consider how considerate 

we are, therefore how civilized we are. 

 

Now I will end after just one more story. I tell this story 

because it's true. It illustrates a point, I hope. I was once 

surrounded by a whole lot of these social scientists in a 

conference in Toronto, and that night we were having a 

banquet and a great speaker from the United States of America. 

And I figured, my God, I have to tolerate all of this just to get 

some free booze and have a real good meal. And the answer is, 

yes I'll tolerate it! 

 

I went in and I listened to a guy by the name of John Graecen 

address us. At the end of the address, I walked up to him and 

told him I thought it was a great performance. He was a great 

deal of help to me. I talked with him a bit and I asked him, 

didn't you know that talking to this sort of 

an audience, what you had to say would be reasonably 

unpopular. And this guy says, yes I knew that. And I said, well 

doesn't that bother you? He says, it used to bother me a great 

deal but not so much any more because I have slowly learned 

that it is not my job to change the world. My job is to try . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 

to congratulate you on your appointment as Speaker of this 

Assembly. I know that you will do an excellent job in 

maintaining the traditions of this legislature and in conducting 

the House with decorum and fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden for moving the Speech from the Throne 

and the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood for 

seconding. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1600) 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Both members had important things to say to 

this Assembly. I would like to congratulate all the newly 

elected members of the legislature and I'd like to congratulate 

the people that were re-elected. 

 

It is my honour and privilege to stand in this Assembly and 

represent the fine people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. I 

appreciate the confidence and trust that the people have placed 

in me. I'm proud to come from an area of Saskatchewan that is 

rich in history, diverse, unique, and whose people are 

extremely adaptable. 

 

We are known to have some of the most progressive cattle 

ranchers in Canada. We are leaders in the heavy-oil industry. 

Our grain farmers are industrious and innovative. Our business 

people are tenacious and ambitious, and Heaven only knows 

they've had to be the last nine years. And our wage earners and 

professionals are dedicated and hard-working. 

 

Included in our constituency are three Indian bands: Little Pine, 

Poundmaker, and Sweetgrass, who add to the history and 

uniqueness of our area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to 

my parents, Helen and Andrew Owchar, formerly from the 

Canora constituency. These people helped to elect people like 

Alex Kuziak, the first Ukrainian to be appointed a minister of 

the Crown and the first bilingual minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- They also worked to elect people like Myron 

Feeley from Preeceville, Dan Daniels from Canora, and Sandy 

Nicholson from the Mackenzie constituency. My parents never 

faltered in their support of the CCF and the NDP. Tommy 

Douglas was a frequent visitor in our area and I grew up 

surrounded by people who really believed that they were their 

sisters' and brothers' keepers. 

  



76 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

It was these values of co-operation, the willingness to share and 

care for others that built this great province. To return to these 

values will make us leaders once again in the areas of health, 

education, native issues, women's issues, and the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- I look forward to the next four years, where 

urban and rural, young and old, farmer and wage earners, 

business people and co-operatives, and native people will work 

together to make this province great again. Diverse as we are, 

we are all citizens of Saskatchewan, and so we must strive to 

reach the same goals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our agricultural sector is in need of immediate 

help. We know the frustrations, the despair, the human 

tragedies that farmers are going through. We have a crisis now, 

worse than in any of our province's history: bankruptcy, 

incomes well below the poverty level, all kinds of social and 

economic problems, rural depopulation, and school 

depopulation. 

 

My constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster had 1,000 fewer 

voters in 1991 than in 1996. Our Premier has been working 

non-stop with the help of the member from Rosetown, the 

Minister of Agriculture and Food, and with farmers from 

across western Canada to tackle many of these issues. This 

government is fully committed to maintaining the family farm 

and supporting rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, our government has tried to ease 

the heavy yoke of taxation from the people of Saskatchewan. I 

love that -- the heavy yoke of the taxation of the people of 

Saskatchewan. I'm Ukrainian, and I can just see those oxen 

with the yoke around them. And that's how I think the people 

felt the last five or six years, like they had a yoke around them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- The removal of the expanded PST will 

eliminate one of the biggest tax grabs that the people of 

Saskatchewan have endured. The former government under the 

direction from the member of Estevan did not understand the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

I have been listening carefully the last few days. I at least 

thought that maybe I could hear some philosophical 

background from the members opposite so that I could 

understand which direction they were going. I find that 

impossible. I see that my first assumption was right. They tried 

to impose an American philosophy on the people of 

Saskatchewan. What's mine is mine; what's yours, I'll get 

tomorrow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- They encourage unbridled competition instead 

of co-operation, privatization instead of a mixed economy, 

waste and mismanagement instead of prudent management, 

patronage instead of fair tendering and fair 

hiring practices. 

 

The former government fell into the Donald Trump trap of 

overspending, overborrowing, and overconsuming -- junk hand 

dealing from junk government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Now we must tighten our belts and adhere to 

sound financial management to get this province back on track 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another concern that the people of my riding 

share is over the quality of education. From elementary to 

secondary to post-secondary, parents and students alike are 

keen to maintain and enhance education. People realize that 

education is the key to the future if people are going to survive 

and adapt to our global village. Our high school drop-out rate 

really concerns me, and there is much work in education to be 

done in this area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from my prospective, the people of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster and the citizens of Saskatchewan are 

looking to this government for leadership in a number of key 

areas. I have mentioned agriculture, sound financial 

management, and education. 

 

Another area I would like to discuss is health. Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster is fortunate to have many talented and 

progressive people in the health field. It is my hope that we can 

work with these folks to develop plans for comprehensive, 

effective, efficient, and innovative delivery of health services. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many women's issues are dear to my heart. 

Actually these issues are people issues. Services are not 

adequate in rural Saskatchewan where victims of violence 

often face intense physical as well as emotional isolation. Most 

of our shelters are underfunded and have to turn people away. 

Many of the crisis centres that operate in rural Saskatchewan 

are grossly underfunded and depend almost exclusively on 

volunteer labour. 

 

Child care in Saskatchewan is too costly for many rural 

families. One in every four children live in poverty in 

Saskatchewan. The families and children of Saskatchewan are 

our hope for the future. These people must be supported and 

encouraged to reach their potential. 

 

Key in the rebuilding of this province is to include and consider 

all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Our native people have felt isolated and on the 

fringe of our society. We must come together, understand each 

other's culture, respect one another, and build together for the 

future. 

 

In fact this is a focal point of the government's mandate -- 

listening to people, working with people, and making decisions 

that will benefit the majority of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

Ms. Stanger: -- I want to assure the people of Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster that I will continue to listen to your 

concerns, as will all members of our government. I follow 

some hon. members that represented Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

Toby Nollet, a former minister of Agriculture; Miro Kwasnica, 

MLA; and Bob Long, a former minister of Highways. I plan to 

give all my energy and to maintain this high standard of 

representation given to Cut Knife-Lloydminster in the past. 

 

Arising from this issue of diligent representation is the issue of 

democratic reform. My constituents hold democratic reform as 

an urgent need in today's process. I was pleased to see that our 

government moved quickly to assure that by-elections are held 

within six months of vacancy -- quite a change from the former 

administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday I spoke to a constituent 

who shared some wisdom with me. He assured me that people 

realize what the financial state of the province is. He assured 

me that people are willing to put their shoulder to the wheel. 

He assured me that people are willing to find new ways to 

grapple with our problems. 

 

He assured me that people are excited because they feel we are 

going to listen and we represent a government that is going to 

put their plans into action; a government that will put people 

before self interest; a government that will lead us in new 

directions. 

 

This optimism, trust, and hope gives me courage to work with 

my colleagues to build the kind of society that includes all 

people. This is our vision and this is our dream. 

 

As the elected member from the Cut Knife-Lloydminster 

constituency I fully support the new directions in the Speech 

from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on 

being elected as Speaker of the Assembly. The fact that it was 

uncontested is I think a tribute to you. I have confidence that 

you will maintain impartiality and order in this new position of 

yours. 

 

I would also like to congratulate all elected members. I'm not 

sure if the constituency of Meadow Lake holds a record this 

election or not, but he elected five members who were born 

and/or raised in our constituency. They are members from 

Regina Albert South, Regina Hillsdale, The Battlefords, the 

member opposite from Wilkie, and myself. 

 

I would like to talk briefly today, Mr. Speaker, about some of 

the priorities I think are important to the fine people of the 

constituency of Meadow Lake. I was fortunate enough to be 

elected as a representative from one of the nicest parts of the 

province. 

 

The economy and composition of our constituency is 

very divergent. It varies from grain to cattle ranching to 

forestry to tourism to small business. Our cultural mosaic is 

equally varied. Nearly one-third of the constituency's 

population is aboriginal. There are many Ukrainian, Polish, 

French, and German people who emigrated to our part of the 

province. Of those, quite a number are still first generation. 

 

(1615) 

 

I would like to pay special tribute today, Mr. Speaker, to my 

parents, John and Dorothy Sonntag. I grew up on a small 

family farm just out of Goodsoil, Saskatchewan, with six other 

siblings. Also living with us was our grandfather who, in every 

sense of the word, was of conservative persuasion. Of seven 

children, with just over seven years separating the oldest from 

the youngest, there were two sets of twins, myself being one of 

them. So you'd better check to make sure it's me here all the 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Picture if you will, 10 of us around each and every meal table 

and not all of the same philosophical belief. Believe me, Mr. 

Speaker, the debates were raucous at times, to say the least. 

What I do want to say is that my parents instilled in me an 

expectation to always be open and honest, and to work hard to 

help our neighbours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- It is so basic, Mr. Speaker, but in many ways 

this ideal of openness and honesty and neighbour helping 

neighbour is all most constituents ask for in their elected 

representatives. 

 

At that time, our family would have been considered to be very 

ordinary. Mr. Speaker, the definition of ordinary family used to 

mean the husband out working while the wife stayed at home 

to look after the 1.75 children. 

 

Let me provide for you a very few brief statistics. In 1960, 70 

per cent of North Americans belonged to this definition of the 

ordinary family. In 1991, it is estimated that only 7 per cent can 

still subscribe to this ordinary family definition. In 

Saskatchewan, with the economy as tough as it is and with 

many couples being forced to work out of the home, I suggest 

the percentages are probably not a whole lot different. This is a 

fact of life and a fact that we as governments cannot ignore. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, somewhat humorously but factual none 

the less, in Canada an interesting statistic shows that most 

Canadians have more parents than they do have children. It was 

those very values, Mr. Speaker, of openness and honesty that 

were the convincing factor in my decision to put forth my name 

as a candidate for the New Democratic Party. Ordinary people 

are so cynical of politicians and the political process. It has 

always been my belief, Mr. Speaker, that either you try to 

change and improve things or you quit complaining. 

 

I stand before you today hoping to be a part of that process of 

change. The good people of Meadow Lake have honoured me 

with that responsibility. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, one of the 

accomplishments I am most proud of was winning the poll of 

Goodsoil, my home town. 

  



78 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- After speaking with Mr. Bob Wooff, a well 

respected and former MLA from our constituency, he tells me 

that in his recall no New Democrat or CCF before him has ever 

won that poll. Mr. Wooff came within three votes. So to the 

people of Goodsoil I say thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- We have heard much in the last few years of 

the woes of agriculture, of the number of young people leaving 

our province, of businesses closing, and it goes on and on. How 

does one begin to resolve these problems, Mr. Speaker? How 

does one undertake such a huge task you may ask? 

 

Well I say the task is far too large for any one of us. The last 

number of years have been geared to individualism, to secrecy, 

to hidden agendas, to the me-first doctrine. It's time for change. 

We need a team effort, and we must have the best team 

possible -- a team of hard workers, a team of co-operators, a 

team of people-first people. I think, Mr. Speaker, that is what 

the people of Saskatchewan asked for and I submit that is what 

they got. 

 

I humbly stand here in this great Assembly and pledge to the 

people of Meadow Lake, Goodsoil, Pierceland, Loon Lake, St. 

Walburg, Paradise Hill, and the six reserves in my constituency 

that I will indeed do my very best to remain a people-first 

person. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- While I'm talking about it, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to compliment the young people of my constituency. In 

the years I have been in politics I have never seen young 

people more interested and involved in campaigns as they were 

in the most recent one. They certainly crossed partisan lines 

and I think this is tremendous. It is a sure sign that we can be 

optimistic. 

 

Somebody once said that if we elected children and old people 

to run the government for a while, there would be much more 

harmony. I'm not sure I'm ready to give up my seat quite this 

early in my career, Mr. Speaker, but I do believe there is much 

to be learned from that suggestion. We get so caught up in the 

day-to-day activities that we tend to lose sight of what are very 

often simple solutions to what we perceived to be massive and 

complex problems. 

 

I say to the fine people of Meadow Lake, Mr. Speaker, and 

indeed to the people of Saskatchewan that our commitment 

during the campaign was not to make a lot of extravagant 

promises, but rather to be fiscally responsible. And I want to 

remind the people now that we intend to live up to that, that 

there will be realigning of spending priorities. Gone are the 

days of the give-aways to the large corporate sector, gone are 

the days when we put profits before people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Our government, Mr. Speaker, is a 

government committed to open dialogue with the Indian people 

of Onion Lake, Waterhen, Ministikwin, Makwa Sahgaiehcan, 

Joseph Big Head, Flying Dust, and all the bands of 

Saskatchewan. Our government is a government that is equally 

committed to open dialogue with the Metis people of 

Saskatchewan for surely there have been injustices there as 

well. 

 

We need to start focusing our spending and energies on the 

ordinary people of Saskatchewan. And I do not say that in a 

derogatory way at all, Mr. Speaker, because it is my parents, 

grandparents, my aboriginal friends and their elders, ordinary 

people of Saskatchewan who work so hard to make it what it is. 

And for whatever I can contribute I will do what I can to 

preserve my community and Saskatchewan as I want to see it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Mr. Speaker, someone once said that the odds 

of restoring Saskatchewan's economy back to the vibrancy it 

used to enjoy makes a Las Vegas crap game look like a 

guaranteed annual income. Well I don't think it's quite that bad, 

but truly I'm not understating the case when I tell you that the 

survival of this province as we know it is at stake. 

 

The issue of Saskatchewan rises again in something we've all 

been hearing and talking a lot about lately -- the environment. 

Mr. Speaker, this issue is of particular importance to me having 

been raised on the banks of the beautiful Waterhen River. 

 

I see two of our environment's main elements being critically 

threatened, the soil and the water. There are many 

environmental issues that we can talk about today because 

sadly, in this day and age, everything is at a critical stage and 

we all know that if we ignore our environment it will be at our 

own peril. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- But let me say that as farmers, aboriginal 

people, and all people living in our province, we do care. I 

firmly believe, Mr. Speaker, that the general populace is far 

ahead of governments when it comes to wanting to restore us to 

a healthier environment. 

 

Decision makers and decision making, that is who we are, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is why we are honoured to be in this 

Assembly. We have been given the mandate to help direct and 

speak for our constituencies and province. We are all a part of 

this process. Democracy, when translated, means the popular 

government. Democracy must have participation to give it 

integrity. And I say that is why we have elections and why we 

are here. 

 

At no other time in history has so much happened in such a 

short time. Africa, Russia, the Germanys, and Central America, 

everywhere people are demanding and rightfully receiving 

what in many cases was theirs to begin with. They are 

demanding to be governed by authorities of their own 

choosing. And now in Saskatchewan we, as legislators, must 

recognize and remember that this is a privilege given to us by 

the people  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

of our fine constituencies. The people of our constituencies are 

the ones with the real power. We are merely spokespersons for 

them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Saskatchewan people have entrepreneurship. They have 

enthusiasm. They have integrity and they have real leadership 

on their side. Saskatchewan has always been at its best when 

team-work and co-operation were required. And if it was ever 

required, now surely is the time. 

 

I want to close today, Mr. Speaker, with a very brief verse that 

I think reminds all of us where our roots are and what we 

should be about. And it goes like this: Walk tall as the trees. 

Live strong as the mountains. Be gentle as the spring winds. 

Keep the warmth of the summer sun in your heart, and the 

Great Spirit will always be with you. 

 

If we could all live by these words, Mr. Speaker, I think our 

province will be a much better place in which to live. Thank 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations on 

your election as Speaker. I've known you for many years, and 

I've always been impressed with your fair and impartial 

manner. I congratulate you and wife and partner, Myrna. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's almost 20 years since I returned to this 

country after having lived in Europe for some time. Once of the 

first things my husband and I saw as we left the plane in 

Edmonton was an emaciated old man rummaging in a garbage 

can for food. I said to myself then that this sort of thing 

shouldn't happen in Canada. I had just spent three years living 

in Holland. It had a social democratic government. 

 

In all my time there, Mr. Speaker, I did not witness such 

desperation as I saw on the face of that old man. Rather, I saw 

people with a sense of purpose, a sense of commitment, a sense 

of dedication to the rebuilding of their country after the 

devastation of war. As a result of that experience, I was moved 

to do two things which have a direct bearing on why I stand 

before you now in this august Chamber. 

 

First, I returned to university in Saskatoon and then I obtained 

a job as a clinical psychologist -- a clinical psychologist 

determined to work to empower people to help them realize 

that poverty is not an individualistic, self-blaming thing. 

Poverty is a symptom of a system gone wrong, gone dreadfully 

wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- And so I've worked over the past several years 

with many people, people with low self-esteem, induced in no 

small part by the sorts of abuse -- mental, physical, sexual, and 

economic -- that they've had to suffer at the hands of other 

more powerful people. 

 

The second thing I did, Mr. Speaker, was to become politically 

active and aware. I look to people like Tommy Douglas, 

Pauline Jewett, and Allan Blakeney as role models. Their 

decency, fair play, and respect for the contributions and 

concerns of all people, regardless of race, religion, or sex, has 

been inspirational to me. 

 

These have been important lessons to me, Mr. Speaker. They're 

lessons that I feel are particularly compelling right now. For 

today in 1991 I see a province that's in desperate need of 

renewal, in desperate need of hope, in desperate need of new 

and creative solutions. We must resolve the economic and 

social problems that have been visited upon us by the actions of 

the former government. 

 

For too long the politics of greed and the entitlement of a 

privileged few, the blue few, has meant that the voices and 

potential contributions of too many Saskatchewan people have 

been ignored. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other government members have alluded to the 

fact that CCF and NDP governments have always had to come 

in and fix up the messes left by Conservative and Liberal 

regimes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I don't need to repeat that here; it's well known, 

well documented, as is our party's proud record of thoughtful, 

careful, social, and economic plans. 

 

Suffice it to say I am proud to be part of a government whose 

key goals are social justice, fairness, and equity for all. I'm 

proud to be part of a government that recognizes and respects 

the value of all citizens, one that is willing to embark on new 

directions and new creative ventures to renew and rebuild this 

province. 

 

The reason I'm able to be part of this government is the hard 

work and dedication and support of many people. I want to 

thank them and acknowledge them today, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to thank our new Premier, the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. I've had the privilege of serving on his constituency 

executive association as president. I have received his advice 

and guidance, and I'm proud to be part of his New Democratic 

team. Our goals are to restore confidence and hope and dignity 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There are a few other special people I want to acknowledge. 

Peter Prebble is a kind and gentle man with an abiding love of 

this planet. He works tirelessly to end child hunger and 

poverty. He is an inspiration to all of us. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Lorje: -- I've also learned and grown tremendously from 

the many strong and dedicated women that I have known. In 

particular, Nayyar Javed, Saskatchewan's representative to the 

National Action Committee on the Status of Women, is a role 

model for political action and dedication. She and many, many 

others are committed as I am to strengthening women's 

contribution to society. Our contributions, our choices, and 

indeed our right to  



80 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

 choose must be respected and valued. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- As I look around and see so many other women 

MLAs here in this House I'm confident that our voices will be 

heard. I'm equally confident that our voices will be strong and 

clear. We will address the issues of pay equity, child care, 

pensions, violence against women and children, poverty, and 

the special concerns of immigrant and aboriginal women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to mention two other very special people 

in my life. I learned many valuable lessons from my mother. 

She raised her children with pride and love despite being 

widowed and forced to rely on public assistance. 

 

My husband, Ted, was a strong and dedicated social democrat. 

He consistently and lovingly supported me in my work on 

Saskatoon City Council. My only regret, Mr. Speaker, is that 

my husband died of cancer and is not able to share this moment 

with me. 

 

But the support he gave me is now complemented by my many 

friends in municipal government, in mental health work, in my 

election campaign, in my work in race relations, and the arts. 

Many people have helped me, and to them I say thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Since the election of October 21 I've been 

fortunate to work with some very, very fine people. I'm 

referring of course to the members of the New Democrat 

caucus. The spirit of collegiality and team-work is 

tremendously supportive. I thank all of them for the trust and 

confidence they've shown in me by electing me as caucus 

co-chair. 

 

Together with my colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser I have 

been privileged over the past month to work on some very real 

structural and functional reforms for the committees of this 

legislature. We are developing proposals for making committee 

work more meaningful and immediate, for ensuring that there 

is a clear and straightforward mechanism for hearing briefs 

from the public and special interest groups, and for ensuring 

involvement of all members of this House. 

 

I thank all my caucus colleagues for the support and 

encouragement that you've shown me as we work together to 

bring operational reform to our committee processes. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I thank the wonderful people of 

Saskatoon Wildwood, a constituency both unique yet similar to 

others in Saskatchewan. Saskatoon Wildwood is a new 

constituency, new in many ways. The houses there are all 

between 1 and 12 or 13 years old, about the same age as many 

of the inhabitants. Saskatoon Wildwood is home to mostly 

young families, families where both mother and father work 

outside the home to provide the necessities for their young 

children. They know firsthand the impact of the changing role 

of the family. They know firsthand the impact of runaway 

taxation and high mortgages. Some of the people in Saskatoon 

Wildwood enjoy above average earnings and incomes. Some 

don't. 

 

All of them though have friends and former neighbours who've 

been forced to leave this province in the past few years. The 

recent out-migration in this province has been nothing short of 

scandalous. Last year alone over 36,000 talented people left. 

They took their talents and their skills with them. They were 

forced to become economic refugees in their own country. 

Many have stayed, but at a tremendous cost. 

 

In the past 10 years, personal bankruptcies in Saskatchewan 

have increased fivefold. Business bankruptcies have 

quadrupled. Fifty thousand Saskatchewan children live in 

poverty. 

 

It is shocking, Mr. Speaker, to go door to door in a 

constituency like Saskatoon Wildwood, one that looks 

extremely affluent, and to see how many homes behind those 

large doors have only the minimum of furniture. It is shocking 

to see the struggle necessary to maintain a family when both 

parents work and there's a lack of adequate, affordable child 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was with sadness that I heard countless people 

in Saskatoon Wildwood tell me that they would have felt 

compelled to leave this province if there had not been a change 

in government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- They were sick to death with unfair taxes like the 

expanded PST. They were fed up with patronage, waste, and 

mismanagement. They were disgusted with the arrogance of a 

government that refused to pass a budget, that ignored calls for 

by-elections, and that listened only to the siren songs of rich, 

out-of-province hustlers. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, with relief and joy, with a renewed sense of 

commitment to this province, the people of Saskatoon 

Wildwood now have a special sense of mission and hope. 

 

The people of Saskatoon Wildwood are fair and decent people 

like most people in this province. They care. They have a 

strong sense of neighbourliness. They have a strong sense of 

contribution and duty to their community. They have a great 

many gifts and talents to use in the rebuilding of this province. 

They have said, as I have, that Saskatchewan, our province, is 

too precious, too important, to give up on. They want to work, 

to give new direction and guidance, to develop creative 

solutions to the problems that beset us. 

 

Things have changed dramatically in Saskatoon in the last nine 

and a half years. Our city is no longer as prosperous. Our 

growth rate, once the fastest in all of Canada, has slowed 

dramatically. Right now the only thing growing is the line-ups 

at the food bank. People of Saskatoon Wildwood do not like 

that. They do not want to see old men and old women and 

poverty-stricken young children rummaging in garbage cans. 

They want to work to stop that. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- But first, Mr. Speaker, they had to find their 

voice. And so they spoke out loudly and clearly on October 21. 

As we debate the Speech from the Throne, our task will be to 

continue listening to those voices and to all the others, to the 

people who felt disenfranchised and ignored. 

 

All people have important and valuable contributions to make 

to the task of rebuilding Saskatchewan -- rebuilding its spirit 

and its economy. We must not forget that. I learned it through 

the last 12 years of my public service on Saskatoon City 

Council. As we rebuild this province, innovation, ideas, and 

insight can come from everyone. Our greatest resource is our 

people. We need to involve people in a meaningful way. We 

must consult them to find solutions to the very, very serious 

problems that we now face. 

 

Past governments threw money at problems. Now there's not so 

much money. We have to find new ways of involving people in 

solutions. Our government is committed to bringing people 

together to find solutions that will benefit us all. Our 

government has already taken steps to involve people in a 

meaningful way. I'm talking about our intentions to introduce 

measures of democratic reform. I'm proud to be part of a 

government that's addressing the need for responsive, 

responsible government. 

 

As someone who has served on the city council of the largest 

city in this province, I'm well aware of the dilemma the at-large 

system of civic elections has created for voters. In the 

municipal election, just two days after the provincial one, there 

were over 50 candidates for city council. This is a real problem 

for people who want to make informed decisions about their 

choices. I'm very happy to see that this problem will be 

resolved with the reintroduction of the ward system for cities 

with more than 100,000 people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this democratic reform, the first in what I know 

will be many, will go a long way to restoring confidence and 

respect for government. Our government will restore a sense of 

professionalism and eliminate the blatant patronage in the civil 

service. 

 

These are important measures. They will restore a sense of 

decency and hope to this province. They're not fancy, sexy, 

give-away programs that will add to mountainous debt created 

by the former government. They are programs that listen to the 

desire of people to be treated with respect and with fairness. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, we're facing an unprecedented 

economic crisis in this province. Everyone wants to become 

part of the solution, not part of the problem. People in 

Saskatoon Wildwood, like people all across this province, are 

ready to go to the stores now, now that the expanded PST on 

clothing has been removed, and buy work shirts, shirts with the 

sleeves already rolled up. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- People are ready to work and work we must. 

There are new economic realities in this country, and our 

government is ready to work in co-operation and consultation 

with all people to find made-in-Saskatchewan solutions to this 

crisis created by the former government. 

 

We have already made a large step in this venture. We dropped 

the expanded PST. We listened to the consumers and the small 

businesses. We listened to the restaurants whose trade dropped 

by over 30 per cent. We listened to the bookstores who 

watched with alarm at the tax on books at a time when 

illiteracy rates at 25 per cent of Saskatchewan citizens are 

already the scandal of this country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing let me repeat that this government is a 

government committed to finding innovative and inexpensive 

solutions to the problems created by the previous 

administration. We will change the notion of what is valuable 

in this society. We will look to new and creative sources for 

solutions. We will look, for instance, to a previously ignored 

economic sector, the art sector. 

 

The arts in Saskatchewan play a major, but unheralded role in 

our lives and in the creation of jobs and of economic 

stimulation. The arts and culture industries employ over 10,000 

people, twice as many as the combined industries of uranium 

mining and potash. More to the point, they enrich our lives 

tremendously. They stimulate us to new ways of thinking, new 

ways of working for social change, new ways of involving 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- We can and we must involve these people and all 

people as we struggle to repair the damage. Indeed we must do 

more than merely repair the damage. We must move beyond 

that -- move to a society where tolerance, understanding, 

respect, and dignity, are important. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- We must recognize the incredible mosaic of 

cultural riches available in Saskatchewan. We are 

immeasurably enriched by aboriginal people, by new citizens 

and immigrants, by people with different points of view and 

orientations. We must value and respect their contributions and 

work actively to hear their solutions. 

 

I mentioned earlier that I had served on Saskatoon City 

Council. I developed a reputation there for being someone who 

spoke out clearly and strongly on the issues of importance to 

the people of Saskatoon. People would often say that they 

didn't always agree with me but at least they knew where I 

stood and they knew that I would listen to all points of view 

and work hard to get results. 

 

It was a no-nonsense, clear, and straightforward approach. The 

poll results for the last 12 years 

  



82 Saskatchewan Hansard December 5, 1991 

demonstrated that it's an approach the people want. It's an 

approach the people have the right to expect and indeed to 

demand from their elected representatives. We cannot, we must 

not, treat people to a diet of bafflegab and simply hope that 

their problems will go away. 

 

I intend to adopt the same sort of strong, clear approach in this 

legislature. I will be working hard and pressing for change in 

certain key areas where I feel social justice has been denied for 

too long. For instance, I believe we need to settle aboriginal 

land claims. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- We must work with Indian and Metis 

organizations on the transfer of jurisdiction where appropriate. 

I believe we need to get serious about the environmental 

degradation of this planet. We need strong, 

conservation-oriented programs. In health care, I want to see 

effective preventive programs in the area of mental health and 

teen pregnancies. I also believe we must have a realistic, 

preventive, and palliative program for AIDS (acquired immune 

deficiency syndrome). 

 

Further, I believe it is now time to update the Human Rights 

Code. We need to strengthen provisions for physically and 

mentally disabled people, and stop discrimination on the basis 

of sexual orientation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I also believe we need to be much more active in 

our support of the arts in this province. 

 

And finally, I am determined to push for economic and social 

measures to eliminate poverty and to close, for once and for all, 

the food banks of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- These are but a few examples of the areas where 

I will be pressing our government to move forward quickly and 

clearly. I don't expect that all people will agree with all the 

issues I've listed, but I do expect that these issues will at least 

be placed on the public agenda and we can begin dialogue and 

action on them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is rich, not rich in dollars but rich 

in people, their diversity and their dignity. As we work to 

restore economic balance to this province, as we work to 

contribute to the process of constitutional renovation, as we 

work to meaningfully involve all people from all walks of life, 

we must never forget our richness in our diversity and our 

strength in our resolve. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too wish to 

extend my congratulations, Mr. Speaker, on your election as 

Speaker of this Legislative Assembly. I pledge my co-operation 

in the orderly dispatch of the business brought before this 

Assembly. It further pleases me that my colleagues who have 

spoken prior to me, have also given a similar commitment. 

This should make your job as Speaker much less difficult. 

Mr. Speaker, it is with a certain amount of trepidation that I 

stand to give my first address to this Assembly as the elected 

member of the constituency of Weyburn. It is noted, Mr. 

Speaker, that I use the word trepidation in the context of the 

uncertainties this rookie encounters in his new endeavour as a 

member of this Assembly. 

 

The good people of the Weyburn constituency have bestowed 

upon me the privilege of representing them over the next four 

years. For this I am truly thankful, and it is a privilege that I 

shall cherish dearly. I shall do my utmost to represent my 

constituents in a manner that is worthy of the trust and 

confidence that my constituents have reposed in me. 

 

I'm also mindful, Mr. Speaker, of the long tradition the 

Weyburn constituency has had of representation in this 

Assembly by honourable and competent members. 

 

As far as my memory permits me, I recall T.C. Douglas who 

served this province with great distinction as premier from 

1944 to 1962. Following Mr. Douglas, June Staveley, former 

Weyburn mayor, was elected as a Liberal candidate and served 

for one term. The late Auburn Pepper served his constituents 

for 18 years under the leadership of former premiers Woodrow 

Lloyd and Allan Blakeney. And for the past nine years, the 

former Finance minister, Lorne Hepworth, served his 

constituents very ably. 

 

Mr. Speaker, regardless of the partisan politics these former 

Weyburn MLAs engaged in, each of them served their whole 

constituent body with dignity, honour, and integrity. It is this 

tradition and fine example that I have as my yardstick and 

bench-mark in the execution of my elected responsibilities. 

 

I fondly recollect, as a very young lad, my first introduction to 

Mr. Douglas via the radio. My father would listen to the radio 

speeches and debates. And, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Douglas 

was on the air waves, it was bad news for me if I was 

disruptive. It took a few years maturity on my part to 

understand why dad tuned me out while he tuned Mr. Douglas 

in on the air waves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is standing in Weyburn Heritage Park a 

building which has the appearance of a church on the outside 

but on the inside it has been restored as a theatre. This is the 

former Calvary Baptist Church, the only church that Mr. 

Douglas pastored as a minister of the word of God. This former 

church was relocated from Second Street, Weyburn, to 

Weyburn Heritage Park and dedicated to the memory of T.C. 

Douglas. 

 

In the dedication address of October 19 of this year, Ross 

McMurty, former United Church minister and long-time friend 

of Tommy and Irma Douglas, spoke the following words: 

 

 In dedicating this centre today, it is with affection and 

thanksgiving we salute Tommy Douglas -- a man of the 

people and for the people; a man of wit but also wisdom; a 

man of compassion but also courage; a man of whom it will 

be said: no one just like him will ever walk our way again. 

  



December 5, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

 In the name of all that was wrong with the past; in the name 

of all that is right with the present; and in the name of all that 

is yet possible . . . we dedicate the T.C. Douglas Calvary 

Centre for the Performing Arts to the memory of Thomas 

Clement Douglas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 

represent the same constituency that T.C. Douglas represented 

for so many years. I was also honoured with the presence of 

Irma Douglas and her granddaughter, Rachel Sutherland, on 

election night when the constituency of Weyburn elected an 

NDP member to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Over the past decade in particular, the 

public has directed much cynicism towards politicians. All 

members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, have an obligation to 

restore trust and confidence in the legislative process. All too 

frequently I've heard members of the public compare us to 

boisterous school children during their recess break when the 

Assembly members engage in persistent heckling and shouting 

on the floor of this Assembly. When I hear this comparison 

being made, I caution the person making the comparison that 

perhaps they're being unduly harsh to the school children. 

 

I was pleased to hear you state, Mr. Speaker, during your 

comments following your election, that you shall make every 

reasonable effort to maintain a dignified decorum in this 

Assembly, reflective of the importance of this institution to the 

democratic process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- This is not to say that we are to don the 

robes of a stoic when we enter the Assembly. There is room for 

laughter, cajoling, and polite heckling which all must be kept in 

its proper perspective considering that the Assembly through 

the medium of television is always under the watchful eye of 

the public. 

 

Our primary focus as elected members is to attend to the 

business of this Assembly through the introduction of 

legislation followed by critical scrutiny and debate. 

Saskatchewan has had and continues to have a reputation for 

taking its politics seriously. This is demonstrated by the 

relatively high percentage of voter turn-out on election day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the years the elected members by far have 

served the interest of their constituents very well, but 

occasionally some go astray and serve their self interest. The 

Bible comments upon service to our brothers, Mark 9:35: 

 

 Jesus sat down, called the 12 disciples and said to them: 

"whoever wants to be first must place himself last of all and 

be the servant of all". 

 

Every one of us must be vigilant constantly and stay the 

course of public service and not private gain. This dichotomy 

of public service versus private gain has always been in the 

public's eye and has been the subject matter of much debate for 

generations. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. It now being 5 o'clock I leave this chair 

until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


