




















































Hansard: December 19, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 355 

 December 19, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I wish to introduce Joe Saxinger, the 

member from Kinistino.  He's with us today, and I ask all the 

members of the Assembly to welcome Joe to the Assembly.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Hiring of Consultants 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a question, 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Speaker, 

yesterday I asked the minister a question about Marg Benson 

and, Mr. Minister, you misled this House in your response.  

You stated . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister had stated that my 

question has been answered on the order paper and, Mr. 

Minister, it definitely was not.  And that is not true.  The 

question that was answered related to the fact that she worked 

for, and was paid by, you. 

 

I ask you again today, Mr. Minister, did your employee, Marg 

Benson, consult for any department of the government other 

than your own, and if so, what departments and what was the 

nature of her consultation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Marg was employed in my department, 

and as far as I know, only in my department.  And she 

consulted with other departments but did not report to me on 

those other departments. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Minister 

of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, I know for a fact that Marg 

Benson met with and consulted regarding the Department of 

Rural Development.  The question, Mr. Speaker, the question 

you did answer on the order paper indicated that she worked 

directly under you or your designate, although you refuse to tell 

us the total amount of money you paid out to her. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, do you have knowledge of 

these other consulting activities.  And if not, did Marg Benson 

receive payment from you or work with you . . . work that 

you're not aware of. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't understand exactly what the 

concern is here.  Marg Benson worked for my department and 

consulted with other departments and may have reported to 

other departments on those matters, but has not reported to me 

on matters other than my departmental concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture is 

answering different today than he did yesterday, because he 

was very, very . . . 

The Speaker: -- I'd like to ask the member to try and refrain 

from inferring that the minister has not been truthful in this 

House.  And I let one particular statement go, and I ask the 

member to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The minister was very sure of himself 

yesterday when he said the member worked for . . . or Marg 

Benson worked for him for one month as advisory. 

 

Are you admitting today, Mr. Minister, that you were wrong on 

that answer and that it should be a correction made to this 

House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question now to the 

Minister of Rural Development.  Mr. Minister, the fact . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Excuse me.  I'm not blaming the member from 

Arm River, he's doing fine.  I just wanted to ask the member 

from Humboldt to quit interrupting when the member is trying 

to ask a question.  The member from Arm River. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate that.  

My question is to the Minister of Rural Development. 

 

Mr. Minister, the fact is that Marg Benson met with senior 

officials in your department and informed them that it would be 

her job to advise you on reorganizing your department.  Mr. 

Minister, did your department pay any part of the fees to Marg 

Benson in return for the consulting work done for you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as the member 

opposite probably knows, the Department of Rural 

Development and the Department of Agriculture are very 

closely related, and there are some organizations which are 

mutual between the two of them.  And part of our job is to look 

at the total reorganization of the government. 

 

And with regard to that, Marg Benson did meet with my 

department.  She was not paid by my department, and she was 

consulting with the government in the overall looking at 

reorganizing all of the government, which is what we are now 

doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the minister.  

He has now admitted for sure -- and I thank him for that -- that 

she did do work for his department but was not paid by his 

department.  Now my question to the minister is: who paid and 

what department paid Marg Benson? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, Marg Benson was 

working for the Department of Agriculture at the time in 

consulting with the Department of Agriculture and related 

matters to the Department of Rural Development. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



356 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister of Rural Affairs is 

saying exactly how it happened, but it's not the same as what 

the Minister of Agriculture is saying. 

 

A new question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, the Provincial 

Auditor has in the past stated that where consulting is done for 

multiple departments, that each department should pay their 

fair share so that proper spending authority is maintained.  Mr. 

Minister, is it your intention to pay to the Department of 

Agriculture that share?  And how much will that consist of? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, Marg Benson was 

working for the Department of Agriculture consulting with the 

Rural Development department in related matters. And I don't 

think that it would be possible to split out the minutes that she 

was actually involved with one department or the other here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

First Ministers' Meeting Agenda 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question will be to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  If he would rather have the Deputy 

Premier respond, that'll be his choice. 

 

What specific proposals, Mr. Minister, did the Department of 

Agriculture and your officials send with the Premier of 

Saskatchewan to his luncheon meeting today with first 

ministers on either agriculture refinancing, or support for 

farmers, or anything else that you might be able to tell farmers 

now as the first ministers meet and discuss the urgency and the 

crisis that's in agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I did not direct the Premier to do anything 

in particular at the first ministers' conference.  He is completely 

familiar with the issues confronting agriculture as is 

demonstrated by the action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- He has spoken out very forcefully for 

farmers in the time prior to our election and in the time since.  

And so have other ministers of this government taken the 

issues of agriculture, both from the income debt and other issue 

sides, to others responsible at every opportunity.  And we only 

wish we could have received the same co-operation from you. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary question to the minister.  Mr. 

Speaker, I think in all fairness to the public and to farmers, this 

is not a laughing matter.  And you can make light of the fact 

that maybe your department did not consult with farmers and 

have suggestions for the Prime Minister through the Premier's 

office. 

 

I would think that if you have a relevant office and you are 

concerned as the Minister of Agriculture being a farmer 

yourself, you could at least have suggestions that you could 

take to the Prime Minister and to the other premiers. 

Now I ask you again, Mr. Minister, in all sincerity, could you 

table any suggestions that have been forwarded from the 

Government of Saskatchewan to the Prime Minister's office 

and to other premiers about agriculture and about things that 

could be done right away to help the agricultural people that 

are facing this crisis as we go into Christmas. 

 

Farmers are losing their land.  They need more cash.  It is a 

crisis.  Could you table anything that you and your officials 

have sent along with the Premier of Saskatchewan to the 

luncheon that's going on today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I find the question somewhat 

ludicrous from someone who has been operating in government 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Would the minister please be 

seated?  I've asked the member from Humboldt not to interrupt.  

I asked members on the opposite side, and specifically the 

member from Arm River, not to interrupt when the minister is 

speaking. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- From my first day in office, the important 

cabinet discussions and the discussions of caucus of our 

government have centred around the important challenges in 

agriculture from the questions of income and debt and 

transportation and international trade. And on every account 

those issues have been investigated and negotiated and 

explored. 

 

And the Premier is absolutely familiar with each of those 

issues.  He realizes the importance of them to the 

Saskatchewan economy.  Ministers of this government at all 

the meetings which they have attended have raised those 

critical matters in a way that reflects that broad understanding.  

And I'm sure those issues are being raised at the meeting at the 

first ministers' conference today.  I don't have to set out the 

agenda for my Premier to do that.  And I do wish you would 

co-operate in the endeavours we're making. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to address a new 

question to the Deputy Premier, the Minister of Finance.  Mr. 

Minister, clearly the farmers have had no help from the 

provincial government and half the amount of help from the 

federal government that the new NDP (New Democratic Party) 

administration want.  The Minister of Agriculture has failed to 

detail any suggestions that have been taken to Ottawa. 

 

Could I get you to respond in suggesting or tabling before the 

Assembly today any suggestions in terms of economic activity 

-- those that were suggested by the Premier of Ontario, for 

example.  The Premier of Alberta has suggested a 1 per cent 

reduction in income tax.  Were there any proposals taken to 

Ottawa by the Premier of Saskatchewan, not only on 

agriculture but on economic activity, on tax reductions, on 

economic solutions at this time?  Or was the only suggestion 

that we got and the only solution again from the NDP 

administration that was that maybe they could just have another 

meeting? 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to inform the member 

opposite that from the time we took office we began to work on 

a strategy to encourage the federal government to meet the 

commitments it had made with respect to negotiations held 

earlier that year on income stabilization for Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers were critical to that task as you well 

know, because you avoided meeting with them.  They met in 

Saskatchewan in large numbers to discuss the problems that 

confronted them, to encourage the federal government to meet 

their commitments, which were to pay out the third line of 

defence in response to the province's commitment on GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) and NISA (net income 

stabilization account). 

 

That position was taken strongly to the federal government 

through the messages of the rallies in the fall and it was taken 

strongly by the farmers in the lobby effort.  We have been 

engaged since that time in a discussion of the farm debt 

question with all people concerned.  We have appointed the 

GRIP/NISA review committee to examine the shortcomings of 

the rather hastily implemented GRIP and NISA program. 

 

We have begun to discuss publicly the transportation issues 

which have some impact on Saskatchewan, but which certainly 

do not have the kind of importance to Saskatchewan people 

that the income and debt questions have.  And those matters are 

a matter of public concern which you, sir, have been carefully 

ignoring to this point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A supplementary to 

the Minister of Finance and Deputy Premier.  The Premier of 

Saskatchewan has said that he would like to talk about areas of 

trade-offs at the first ministers' luncheon that's going on today.  

Could the Acting Premier give us some suggestion, some idea 

as to the areas of acting trade-offs that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan is talking about, if they involve agriculture? 

 

And I point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has been 

recorded as saying if he could get us 3 or $4 an acre then he 

might talk about the constitution; if it's something like that.  Or 

is it along the lines that an RRSP (registered retirement savings 

plan) could perhaps be remodelled to use for housing, or the 

fact we could reduce income tax or anything else that the 

minister would like to table.  Or is in fact the case -- and could 

they acknowledge -- that there is no ideas coming from the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

And like the Premier's luggage and baggage, it was lost and the 

suggestions are lost, and there's nothing for the farmers, there's 

nothing for the economy.  In fact, it's just a luncheon that the 

Premier is attending, and that's his claim to fame today in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the Leader 

of the Opposition to know or be reminded that the reason that 

there is a first ministers' meeting for the first time in 18 months 

in this country, which is in itself amazing, is because of the 

leadership and the insistence of people like the Premier of 

Saskatchewan and the Premier of Ontario . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And that itself, Mr. Speaker, is a 

major accomplishment.  This . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Lunch. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, it's a lunch, Mr. Speaker, and 

it's a lunch because the Prime Minister chose to have a 

luncheon meeting rather than a full-fledged conference.  And it 

is our intention, and the Premier will be pressing at this 

meeting which is taking place at this moment in Ottawa, that 

that meeting is a beginning, an important beginning, and that 

out of that should come a full-fledged first ministers' meeting 

which will be a meeting of decisions early in the new year. 

 

And I hope that the Prime Minister is concerned enough about 

the state of the Canadian economy -- and I have no reason to 

think that he isn't -- that he will agree to do that so that we can 

get on with rebuilding the economy of this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  I ask the Deputy 

Premier again: will he acknowledge that there's nothing more 

coming out of the province of Saskatchewan's suggestions 

other than another lunch and another meeting?  And secondly, 

would he respond to the proposals coming out of Ontario; 

would he join with us and other people in saying: I would like 

to see something happen with respect to RRSP and mortgages; 

I would like to see something happening with respect to 

taxation or diversification or economic activity? 

 

Would he give us something so that the public of 

Saskatchewan have anything of substance to talk about at this 

time of the year with a brand-new administration with a big 

majority, other than lunch in the Prime Minister's office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

question, hopefully that this sharing of ideas that all the 

premiers and the Prime Minister may come up with will lead to 

the first ministers meeting early in the new year, in which those 

ideas can be fleshed out so that some of the decisions can be 

made. 

 

Of course there will be things that the Premier of Saskatchewan 

will be raising.  The Minister of Agriculture has outlined a 

number of them.  We will want to be talking at this meeting 

about the monetary policy of the federal government where the 

high dollar is restricting trade, and we are a trading country and 

a trading province.  We will want to be talking about federal 

off-loading, which the former government allowed the federal 

government to 

  



358 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

carry out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Without ever a word of protest so 

that in this year alone it is costing the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

$550 million.  We will be talking at this first ministers' meeting 

about farm income support, Mr. Speaker, and about 

renegotiating of GRIP, and we'll be talking about the need for 

an economic development and industrial strategy so that we 

can create work for the people of this country as well as the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Final supplementary.  Final supplementary to 

the deputy premier.  Minister of Finance, could you suggest the 

areas where the Government of Saskatchewan would 

co-operate with the federal government in terms of economic 

development, in taxation, in the kinds of things that we could 

do to help farmers stimulate the economy -- could you list the 

areas where this jurisdiction is prepared to co-operate to 

improve the lot for people not only in this province but indeed 

across the country? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the province, the 

Government of Saskatchewan, stands ready to co-operate with 

any initiatives it will develop out of this and any future first 

ministers' meeting which will be in the interests of the country 

that we live in and in the interests of province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We will co-operate in a major restructuring and renegotiating, 

for example, of the GRIP program -- which is inadequate and 

the members opposite know it -- so that it can provide the kind 

of income support the farm producers of this province and this 

country need to have. 

 

But my bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, that whatever comes out of 

this meeting, if it is in the best interests of Canada and is in the 

interests of Saskatchewan, we will co-operate.  We don't go to 

these meeting with a closed mind; we go to these meetings with 

an open mind because the situation that this country faces is so 

crucial that we have to do that. 

 

All we do, Mr. Speaker, is ask the members opposite to 

co-operate.  Unfortunately the Leader of the Opposition has not 

when we consulted him on the trek to Ottawa which took place 

some time ago. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Foreclosure Moratorium 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct my question, 

which is of interest to tens of thousands of Saskatchewan 

people, to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on January 11 of this year while in opposition the 

premier stated as follows, and I quote: 

There needs to be an immediate program of adequate, (and) 

effective debt restructuring and . . . This should be coupled, . 

. . with a short-term debt moratorium until other programs 

are in place. 

 

I ask the minister, will the moratorium package on foreclosures 

that I asked you about last week, and now debt that I'm asking 

you about this week, that you are negotiating with the financial 

institutions that you told this House you were -- do they 

provide for either voluntary or mandatory participation on 

behalf of institutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

inform the member opposite that the negotiations are 

continuing and the details of the negotiations will be released 

when the negotiations have been completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  This is 

directed as well to the minister from Rosetown-Elrose.  Sir, the 

New Democratic Party in the previous election for the last 

three years went throughout the province of Saskatchewan, 

telling everyone that they supported a moratorium on farm 

foreclosures. 

 

Will you rise in this House and tell us whether or not this New 

Democratic government does or does not support a mandatory 

foreclosure moratorium for the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The commitment that was made during the 

election campaign, which is that for which I take responsibility, 

is that we indicated that we would be engaging in discussions 

with the financial institutions as soon as we were elected. 

 

Those discussions have . . . those discussions proceeded at our 

earliest convenience and they are ongoing, and we will report 

the results of those negotiations when they've been completed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I will recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone.  But before she does, I just want to ask 

the members please, if you expect one side of the House not to 

interrupt when questions are asked, then I think you have to 

also at the same time not interrupt when answers are given.  I 

want to be fair to both sides of the House, and you have to give 

me that co-operation. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- This is my final supplementary to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  Sir, are you indeed telling to the 

farmers of this province, the people in the Christian Farm 

Action Crisis Committee, the National Farmers Union, the 

United Grain Growers, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool -- all of 

the people who were held to believe that the New Democratic 

Party of Saskatchewan was indeed supportive of a moratorium 

on farm foreclosures -- you're now telling this Assembly and 

all of the people of Saskatchewan that indeed that was not your 

intent?  There was never an intention to follow through on this? 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 359 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to say that the situation in 

Saskatchewan is very serious from both the debt and the 

income side.  And that's not something to play politics with. 

 

Addressing those issues independently is valueless and 

addressing it without consideration for everybody's . . . for the 

impact on everyone in it is valueless.  The solutions that we 

need to come to in Saskatchewan in the '90s, as was 

demonstrated by the trek that went to Ottawa where everyone 

co-operated except the Leader of the Opposition, demonstrated 

that a variety of interests can come together and make progress 

on substantial issues and speak in a unified fashion to the 

people of Canada and make a difference. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to say that in implementing the 

GRIP and NISA review, we went to the broad array of 

Saskatchewan organizations and asked them to sit 

co-operatively on a body to examine existing farm policies so 

that the inadequacies of the program, as it was hurriedly 

introduced, might be addressed either in the short range by 

changes or in the long range by major conceptual change.  And 

I want you to know . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the minister has answered quite 

sufficiently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Before orders of 

the day, I would like to ask leave of the Assembly to make a 

brief statement regarding one of my constituents. 

 

Leave granted. 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipient 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit -- in 1985 the province of 

Saskatchewan established the award and later in '88 changed 

the name to the Saskatchewan Order of Merit.  Mr. Speaker, 

the constituent of mine who received the award was Annie 

Johnstone of Pinehouse. 

 

Annie Johnstone was born in Souris River near La Ronge in 

1899, a northern Saskatchewan Metis.  She has lived most of 

her life in Pinehouse Lake where her husband farmed and 

managed a Hudson's Bay Company store. 

 

Mrs. Johnstone is a skilled practitioner of traditional native 

medicine, tied closely to Indian spirituality.  She has an 

extensive knowledge of plants and herbs which she first 

acquired from her grandparents as a young girl. 

 

At the age of 15, Annie Johnstone learned how to be a midwife 

from local women through first-hand experience, supplemented 

with information from medical textbooks.  For 65 years she 

was the nurse-midwife for the Pinehouse area.  Despite her lack 

of formal training, she successfully handled all kinds of births, 

including the most complicated, in an area where there were no 

doctors and transport was by horses, 

canoe, or dog sled.  She delivered over 500 babies without a 

loss of a child or a mother. 

 

Mrs. Johnstone also treated illnesses in adults and children, 

using her Indian medicine, often curing patients who had not 

been helped by modern medicine.  Local people continue to 

consult with her on health problems and she has passed on her 

skills and knowledge of herbs to others who carry on her work. 

 

Mrs. Johnstone, Mr. Speaker, delivered her last child in 

Pinehouse when she was 81 years old.  She is 91 years old 

today and is still a very active woman. 

 

And I just want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that my wife's 

family, a family of 13 children in Pinehouse -- Mrs. Johnstone 

delivered 11 of those 13 children.  She delivered them under 

severe conditions.  There was no sewer and water.  There was 

no electricity.  And this was done by candle-light, coal oil, and 

gas lamps.  She's a very exceptional woman. 

 

I ask all members to join with me in congratulating Annie 

Johnstone of Pinehouse on receiving Saskatchewan's highest 

distinction: the Saskatchewan Order of Merit. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just in response to the member from 

Athabasca, the members of the official opposition would also 

like to pass our congratulations on.  As the last minister of 

Indian and Native Affairs for the previous government, I came 

to appreciate many of the things that the member from 

Athabasca has mentioned in talking about Mrs. Johnstone, and 

we just also would like to add our congratulations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Canora, that by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That a special committee composed of Mr. Speaker as 

chairman and members Van Mulligen, Lingenfelter, Calvert, 

Bradley, Kowalsky, Stanger, Shillington, Haverstock, 

Martens, and Neudorf as members to be named at a . . . 

 

Pardon me, I've got this . . . I just received the names of the 

members of the opposition so I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the member proceeds, would he ask 

leave of the House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I did. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes but you didn't give me a chance to even 

ask.  Would the member ask for leave and then we'll ask 

whether you have leave. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like leave to 

introduce a motion to establish the Rules Committee. 

  



360 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Leave granted. 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 That a special committee composed of Mr. Speaker as 

chairman and members Van Mulligen, Lingenfelter, Calvert, 

Bradley, Kowalsky, Stanger, Shillington, Haverstock, 

Martens, and Neudorf be appointed to examine such matters 

as deems advisable with respect to the rules, procedures, 

practices, powers of the Legislative Assembly, its operation 

and organization, and the facilities and services provided to 

the Assembly, its committees, and members. 

 

 That this special committee be instructed to include in its 

report drafts of proposed rules to give effect, if adopted by 

the Assembly, to any changes or change that may be 

proposed by that committee. 

 

 That the committee having the power to sit during 

intersessional period, during the sessions except when the 

Assembly is sitting, and that the committee have the power to 

send for persons, papers, records, and to examine witness 

under oath, to receive representation from interested parties 

and individuals, and to hold meetings away from the seat of 

government in order that provisions in other legislatures can 

be studied. 

 

 That this committee be instructed to submit a report to the 

Assembly at such time as the Assembly resumes regular 

sittings in 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to 

move a motion to constitute a special committee to consider 

regulations. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Rosetown-Elrose: 

 

 That the members Toth, Boyd, Goulet, Koenker, Kowalsky, 

Kujawa, Pringle, Scott, and Wormsbecker be constituted a 

special committee to consider every regulation filed with the 

Clerk of the Legislative Assembly pursuant to the provisions 

of The Regulations Act with a view to determine whether the 

special attention of the Legislative Assembly should be 

drawn to any of the said regulations on any of the following 

grounds: 

 

 (1) that it imposes a charge on the public revenues or 

prescribes a payment made to any public authority not 

specifically provided for by statute; 

 (2) that it is excluded from challenge in the courts; 

 

 (3) that it makes unusual and unexpected use of powers 

conferred by statute; 

 

 (4) that it purports to have retrospective effect where the 

parent statute confers no express authority so to provide; 

 

 (5) that it has been insufficiently promulgated; 

 

 (6) that it is not clear in meaning; 

 

 and if they are so determined to report that effect, and that the 

committee have the assistance of the Legislative Counsel and 

Law Clerk in reviewing the said regulations, and that it be 

required prior to the reporting that the special attention of the 

Assembly be drawn to any regulation to inform the 

government department or authority concerned of its 

intention so to report; and 

 

 that the committee be empowered to invite any 

regulation-making authority to submit a memorandum 

explaining any regulation which may be under consideration 

by the committee, or to invite any regulation-making 

authority to appear before the committee as a witness for the 

purpose of explaining any such regulation; and 

 

 that the committee be empowered to review the by-laws of 

professional associations and amendments thereto to 

determine whether or not they are in any way prejudicial to 

the public interest. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of By-laws of the Professional Associations and 

Amendments to the Special Committee on Regulations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the by-laws of the professional associations and 

amendments thereto tabled in the last legislature and not 

ratified by the committee, and the by-laws and amendments 

as tabled in the twentieth and the twenty-first legislatures be 

referred to the Special Committee on Regulations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  By leave of the 

Assembly, I would like to make a motion as well of a 

housekeeping nature as far as the committee make-up is 

concerned. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Substitution of Member of the Standing Committee on 

Municipal Law 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

move, seconded by the member from Thunder Creek, by leave 

of the Assembly: 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 361 

 That the name of Mr. Boyd be substituted for that of Mr. 

D'Autremont on the list of members of the Standing 

Committee on Municipal Law. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Could the member give me a different 

seconder?  I recognize the member from Thunder Creek is not 

here. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay.  The member for Wilkie, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to Amend The Municipal Board Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Municipal Board Amendment Act, 1991. 

 

This Bill introduces changes to The Municipal Board Act 

pertaining to, first, the conditions of membership on the 

Saskatchewan Municipal Board (SMB); and second, the 

appointment of an executive director for SMB. 

 

The existing Act established the SMB of 1988 by consolidating 

the responsibilities and authority of four predecessor boards: 

the Local Government Board, the Provincial Planning Appeals 

Board, the Saskatchewan Assessment Appeals Board, and the 

Municipal Boundaries Commission. 

 

The Act provides for the appointment of both full-time and 

part-time members of the SMB.  The term of office for 

full-time members is up to 10 years with the possibility of 

reappointment.  Appointments are for the duration of the 

appointed term during good behaviour, subject to resignation or 

death of a member or, alternatively, removal for cause by the 

Lieutenant Governor on address of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this latter provision is unusual.  Provincially 

appointed boards normally serve at the pleasure of the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council.  This approach ensures that 

the board appointments are continually open to review.  We 

feel as a government that this level of openness is desirable.  

Accordingly the Act will be amended to permit board 

appointments to serve at the pleasure of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. 

 

This change will also enhance flexibility in adjusting or 

matching the size and membership of the Municipal Board to 

its work-load, since this may change over time.  Locking in 

appointments for 10 years does not necessarily make sense in a 

time of severe provincial financial restraint where resource 

flexibility must be required. 

 

The Act is also being amended to permit introduction of 

regulations specifying qualifications for appointments to the 

board.  The objective here is to ensure that any future board 

appointments have recognized experience and competence in 

the areas under the board's jurisdiction. 

 

A further change is proposed with respect to the appointment 

of an executive director.  The Act now makes this appointment 

mandatory. It will become optional.  Because no funds were 

ever budgeted for this position, the board was placed in a 

position of contravening the statutory requirement.  If restraint 

continues, the opportunity to hire an executive director may be 

limited.  And without amendment the legal contravention 

would continue. 

 

Finally, these changes to the Act are being made retroactive to 

when the municipal board was first established in 1988.  The 

purpose of this is to release a board from the requirement 

relating to the appointment of an executive director.  The 

government is satisfied that these amendments achieve a 

balance among several objectives, including independent and 

open operation of the municipal board and an enhanced ability 

to manage restraint. 

 

I ask all members to support this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I've listened to the minister's 

comments very carefully, and we would not have any problems 

or concerns with agreeing to let the Bill go into the Committee 

of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to establish The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today 

to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding company Act. 

 

As many members will be aware, this legislation is designed to 

allow for the reorganization of SaskTel in anticipation of 

federal regulation by the Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission. 

 

SaskTel is one of the only two major telecommunications 

companies in Canada which are not currently subject to federal 

regulation.  In 1989 the federal government introduced 

amendments to The Railway Act to give the CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) the 

authority to regulate SaskTel.  While that Bill died on the order 

paper the federal government remains determined to take over 

the regulation of SaskTel. 

 

Unfortunately the federal government does have the legislative 

authority to regulate SaskTel if it decides to go ahead with the 

amendments that are required.  In that event all of SaskTel as it 

is currently organized would come under the jurisdiction of the 

federal government  



362 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

and its regulatory agencies.  It is therefore imperative that the 

province take whatever steps it can to prepare for that 

possibility. 

 

Just at the time when increasing competition makes it essential 

for SaskTel to be able to respond quickly to the demands of 

customers and the market-place, it will be shackled by CRTC 

regulations and requirements which will increase SaskTel's 

operating costs, delay the introduction of new services and 

technology, and adversely affect the Crown corporation's 

ability to manage its affairs to meet the unique needs of 

Saskatchewan customers. 

 

It will also restrict the province's ability to manage SaskTel 

consistent with its mandate as a Crown corporation to help 

promote economic diversification and further this government's 

social policy. 

 

Federal regulation will limit the ability of SaskTel to fulfil its 

mandate on behalf of the people of this province while at the 

same time conducting a successful and profitable business in an 

increasingly competitive and rapidly changing market-place. 

 

This legislation will enable us to be in a position to respond as 

best we can to the changes affecting SaskTel and to use the 

window of opportunity that exists prior to the CRTC regulating 

SaskTel.  Almost all major telephone companies in Canada 

have organized themselves so as to isolate the core telephone 

company from their other non-integral telecommunication 

assets which are either marginally regulated or not regulated at 

all. 

 

In other provinces this has been accomplished by creating a 

holding company which owns the telephone company assets 

separate from the non-integral assets. 

 

Under the proposed reorganization, SaskTel's non-integral 

assets would be transferred to the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications holding company.  These non-integral 

assets will include SaskTel's mobile division, SaskTel 

International, SaskTel's non-integral real properties such as 

buildings and parking lots, and SaskTel's shares in ISM 

Corporation, formerly WESTBRIDGE Computer Corporation. 

 

SaskTel's core business representing approximately 90 per cent 

of its current assets will remain in SaskTel.  These will consist 

primarily of local and long distance services with associated 

facilities, equipment, and rates and will be subject to full 

federal regulation.  Separating SaskTel's assets in this way will 

simplify regulation of the corporation and permit the holding 

company to operate and expand the unregulated portion of its 

business. 

 

We wish to make clear that this separation of assets in no way 

affects levels or conditions of employment, the terms of the 

collective agreement, or other employment matters such as 

benefits, seniority, and pensions. 

 

We believe that there are sound financial, administrative, and 

managerial reasons to proceed with this reorganization.  We 

think that the changes being proposed will help SaskTel 

respond to the dual challenges of federal regulation and the 

changing 

telecommunications market-place. 

 

Although we will continue to fight as strenuously as possible 

any attempt by the federal government to intrude into what we 

regard as provincial matters, we need to be ready for possible 

federal regulation of SaskTel.  This Bill will prepare SaskTel 

for that possibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now move that The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding company Act be read a second 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don't 

think we have any major problems with the Bill.  In order to 

facilitate expediency, we'll let it go into committee and 

certainly we'll have some questions for the minister at that 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to 

move second reading of The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Amendment Act, 1991.  These 

amendments are necessary to permit SaskTel to sell, assign, or 

transfer its non-integral assets to the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications holding company as part of the 

restructuring referred to in a Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications holding company Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now move that The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Amendment Act, 1991 be read a second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to Provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in 

Crown Employment Contracts governing Payments and 

Benefits on Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, 

to Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting those 

matters and to Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to 

Compensation for any Loss or Damage resulting from the 

Enactment or Application of this Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

conclusion of my remarks today I shall be moving second 

reading of this Bill, The Crown Employment Contracts Act.  

First, Mr. Speaker, let me speak briefly about the background 

to this legislation and the public concerns that have led to its 

development and introduction. 
 

Over the past several years, the people of Saskatchewan have 

become increasingly concerned about the need for sound and 

responsible management of the province's finances.  And they 

have become increasingly concerned about the need for greater 

openness and accountability on the part of the provincial 

government.  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 363 

The public's concerns were greatly intensified several weeks 

ago when it became apparent that the previous administration 

had entered into a number of secret employment contracts with 

certain employees and that these contracts provided unusually 

generous provisions in the event of voluntary resignation or 

involuntary dismissal. 

 

The public was not alone in expressing concerns about these 

contracts.  In the course of his review of last year's Public 

Accounts, the Provincial Auditor also expressed concerns about 

the way in which deputy ministers and other senior public 

servants were being appointed -- first by an order in council 

and then by a contract whose terms and conditions were 

prescribed by the Premier and which differed from those in the 

order in council. 

 

The public has also expressed deep concern, Mr. Speaker, 

about the unreasonable and excessive provisions in some of 

these secret contracts.  For example, provisions which 

guarantee a substantial payment even if the employee 

voluntarily resigns to take a different job. 

 

Many Saskatchewan working families and farm families find it 

unconscionable that such a provision exists in a contract for a 

person whose position is called ministerial assistant -- a very 

substantial payment that the taxpayers would have to bear for a 

ministerial assistant who voluntarily resigned to take a different 

job. 

 

Or to take another example, contract provisions which provided 

for unreasonably generous severance payments in the event of 

dismissal -- more than three years pay or $1.3 million in one 

case, three years pay or $624,000 in another case, and more 

than 18 months pay in the case of a contract with a ministerial 

assistant. 

 

Such employment contract provisions may not be surprising to 

the members opposite who, you will recall, Mr. Speaker, 

signed a five-year contract with Chuck Childers while PCS 

(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) was a Crown 

corporation.  But such provisions are certainly surprising to the 

men and women of Saskatchewan who find them excessive, 

unfair, and unreasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people want the government's 

employment relationships to be fair and reasonable both to the 

employees and to the taxpayers.  The government agrees with 

those objectives and this Bill will meet them. 

 

This legislation therefore addresses those issues.  First, it 

provides for public disclosure of all individual Crown 

employment contracts.  It thereby establishes the statutory right 

of any member of the public to have access to any such 

contract.  Moreover the Bill requires the filing of certain 

contracts in a single central repository.  The contract of every 

permanent head and every person who reports directly to a 

permanent head must be filed with the clerk of the Executive 

Council for public inspection.  No more secrecy, no more 

hidden contracts. 

 

Second, the legislation cancels and prohibits all termination 

benefits except those that are expressly permitted by law.  It 

cancels the unreasonable termination provisions in existing 

contracts and prohibits those kind of unreasonable benefits in 

future contracts. 

 

Third, the legislation provides for fair and reasonable severance 

payments in the event of dismissal.  The legislation requires 

that the same common law principles used by other employees 

and employers also be used in the case of provincial 

government employment contracts -- the same common law 

principles should be used in provincial government 

employment contracts.  It therefore provides to employees full 

and free access to the courts to determine what is fair. 

 

I would like to make just one final point, Mr. Speaker.  People 

understand that public servants are engaged in important work 

in the public interest and that they should be reasonably 

compensated for that work.  But Saskatchewan people also 

understand at a time when we have children and families in 

poverty, farm families facing financial crisis, working people 

fearful for their jobs, and a massive -- a massive -- provincial 

government debt, secret contracts containing excessive and 

unconscionable benefits simply cannot be tolerated. 

 

Saskatchewan people want the provincial government's 

employment arrangements with its senior executives and 

contract employees to be open and to be fair, both to 

employees and to the taxpayers.  This Bill establishes such 

fairness, both for today and for the future. 

 

And that point is crucial, Mr. Speaker, for this legislation 

covers both those contracts that were in existence when the 

government changed six weeks ago, and all new contracts that 

have been entered into since that time or may be entered into in 

the future.  This government believes this legislation is fair and 

we will be bound by it in the future. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the Bill before us today addresses 

directly the public's concerns with respect to Crown 

employment contracts.  It establishes the right of open access to 

such contracts.  It cancels the unreasonable and excessive 

contract benefits which exist.  It establishes fair and reasonable 

contractual arrangements with full and free access to the courts 

if necessary.  And it covers both existing contracts and future 

ones. 

 

And with those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I now move 

second reading of this Bill, the Crown Employment Contracts 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to begin my 

remarks by pointing out to the Assembly that I have a great 

deal of difficulty with this Bill, not from the aspect of 

disclosure, Mr. Speaker, but the principles that relate to how 

they go about disclosing the things that they ask for, and the 

methods used to disclose. 
 

As the minister indicated there was a . . . and I don't believe it 

from reading the Bill, Mr. Speaker, that this individual has 

access to the  



364 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

courts.  He has access to the courts but he's limited to the 

definitions as defined by the Act.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

part of what I see as a very serious problem. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the indication is from the minister, that 

common law principles prevail.  However, there is an exclusion 

provision within the Act that says that those principles where 

the least of these are applied are the ones that are addressed, so 

that the common law principles are erased. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not a part of the functions of this 

Assembly, nor should it ever be a part of the functions of this 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Act talks a little bit about public disclosure of 

Crown employment contracts.  And, Mr. Speaker, I have no 

problem with that at all.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, our Act in the 

spring of this year presented to this Assembly freedom of 

information, which in fact would have defined all of the 

functions in relation to the Crown employment contracts that 

individuals have, regardless of who they were. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is being delayed by the government 

opposite in its presentation for the Bill to be enacted for 

political purposes, defined so that they can move this forward, 

and then they don't have to proclaim the Bill that is already in 

place. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think they should think about that twice, 

because they themselves in fact stood in this House and agreed 

to have that Bill brought forward, that freedom of information.  

And now we have a great deal of delay in proclamation of that 

Bill. 

 

And I seriously believe that they have decided that this is a 

political move and it's something that they should be very 

careful about, because in fact, Mr. Speaker, they are infringing 

on the rights of a person to appeal to the court.  They allow 

only certain evidence to be brought to the court, Mr. Speaker, 

and that has a serious reflection on the government opposite. 

 

Now the provisions of the Bill, also in the Crown employment 

contracts that they provide, give a focus by the Bill that they 

can terminate contracts.  They can have an expiration of a 

contract -- they define that.  And then, Mr. Speaker, they do 

something that's very interesting -- they void all of the 

provisions of a contract that are there. 

 

Now I find that very very disturbing, that by an order of a 

statute within the framework of this Assembly that the judicial 

system is curtailed, in the fact that it can void the content of a 

contract that is binding on everyone else in this country.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, for me as a part of this Assembly, is 

disgusting.  I really don't think that that needs to be a part of a 

Bill like this. 

 

And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are certain 

things that I find lacking in this discussion.  One of them is the 

very fact that the Minister of Justice did not provide the detail 

on the second reading.  I find that very, very disappointing. 

 

I find that disappointing for a number of reasons. And the 

reasons are this.  I wonder if his department and the Justice 

department who will have to deal with this are in conflict of 

interest within the definition of how this is being presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they are in fact, are going to have to defend the 

position of this government in relation to discussions on the 

constitution and the freedom of rights and individuals.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why the . . . possibility of the 

reason why the Minister of Justice was not here to speak on 

second readings on this Bill.  And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is a 

very, very negative observation. 

 

The second thing I want to point out in this discussion is this:  

why didn't the government take the contract and negotiate a 

better opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan?  Why did 

they take an onerous Bill that curtails rights of individuals to 

appear before the court and set that down as a part of a political 

agenda to deal with this in a framework that is entirely outside 

the realm of those individuals . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member from Rosthern and the 

Minister of Health want to have a further discussion, I would 

ask them to either go outside the legislature or behind the bar, 

but let the member from Morse continue with the debate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that I think 

that the government was very negligent in not providing a 

discussion process for the individuals to bring forward their 

position in relation to this. 

 

What they should have done, Mr. Speaker, is set up a 

committee that was made up of individuals who have the 

capacity to arbitrate on behalf of the government in dealing 

with these contracts.  Why waste the taxpayers' dollars on 

fighting these contracts in the court?  Why waste the taxpayers' 

dollars? 

 

They're claiming here today on two items why they're bringing 

this Bill forward.  The first one, they want to save taxpayers' 

dollars.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I submit to you and to this 

Assembly that when and if this Bill ever passes, that there will 

be more money spent in its relation to applications to the court 

of Canada than any other Bill ever presented in this House in 

the last 10 years.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is I think the 

fundamental reason why they should have taken the 

opportunity, allowed the court to settle.  That was one 

opportunity they had. 

 

The second one is they could have even arbitrated it themselves 

with a group of people assigned by cabinet from the cabinet 

Executive Council, or even from outside.  We have labour 

negotiations taking place in the province of Saskatchewan year 

after year where you have arbitrated settlements on a lot more 

money than is being contested right here. 

 

And that is why, Mr. Speaker, I believe this is a political 

vendetta.  When people cannot apply to this Assembly to have 

the freedom to speak on it, these people are saying to all of us, 

I am not even going to allow them the access to the court 

because I'm going to define what they can have in the court and 

what they can't have in the court; 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 365 

what evidence can be provided in the court and what cannot.  

And you are going to curtail the access of that information by 

the judiciary in this province and say you can't have that.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is in this Bill. 

 

It says these are the limitations that the justices in this province 

have to take and consider.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that is 

unconstitutional.  It has been unconstitutional in the past, and I 

believe it's unconstitutional now. 

 

They could have sent it to arbitration.  They could have set up 

an arbitration committee to deal with it in the function that 

cabinet could have been doing it, other members of society 

could have been doing it. But no, they chose to use this 

Assembly for vindictive purposes, and I think that that's totally 

wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's a number of things that really, really 

irritate me more than anything else, and those are pointed out 

in the very middle of that Bill in section 9 that deals with . . . 

and I know I can't refer to sections, but I will broaden the 

context of it.  No claim of action can be taken on an individual 

basis for a number of very specific reasons.  And I want to 

point them out. 

 

There is no recourse to the court for damages -- none at all.  

And that's what it says in section 9: no recourse to the court for 

damages.  That's what it says. 

 

Second point that it says:  there is no recourse to the court for 

unjust . . . for debt for unjust damages.  And that's exactly what 

it says in the Bill. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  When does this Assembly 

ever have the authority to say that no one has the right to the 

court?  I think that's fundamentally wrong.  That's wrong for 

this Assembly to even consider that kind of a Bill in this 

House. 

 

The third point I want to make on this issue, that there is no 

access to the court, is a breach of contract.  Now I asked the 

Minister of Justice yesterday in this House as to whether in fact 

the government would consider making this function of no 

court action available to the private sector.  And the Minister of 

Justice said no, he would not. 

 

And for the very same reasons that he would not apply it to the 

private sector, I believe he should not have the authority, or this 

Assembly should not have the authority, to apply it to the 

principles set down in this kind of an action.  I don't believe 

they have the right to do that. 

 

Now there is no recourse to the court for inducing a breach of 

contract.  Now what does that mean in its broadest context?  

I'm not a lawyer; however, it means a lot.  Inducing a beach of 

contract could have far-reaching measures that could be taken 

and put into place by individuals who have a vested interest in 

seeking that individual's position for employment.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is wrong. 

 

I can't say to anyone in this province . . . I can't do that myself.  

I can't cast aspersions.  I can't slander anyone.  I can't by law 

without recourse to the court. 

And yet this institution is going to apply that broad-ranging 

function to this Bill and allow Executive Council to bring 

forward their idea about what it has to be.  And I think that's 

totally wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can interfere with a contract and not be sued.  

Mr. Speaker, they can't take it to court if there's an interference 

and it signals a conclusion of that contract, a breach of that 

contract.  They can't come to the court to do that.  I think that 

that's wrong too, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think it's under the 

fundamental rights established by the constitution of this 

country that that is a legal thing to do. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it flies right in the face of 

what the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan did in 1981 

by asking the rights and freedoms to be established in this 

country.  And I believe he was right in doing that. However he 

is in breach of his own constitution that he established by 

putting this Bill forward.  I think he's wrong. 

 

Now the individual . . . here is where we have cases of law and 

fact.  Now it deals also in strong measure with another area that 

has to do with the psychological impact of dismissal and 

harassment.  And, Mr. Speaker, there is no recourse in the court 

for mental distress in a situation like this .  There is no value 

placed on it, none at all. And I think that that is very, very 

wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have another one that's presented that you 

can't go to court for recourse, and that is a loss of reputation.  

Now we can in this Assembly speak freely as long as we don't . 

. . And as you said, when you became a part of this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, you said that this Assembly could not make 

disparaging remarks about other members of this Assembly.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, I agree with.  That's a fundamental 

principle of conduct within the framework of this House. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fundamental right that an individual 

has in society, that if that happens in society, he has a recourse 

to the court for that slanderous and disregard for the reputation 

of that individual.  He will tear it apart, and in this Bill he has 

no recourse to the court. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm still on section 9 of this Bill.  Then we go to a 

very, very extensive description of slander. Defamation of 

character is not permitted to have the individual have recourse 

to the court.  That's another area where this Bill says no court 

can be allowed access to the information. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, it goes even further to that. It goes 

beyond that and it says, any other course of action in the 

termination of this individual, the rights of that individual are 

lost.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  It is wrong in a 

technical sense. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are moving away from that sort of function 

where the hard hand of government and the function of a 

hard-handed government is domineering the system.  We are 

moving to the place where the court becomes the sole role of 

disclosing what the individual rights are. And the legislative 

arm defines what they  



366 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

would be, but the court determines it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was asked earlier this week whether in fact we 

had not done this very thing that this Act implies when we 

asked this Assembly to put people back to work in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I made one very specific point, and that is 

this. This Assembly voted to have the strike action closed on a 

number of events in the past nine years.  But never, Mr. 

Speaker, did we ever give those people a definition that said 

you have no access to the court for consideration by the court 

of Canada, by the court of the province.  We never, ever said 

that. 

 

And as a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, and you may recall this, 

when the dairy producers in Saskatoon went on strike, they 

took court action against this government in relation to the fact 

that there was no justifiable hurt in putting those people back to 

work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we in this Assembly voted for that but we 

were proven by the court that we were wrong.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that very action is the freedom that individuals should 

have across this province and across this country. 

 

And what you are putting at risk for 100, 200, 300 people is 

putting at risk 1 million people's rights and freedoms in this 

province.  And I think that that's wrong.  Who else is going to 

get this whole focus of attention?  Who else is going to stand in 

your way and say, I'm going to just legislate you out and I'm 

going to give you no access to the court? 

 

And when all this is finished, Mr. Speaker, when all of this is 

finished, what do they say in that same section?  Mr. Speaker, 

when this whole focus of attention is placed on what you 

cannot have access to the court for, then they define who is 

excluded from the fact that they can't have recourse to.  Who is 

excluded from any charges being laid against or court action 

being taken against?  Who is?  Mr. Speaker, the Crown.  The 

Crown cannot be taken to court for actions that have a 

defamation of character. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, I want to provide an illustration of what 

can happen in this case.  If for example a deputy minister or a 

president of a Crown corporation is slandered for one action or 

another and it is not even true, for example, it can be said by 

individuals of Executive Council that he took money that was 

not legally his.  It can be told throughout the offices that he 

works in.  It can be told that he individually assaulted, did all 

those kinds of things with individuals in that place in his work 

place.  And it can be discussed, it can be done. And if it can be 

done from the inside . . . and he has no recourse to that 

damaged reputation that was started in order for him to have 

his name taken and have him kicked out -- or her.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is wrong. 

 

The Crown is exempted; a Crown employer or a board or a 

commission is excluded; any officer, director, employee, or 

agent or former director, employer or agent is also exempted 

from those people having action taken against them. 

And, Mr. Speaker, there is one other thing that really interests 

me a lot.  We have stood in this House in the last three weeks 

and we have seen attacks on individuals who should not have 

attacked individuals. 

 

The member for Regina Albert South stated outside this House 

that individuals did not matter in relation to guilt or innocence 

in relation to a court decision.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

exactly what he said.  Mr. Speaker, he called that individual a 

kook and he called him a whole lot of other things.  And it was 

reported in the Winnipeg press; it was reported in this press in 

here. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  You cannot deal with those 

items, you cannot deal with those functions if you have no 

recourse to the court for those kinds of actions. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is wrong.  It's wrong when someone of 

this Assembly does it about some other member of the 

Assembly, and it's wrong when an individual in the province of 

Saskatchewan does it against another one.  And that's what this 

action, Mr. Speaker, provides to this Assembly.  It is in my 

view absolutely totally wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we could have, as I said earlier, had the 

opportunity to have binding arbitration placed by the Executive 

Council on the negotiated settlement that they would reach 

with individuals who they terminated their contracts.  They 

could have easily done that.  Instead they chose the hard hand 

of the law of this Assembly to do that.  And I submit, Mr. 

Speaker, that it's constitutionally wrong. 

 

They said in the Bill that evidence cannot be included and if it 

is included, they have exclusive right to say that it will be 

excluded.  They talk too about, Mr. Speaker, retroactivity.  It 

can be retroactive for as long as they want to have it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure that I would ever want to be a 

part of this kind of a push by the Assembly to dictate to the 

court the rules that they should establish.  That in my view, Mr. 

Speaker, is handcuffing the justice system - 

_ handcuffing the justices in their work in providing justice to 

the people of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I believe it is 

entirely wrong. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as a result of that, I would like to 

move: 

 

 Bill No. 18, The Crown Employment Contracts Act, be not 

now read a second time so that the subject matter of the Bill 

may be referred to the Court of Appeal for an opinion on its 

constitutional validity pursuant to the provisions of The 

Constitutional Questions Act. 

 

I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:26 p.m. until 3:31 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 367 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd Haverstock 

-- 10 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Pringle 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Murray 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Koskie Johnson 

Anguish Trew 

Goulet Serby 

Solomon Sonntag 

Atkinson Flavel 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Crofford 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Upshall Kluz 

Hagel Carlson 

Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons Jess 

-- 38 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that we've 

witnessed a dark day for individual democracy in 

Saskatchewan.  I beg leave that we adjourn debate. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It really makes one wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

what the great rush is by the members of the government on 

this particular Bill.  The practice in this House in the whole six 

and a half years that I have been here is usually, on a Bill such 

as this when we have certainly, Mr. Speaker, the possibility -- 

some members might say remote -- but we do have the 

possibility, Mr. Speaker, that someone's rights in this province 

may be overrode by a resolution of this legislature . . . And I 

really wonder, given the depth of this Bill and the amount of 

impact that potentially can happen upon people in our 

province, why this government is so bent in shoving debate 

forward in this legislature.  It only leads me to one conclusion, 

Mr. Speaker, that this government has a political agenda which 

they wish to fulfil before this House adjourns. 

 

And that agenda, Mr. Speaker, because it is political, may not 

be as well reasoned as what people in this province would 

expect from a new government.  It means that this government, 

Mr. Speaker, is in a hurry, it seems, to potentially trample on 

the rights of individuals in our society. 

 

The member from Morse went through this Bill in a very 

general way because he is not allowed in second reading to go 

into the clause-by-clause sections on it.  But in his comments to 

this legislature, I think he raised a number of concerns in that 

broad context that would give any 

person, any reasonable minded person in our province, pause to 

think and consider of whether this Bill is ultimately achieving 

the ends that the government talks about, or is simply a method 

for the government opposite to do some of the political work 

that the New Democratic Party is insisting that members in this 

House do instead of actually thinking about the bigger question 

in our province. 

 

And those questions involve things like freedom of information 

and disclosure; disclosure of information, Mr. Speaker, which 

every person in this House stood last year and voted for.  If that 

Bill had been proclaimed, Mr. Speaker, at that time, all of this 

contractual information would be public today.  And I have 

heard no person in this House stand and disclaim that very fact.  

That would be a fact of life today. 

 

The very first Act I would have thought, Mr. Speaker, of a 

government that was setting new direction, that was saying to 

the people, we will be open to the folks, means that that Act 

would have been proclaimed in this legislature as its very first 

Act. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, I find it very strange that the 

government opposite, given the complexity of this Bill, given 

the potential repercussion on individuals in our society . . . 

albeit those individuals today are public servants. 

 

But what if those individuals -- and, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does 

not limit it simply to public servants -- what if it branches out 

into other areas of our society? 

 

That a Bill that has that amount of depth in it, that amount of 

potential to disrupt our rights as individuals in this province 

would, on its very second day, be denied on a motion of 

adjournment so that the opposition who have presented one 

amendment already would not have the opportunity to either 

bring similar amendments forward or at least position 

themselves to discuss a matter that has that much importance to 

individual rights in our province. 

 

And I would like to know, Mr. Speaker, what the motivation 

would be to ram that type of legislation through this House 

without giving the opposition an opportunity to do its work as 

an opposition should. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am going to give this government another 

chance with this particular piece of legislation.  I think they 

need the opportunity to redeem themselves and make sure that 

every possible opportunity is given to people in this province to 

know full ramification on this Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate on this 

Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- I would have to remind the Assembly that a 

second adjournment debate, according to our rules, is not 

permissible until another activity intervenes.  So I would have 

to rule that the adjournment of that debate is out of order . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . No, there isn't such a thing. 

  



368 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I couldn't 

introduce guests. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, I think that the Government House 

Leader could certainly introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I see in the west 

gallery a couple of individuals who are here today to observe 

the proceedings of the House.  I would very much like to 

welcome them here and hope they enjoy their stay. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill 18 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

unusual circumstances that have arisen here.  But I think the 

Government House Leader has very clearly indicated to the 

Assembly that the government does wish to allow the 

opposition some time.  And I think it is only proper that I ask 

for leave of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that you can consider 

the Government House Leader's proposal in this matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I think there is a way out.  And I 

don't want to . . . I think what could solve the problem is an 

amendment to the second reading speech, and I don't want to 

suggest here but I think the possibility of an amendment could 

be a mechanism. 

 

The Speaker: -- That certainly is a possibility but I have no 

amendment before the House; therefore, I can't deal with it.  I 

would suggest, and I am very reluctant to do so, but I would 

suggest that by . . . if someone were to ask for leave of the 

Assembly -- and this will not set a precedent; I want members 

to recognize that -- but by leave of the Assembly I would 

entertain such a motion . . . a leave to adjourn. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would seek leave to adjourn, Mr. Speaker, 

given the circumstances . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . On the 

Bill. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce Keith 

Schneider from the Department of Community 

Services. 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This 

is a housekeeping amendment to clause 1.  I just want to make 

a few remarks. 

 

The Northern Municipalities Act was amended to permit 

municipalities in the North to take an active part in municipal 

and economic development corporations on a similar basis with 

rural municipalities in the South.  Due to a technical problem 

with the legislation, an old section of the Act prevented 

municipalities from participating to share ownership in local 

corporations. 

 

This amendment will provide the clear authority for northern 

towns, villages, and hamlets to participate through share 

ownership in municipal economic development corporations. 

 

Mr. Chairman, many of the communities in northern 

Saskatchewan are now participating and operating. And with 

the high unemployment rate in the North it's important that the 

communities are allowed to take part in northern development 

in their communities.  I would just ask all members to give 

speedy passage to this amendment to the Bill. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I only have a couple of questions for the minister.  

The Bill talks about industrial and commercial development in 

the North.  What are the minister's plans for industrial and 

commercial development in the northern municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It's not the 

intention of the Community Services department at this time to 

lay out plans for economic development in the past.  There will 

be an economic development board.  Responding, there was a 

commission that just submitted a report that had been 

surveying the North in this.  There will be a task force set up in 

the future to develop initiatives according to the Northerners' 

wishes. 

 

So we are not going to at this time lay out the plans for the 

North because there will be an economic development 

committee in the North that will be established, and through 

that committee they will design their own plans for economic 

development in the North. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- When do you expect that committee to report to 

the Committee of the Whole? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a report of the 

northern economic development task force and we'll be setting 

up a committee that will be looking at the recommendations 

within that, and reporting back to the department.  We're just 

now looking at setting up the membership of that committee. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the minister 

have any specific examples of anything that they . . . plans in 

regard to industrial development in the North? 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 369 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Two, Mr. Chairman.  There are two 

corporations now working in the North.  One's the Cumberland 

House Development Corporation.  And they are establishing 

their own priorities for economic development.  And the other 

one is the Ile-a-la-Crosse Development Corporation that's 

looking at plans in construction and accommodations, real 

estate, and forestry. 

 

As well, Air Ronge and La Ronge communities are looking at 

establishing a similar development corporation.  And they'll be 

establishing their own commercial and industrial strategies 

from a community base perspective. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Bill also makes 

reference to social development in the northern municipalities.  

Mr. Chairman, could the minister outline the department's 

plans for new initiatives with respect to social development in 

the northern municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill really is to 

establish the ability of the municipalities in the North to set up 

economic development corporations.  As these corporations 

look at various projects, the spin-off of course will be in social 

housing and will be in better training programs and so on.  So 

this Bill doesn't specifically deal with social programs, but it 

does allow those communities to expand their life . . . the social 

and economic amenities in life through giving them the 

opportunity to control their own destiny. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  My question is: will 

municipalities be using this vehicle for the purpose of buying 

out existing industries in the North, or is it designed to create 

new types of things, new ventures for new employment and 

new activity? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This Bill opens up that for a possibility 

which doesn't preclude that, but it would encourage new 

opportunities to be sought in the North so that there is an 

expansion of economic development opportunities. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In my role as a 

minister responsible for Sask Water Corporation, we dealt a lot 

with the different communities up there that needed water and 

water development for health safety reasons because of the 

permafrost and all that.  Is this going to allow some opportunity 

for carrying out within those communities a way to develop 

their own systems?  That's the first question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, anything that expands a 

tax base in those communities and allow them the opportunity 

of expanding their infrastructure will probably have a positive 

effect. 

 

We realize the problems that exist in northern communities as 

far as infrastructure, water and sewer projects, and we're 

looking at that.  And hopefully, this Bill will allow that 

expansion to begin by allowing them to increase their taxable 

assessment as well. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, the next question that I have 

has to do with changes in the structure.  I know that 

there are some . . . some of the communities there are -- like 

Patuanak for example, part of the village is outside of the 

reservation and some of it is inside.  And what's inside gets 

federal government grants; what's outside is strictly the 

responsibility of the provincial government. 

 

Is there some direction to include some of these things in 

negotiations as it relates to the benefit that could accrue in 

developing the industrial base in that framework if the federal 

government were more directly involved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, that's a good question and 

we appreciate it.  And I think what this Act does allow is for 

joint ventures to be developed between communities within the 

municipality and communities outside of the municipality. 

 

So certainly that will be looked at and I appreciate that 

perspective. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder if we could 

ask the minister if we could possibly receive a copy of the 

report when it becomes available. 

 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This task force report was made available 

in the last House so I'm sure some of your members already 

have it.  But if you need a copy of it we'll provide it for you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  We would appreciate receiving a 

copy of that.  As well, we would also ask that in the initiatives 

of social and economic development, will that also include the 

possibility for future community bond corporations in the 

northern municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That hasn't been considered.  But we are 

looking at The Community Bonds Act and it is being 

expanded.  And it's a possibility that that should be included.  I 

will bring that forward as a desirable opportunity for 

Northerners to expand their economic activity. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Will this 

Northern Municipalities Act change allow communities 

through community bonds to invest in mining and the mining 

infrastructure? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, those are various options that are 

available.  And should the community wish to pursue that 

route, it's there for them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, will this type of 

investment also include investment in uranium exploration and 

development? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We have given assurances to the northern 

people that we are looking at co-management of resources, and 

we'll pursue that avenue as part of that strategy. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, is uranium then included 

in that or will it be specifically excluded? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Nothing will be excluded. 

  



370 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, my question is with regards to 

the chain of command, and I'm a little bit fuzzy on just how 

this type of a process would work. 

 

Could you tell me who's responsible, for example, if someone 

decides that they're going to buy out a mining project that has 

been losing money, who's responsible for checking that out to 

see if there is a potential for making profit or if it's just going to 

be a dumping down the drain of a lot of taxpayers' money to 

buy out something that maybe was just created to save some 

jobs or something like that? 

 

How does that chain of command work for scrutiny and how is 

the structure put into place? Or do you yourself scrutinize these 

types of things? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- These corporations are set up under the 

municipality and under the Act the minister has an opportunity 

to review the by-laws that will be governing any economic 

development activity set up by the rural development 

corporations of the municipality.  So there is a chain of 

command.  And the minister responsible has some provisions 

for reviewing those by-laws. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, will investments also be 

allowed with SaskPower to provide electricity, electricity into a 

number of the northern communities that do not already have 

it, or for electrical generation in the North? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This Bill allows those communities the 

chance to pursue whatever priorities they feel will best benefit 

their communities.  It doesn't exclude anything. And it's up to 

them to set their own plans and their own priorities.  So we do 

not direct the communities in any way.  It's up to them to look 

at the Bill and decide essentially how it can best . . . most 

effectively work for their community.  And that's their agenda. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, would that also include a 

community who wished to invest in a potential nuclear 

generator for electricity? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- It doesn't exclude anything.  If they have 

the money and they have the ability, I suppose they have the 

right to choose whatever they feel they have the ability to 

provide.  And I think that's a very hypothetical question.  And 

I'm reluctant to get into that debate, because the Bill simply 

deals with the ability of a corporation to pursue its own 

economic development initiatives through a municipality.  And 

I think, with all respect, you're pursuing a hypothetical question 

that far exceeds the intent of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, the role of 

the economic development committees, is that going to be 

carried on through Community Services as it is carried on 

through Rural Development for rural development 

corporations.  Is it the same corporate structure that you 

follow? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The principle is similar but because of the 

North, it has a different set-up.  In the South as you know it's a 

mixture of urbans and rurals that form a rural 

development corporation.  Within the North it's tailored to meet 

the life-style and the communities of the North.  So the 

principles are the same, it's just that the circumstances will 

differ a little bit because of geography. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm still concerned a little bit 

about this responsibility aspect of this type of thing.  And 

perhaps you can clear up for me what happens if one of these 

municipal groups decides to go into a program where they buy 

out some industry and that industry becomes defunct -- or 

whatever the word is for going broke. Suppose it goes into 

receivership or bankruptcies or those kinds of things, who 

picks up the losses?  Does the provincial government then end 

up being responsible for that, or how does that work? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Like all rural development corporations 

in the South it is a responsibility of the municipality to be very 

prudent in how they invest their money.  And I believe if they 

are an independent corporation it's their responsibility to invest 

in industries or in business ventures that will succeed.  So if 

you're saying, is there an inherent liability on the part of the 

government, I would say no, I can't foresee that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, I was wondering, do we enter 

into areas of matching grants in these kinds of adventures with 

the provincial government? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- There are no programs at this time that 

makes funds available to them.  It might be something that 

could be considered in the future, and depending on the wishes 

of the municipalities in the North, we'll sit down in discussions 

with them and see how best to pursue that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- One other thing that comes to mind.  What 

happens to an RM (rural municipality) that goes broke if it's 

saddled with say a 2 or $3 billion liability suit if they happened 

to take on a uranium mine and it would cave in on a bunch of 

people and they were sued for libel, or liability rather is the 

word?  And the RM you say is probably going to be held 

responsible and the government would not have any inherent 

responsibility.  So then that RM is responsible for something 

their taxpayers could never hope to ever pay off.  And they 

would have to then themselves go into some kind of . . . what, 

receivership or what would happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- This is not an Act dealing with rural 

municipalities.  It's an Act dealing with northern municipalities.  

And I don't think in the past there has been any municipality 

that ever has declared bankruptcy.  I mean again I just have a 

hard time grasping the intent or the direction of your question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Okay, using the proper term "northern 

municipality", it would seem to me that the comment was made 

earlier here that we were asked to pass this piece of legislation 

to basically make northern municipalities on the same 

playing-field the southern municipalities are on.  So there is a 

direct comparison drawn there. 

 

But a northern municipality obviously, if it enters into some 

kind of a business contract with someone to put up money to 

fund something inherently will have some 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 371 

liability.  And it is possible for those people that take on 

financial investment responsibilities to also have losses as well 

as profits.  And if those losses are so great that they are not 

possible to be paid off by the existing structure that pays for 

bills, which is the tax structure, then who is responsible to 

make up the losses? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, I think, in terms of the money 

that they have available to them, that their investments will not 

be that great that would jeopardize their ability to function if 

the industry turned bad or went bankrupt.  Like all 

municipalities, it is a responsibility of the taxpayers of that 

municipality to foot the bill for whatever decisions the 

municipal council makes. 

 

If however, in some extraordinary circumstance something 

happened that was far exceeded the normal limits, I suppose a 

government would have to look at that as some extraordinary 

circumstance.  But it would have to be done, I believe, through 

litigation and not through some amendment or some Act of a 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Chairman -- or Mr. 

Chairman, Madam Minister, in the area of wild rice in the 

North, will the economic development committees be able to 

make arrangements to deal with that?  And where will the 

licensing of that . . . will that stay with the Department of 

Agriculture, or where will that be . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I think that's a very useful project and it 

will continue on as it is.  If an economic development 

corporation decides to pursue the industry of wild rice, they 

will continue to look for licensing from the Department of 

Agriculture where it now is . . . or Rural Development -- 

Agriculture, I believe. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, that there is also a 

strong possibility of game farming in the North too and 

individuals may want to become involved with that.  I know 

there's fur trappers, lots of fur trappers up there and there is a 

reasonable amount of people in the west side of the province 

who are fur farming and would they be involved in this kind of 

process also? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's exactly where we hope this Bill 

will lead these municipalities.  It's open for them to become 

involved in those kind of activities if that's the wishes of their 

community.  As far as looking to various other government 

departments to expand or to change licensing requirements, I 

will leave that to those communities to communicate that desire 

with the departments.  But if that is necessary in order to ensure 

the viability of an industry, certainly we would look at that. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister we 

thank for your attention to this matter and the officials for 

coming in and helping out with the questions, and we 

appreciate your co-operation on this Bill. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the comments 

made by the members of the opposition and I look forward to 

co-operating with them on this development.  I move that the 

Bill be reported without amendment. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax 

Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just 

want to introduce Mr. Bill Jones who is the associate deputy 

minister of Finance.  He's here -- would be here anyway -- but 

he's here because our deputy minister is in Ottawa at the first 

ministers' meeting. And Mr. Jones will be here for the duration 

of all of the Bills. 

 

And for The Liquor Consumption Tax amendment I have Kirk 

McGregor, executive director, taxation, in Intergovernmental 

Affairs on my right behind me; and Murray Schafer, director, 

education and health tax, revenue division, on my left behind 

me. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

would you please tell the Assembly how much revenue the 

government will be foregoing in dropping the tax from 10 per 

cent to 7? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  Just to 

report to the House that this would lose, if no other measures 

were taken, revenues of $12.5 million, and it became effective 

on February 20 of 1991.  So it's a situation which exists 

already, and all we can do at this point in time is work with the 

legislative authority to do that. 

 

But because there was at the same time that -- and this is not 

said in a critical sense -- when the former government 

introduced this, they also raised the mark-up at the front end of 

the price; that raised something around $9.5 million that made 

up that difference.  So the loss would be $3.5 million, but that 

was really again for the hoteliers who have been struggling and 

in some difficulty, and therefore they gained the major benefit 

from that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would like to thank the minister for that 

answer, Mr. Chairman.  I have another question to the minister. 

 

We fully realize the difficulty that particularly the rural 

hoteliers have been facing in the last few years.  Certainly 

because like many small-business people in rural Saskatchewan 

and even in our cities, they face what is in effect triple taxation.  

They pay personal income tax, they pay property taxes on the 

premises, on their house, and then because they are involved in 

the distribution of liquor, they also pay this particular tax. 
 

One of the reasons the former government, Mr. Minister, 

dropped the rate was along with harmonization it passed on 

certain benefits to those hoteliers as business people.  



372 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

 Can you tell me if any cost-benefit analysis was done between 

dropping the rate and allowing these people to harmonize and 

going back and charging the E&H (education and health) tax to 

them and simply dropping the rate 3 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that the analysis that 

was made under the former government, the only analysis was 

made was to shift the tax from this system to the same level or 

the same system as the E&H tax is, which is 7 per cent.  By 

reducing this tax from 10 per cent to 7 per cent it essentially 

does that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would not have 

these people as businesses been allowed to flow that 7 per cent 

tax through their own investment tax credit, which would have 

a net benefit to that particular industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, because most of these are 

established.  There are very, very little new inputs, and 

therefore the benefit of that is negligible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman and Minister, would the 

minister care to put a figure on negligible? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not possible to do that because 

that's based on each individual situation and we don't have that 

information. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what you're 

saying then is that all of the glasses that these people break in a 

year, all of the cutlery they lose, all of the new bar tables and 

stools that they buy, all of the light bulbs, their natural gas bills, 

their electrical bills, all of these input costs that rural hoteliers . 

. . the refrigeration units, recharging the Freon every year, that 

sort of ongoing cost that rural hoteliers go through in order to 

stay alive and compete, that those costs are all negligible.  If 

that's what the minister is saying I'd like him to confirm it to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- To some degree the member 

opposite is correct.  There would have been some benefit but 

not in a very significant way.  The benefit that the hoteliers 

who also run other parts of their business would have gained 

out of this were far outweighed by the costs that they would 

have incurred, costs that come as a result of reduced spending 

by the consumer, for example, in the restaurant side of the 

operations where they exist. I mean, members opposite will 

know the issue that that was when the PST (provincial sales 

tax) was introduced, costs that came about because of greater 

increase in costs. 

 

The amount that the service industry -- and the hotel business is 

a service industry -- was losing, because of harmonization of 

the PST, was far in excess of what they might have gained in 

that negligible way that we spoke about through the 

harmonization. 

 

Having taken that into consideration, it was of no benefit to 

continue with the harmonization and the PST, and therefore 

that Bill is also before the House for the elimination of it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, given the 

fact that all the items that I mentioned before are now subject 

to, and were subject to before, E&H tax at 7 per cent, and given 

the fact that this particular industry does suffer in many cases 

under triple taxation, could you tell the Assembly today what 

measures you anticipate to mitigate the very difficult situation 

that our hotelier industry has at the present time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I'd like to be of help to the 

member opposite.  This Bill is dealing with The Liquor 

Consumption Tax Act.  It's not dealing with policies with 

regard to the hotel industry or of people involved in the retail 

end of the liquor industry. 

 

That's a broader question that will be reviewed by the 

government in consultation with the Hotels Association.  We 

had consultations with them when we were in opposition in a 

very extensive way, as the members opposite did when they 

were in the government.  That will continue, and policies will 

be developed. 

 

Just simply the matter of reducing the liquor consumption tax 

from 10 per cent to 7 per cent is a very significant measure to 

assist the hoteliers meeting the objective which the member 

opposite mentions, because the liquor consumption tax is a tax 

imposed on the end-product.  It's a tax not only on the liquor 

but the ice and the mix and the whole content of what is being 

sold.  By reducing it at this level is of great benefit to the 

industry. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, it seems that the recognition 

of this Bill is directed towards the hoteliers' industry being in 

some deep financial trouble.  And we will all recall that this 

particular measure was begun by the previous government last 

year, so what we are in effect doing here is looking backwards. 

 

And in retrospect -- hindsight being better than foresight -- we 

should have been able to detect by now that the measure taken 

wasn't going to be enough to save the hotel industry, as we had 

hoped it would be.  So my question is, sir: in retrospect, 

shouldn't we have considered this Bill to reduce the rates even 

a bit more; and is there any plan in the future for you to reduce 

it if our feelings are substantiated, in the next little while? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- What we're doing, as has been 

made very clear to the House, Mr. Chairman, is that we're 

implementing the former government's budget.  This is one of 

the measures that was part of the former government's budget.  

We're carrying it out. 

 

We said when the Bill was introduced before the House was 

prorogued in June that -- when the New Democratic Party was 

in the opposition -- that we were going to support this Bill.  

That's on record.  And we're carrying out those measures in 

keeping with our objective of passing a supply Bill so that we 

can have legislative approval to complete the former 

government's budget as it was proposed.  Nothing more and 

nothing less at this time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, we certainly would have 

hoped that you could have taken a look at doing just a bit more 

than what the past government has done.  Obviously they were 

replaced because of their mistakes.  And I would think that you 

would use that as guide to try  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 373 

to do better. 

 

So there are people out there, Mr. Chairman, who are 

concerned about the consumption of alcohol from a different 

perspective other than saving the hoteliers' industry.  And they 

of course are those people that are worried about the increased 

consumption of alcohol.  And I wonder if you have any 

estimate of the amount of increase there will be in the 

consumption of alcohol as a result of these measures, for those 

people that are concerned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Being only here to deal with the 

amendment to this legislation I am not able to comment on 

that.  I am not the minister in charge of the Liquor Board, the 

Liquor Licensing Commission, nor am I the Minister of Health. 

 

Those questions would be better directed at that time when the 

new budget is brought in in the new year, when you can then 

address it.  Because I can assure the members opposite that 

when this government brings in this government's budget, not 

simply put into place the former government's budget, there 

will be some major new directions that will be developed and 

will be introduced for the legislature to consider which will 

give the whole policy and the approach of government a new 

flavour and a more productive and a more constructive 

approach. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, in spite of the fact that the 

minister has indicated that we may have gotten a little off base, 

his answer would have led me to another question sort of 

automatically.  And that of course is whether or not there is 

provision for the treatment of alcohol disease as a result of 

further funding to this industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure what the thrust of the 

question is or whether it has to do with this Bill.  I'm here to 

respond to the reduction of the liquor consumption tax from 10 

per cent to 7 per cent.  I think I've provided the answers.  I'm 

not in a position to speak about . . . in specific terms about 

things like rehabilitation and health care and so on. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  How much 

money will this Bill . . . how much money will the government 

lose because of this Bill on the cross-border shopping -- the 

beer coming in from the U.S.? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sure I don't know that, but I 

suspect if the member thought about it for a while he'd know 

that if you reduce a tax from 10 per cent to 7 per cent, 

hopefully that will have some positive effect on the question of 

cross-border shopping.  That's one of the reasons why the PST 

and the harmonization was so devastating to Saskatchewan 

because it encouraged people, more people, to go south of the 

border to shop.  That's why when the PST was eliminated on 

October 21 we calculated from that that there would be an 

increase in economic activity in Saskatchewan which would 

provide increased revenue to the treasury of some $7 million.  

So this should help the situation rather than aggravate it. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, when you drop the liquor 

tax from 10 per cent to 7 per cent you may be dropping the 

price of 24 beer in your local hotel from $32 for 24, down to 

31.  When the price coming across the border totals out in the 

neighbourhood of 14 to $16, it's not going to have any effect at 

your local hotels.  And I'm wondering how much money are 

you going to lose on that beer which comes across the border 

by dropping the tax from 10 per cent down to 7. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not able to answer that 

question.  We'll have to see what kind of Estimates the Liquor 

Board might have.  But the member knows that you can't make 

that kind of an estimate.  There's no statistical base on which 

you can make that kind of an estimate.  All you can do is 

develop policies for the province of Saskatchewan which will 

encourage the population of Saskatchewan to shop in 

Saskatchewan.  And hopefully that over time we'll be able to 

do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, is the minister prepared 

to develop some policy to look at the issue of cross-border 

shopping, especially the importation of alcohol? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course.  We will be considering 

every option available when we are preparing the budget for 

the next fiscal year.  Any government would obviously be 

doing that.  It will not be simply a matter of dealing with the 

question of cross-border shopping for liquor.  We'll be 

addressing the broader question. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, will the minister be . . . 

when he considers this matter will it be a consideration of 

increasing the taxes on the border or will it be a situation of 

making our businesses more competitive? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's a matter which will be 

considered and we'll announce it in due course when any 

decisions have been made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would the minister tell us the 

difference . . . whether this reduction of 7 per cent, from 10 to 7 

has made any difference in the volume of sales? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that it has not, 

because the prices remain almost constant.  So there has been 

no reduction in sales as far as I'm able to tell you at the present 

time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Has there been a change of usage from spirits 

to beer or liquor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Just one short series of questions, Mr. 

Chairman, to the minister.  A while back, I'm not quite sure 

how long ago, six weeks or so, you came up with your 

statement saying that there was now a $950 million, I believe, 

deficit. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sixty. 

  



374 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Nine hundred and sixty, to be more accurate, 

thank you -- and that $72 million of that I believe was cost 

included for not harmonizing.  Is that correct, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I announced several weeks ago that 

if all government expenditure projections were to remain as 

they were when we became the government, the deficit would 

be $960.3 million.  It so happens that . . . and included in that 

was the reduction in revenues because of the elimination of the 

PST for the remaining portion of the fiscal year.  I at the same 

time announced measures which we had taken in cost saving 

measures within the government to make up the difference. 

 

And I'm pleased to report to the House today that we've been 

able to achieve that.  So there's been no net increase because of 

that, because although there was lost revenue on the PST 

elimination, we recouped it by taking some initiatives on the 

cost saving side of the government operations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, you indicated to us earlier that it 

would be about $12.5 million loss, I believe, going from 10 to 

7, but that there was also, because of increase in liquor and so 

on, that I think there was about a $9.5 million recouping of it, 

having a net cost of $3 million.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- About that.  But that was part of the 

price that I guess the government paid in order to benefit the 

hotels industry, because that $3.5 million was a direct benefit 

to the hotel industry.  And you're right, in net terms from the 

point of view of the Liquor Board, that's the net loss. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, could you . . . Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Minister, could you indicate to the House then the 

recouping of the charging of the 7 per cent E&H?  What effect 

did that have on the net loss of the $3 million that we're talking 

about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not quite sure what the question 

is, but I'll try and attempt to give you an answer which may 

satisfy the question.  There was a difference of $3.5 million.  

The prices at the hotel remain constant because the hotel 

industry took the opportunity, and that was what the intent of 

this was, I understand.  Can't speak for the former government, 

but that's what the intent was, to benefit the hotel industry.  So 

the price remained constant and the hotel industry benefitted by 

three and a half million dollars. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Perhaps I'm not making myself clear.  I'm 

referring to the fact that normally there would have been 

harmonization.  Now you're charging 7 per cent E&H.  Does 

that have an offset to it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Nothing changed because the 7 per 

cent liquor consumption tax was 10 per cent liquor 

consumption tax.  The only thing that's changed, and instead of 

being 10 per cent, it's now 7 per cent. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, the bottom line in our 

discussion so far is that there was a cost.  The $72 million that I 

referred to before as the cost of not harmonizing, was this loss 

that we're talking about here in the liquor consumption Act 

included in that $72 million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Answer is yes it was. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- On my right, behind me, is Brian 

Smith, executive director of the Public Employees' Benefits 

Agency. 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm 

pleased to introduce Harold Litzenberger, manager, revenue 

administration, revenue division. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister give us the number of 

dollars that are lost in relation to this, or that are not going to 

benefit the taxpayer in a rebate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes.  The member might be 

familiar that when this was brought in on March 1, 1991, when 

the former minister of Finance announced in a press conference 

that this was going to be eliminated, that that was going to . . . 

if we were to not pass this legislation, because it's already been 

working for the duration of this fiscal year, it would be a 

difference of $25 million. 

 

So the purpose of this legislation is to legitimize what's been 

happening and would, I guess, result in a saving to the treasury 

of $25 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many individuals does this affect? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told about 2,300. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- 2,300 or 23,000? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because during the process of the 

year people's mortgages come up for renewal, the numbers 

change.  The member will be familiar.  I just renewed my 

mortgage the other day for a year at I believe eight and a half 

per cent.  I know that's impressive. 
 

So people are beginning to take advantage of the new mortgage 

rates and would be far better off even under the old ten and 

three-quarter per cent set-up. 
 

So I am informed that it began when this was introduced,  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 375 

with 6,500 people who . . . or 65,000.  But in the process -- 

sorry I wasn't clear in my first answer -- but in the process 

throughout the year because renewals are taking place, it's 

down to 2,300. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Two thousand three hundred from 65,000.  

Okay.  What's the real number of the reduction in the . . . It will 

be 25 million off the budget as you calculate, but what's the 

real number that you're going to be reducing it by?  Not the 25 

million. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's the real number.  During the 

process of this fiscal year the number is $25 million. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

(1645) 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Could I make a suggestion that 

since we are doing what the Finance officials . . . we could go 

on to the Bill dealing with the tabling documents and then we 

could come back to.  You want to do it right in the order as 

they are? 

 

Fine, that's no problem.  Then we'll go on as it is. 

 

The Chair: -- The item then before the committee is item no. 

6, Bill No. 8, An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents and 

Certain Consequential and Other Amendments to Other Acts 

resulting from the enactment of this Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The order that the House Leader gave us was 

that the by-election Act was going to be next.  If we could . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you. Let me try to be of 

help.  If there is a list that was arranged . . . I just assumed that 

since the officials are already here we'd skip one and then come 

back to the by-elections Act.  But if the members opposite want 

to stick to the list that was arranged, we're quite happy to do 

that. We'll do the by-election Act. 

 

The Chair: -- The business before the committee is item no. 5, 

Bill No. 7, An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act.  Would the minister please introduce 

his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like 

to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly Susan 

Amrud, a Crown solicitor with the Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, we on this side of the House 

have no problem with the context of the direction of the Bill. 

However, we do have a concern about when 

the Bill would apply and the possibility that the minister or the 

Premier, when he calls the by-election, wouldn't have an 

opportunity to reflect on the time line that was remaining. 

 

And so therefore what we did in a way to expedite that is to ask 

the Law Clerk for an amendment that would allow a period of 

time when that could be done -- 42 months -- and then after 

that then allow discretion on the part of the Premier to call the 

election so that he doesn't have an election called within a 

month of the general election that he decides to call. 

 

So I guess that's the gist of the amendment that we have placed 

before . . . or that we will be placing before this Assembly.  I 

gave a copy of this to the Minister of Justice and ask him to 

consider that.  And when we get to that section, I would like to 

have the opportunity to place that amendment before the 

House. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'd like to rise in support of the 

amendment to Bill 7, Mr. Chairman.  The amendment has been 

presented to you, has it not?  You're going to . . . 

 

The Chair: -- As I understand it, the amendment that's to be 

moved pertains to section 2.  And once we get to section 2, I'll 

certainly entertain the amendment at that point if someone 

wants to move it.  At this point we're on clause 1. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in support of the 

amendment to Bill 7. A general Bill legislating by-elections is . 

. . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Someone should move the amendment 

before we consider the amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the amendment as I've 

tabled it with you.  It deals with, as I said earlier, a reflection 

on how the election process and the call of an election in a 

by-election should work prior to or just before a general 

election being called. 

 

The Chair: -- The committee is considering section 2 of the 

Bill as now amended by the member from Morse.  And the 

amendment reads: 

 

 Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by deleting subsection 

40.3(2) and substituting the following: 

 

 "(2) Where: 

 

  (a) the Assembly is dissolved 

   (i)  after the issue of a writ for a by-election; and 

   (ii)  before a by-election is held pursuant to the writ; 

 

  (b) a seat in the Assembly becomes vacant in the period 

that is 42 months or more following the immediately 

preceding general election; or 

  



376 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

  (c) the Assembly, by resolution, directs that, due to 

extenuating circumstances, no by-election shall be held 

before a time specified in the resolution; 

 

 the provisions of subsection (1) shall not apply and the writ 

mentioned in clause (a), if issued, is deemed to have been 

revoked on the dissolution of the Assembly." 

 

That is the amendment by the member for Morse. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise in 

support of the amendment to Bill 7.  A general Bill legislating 

by-elections is important, but certain restrictions must be 

implemented.  This side of the House recognizes the 

unnecessary costs and inconvenience that will be incurred by 

the people of Saskatchewan if a by-election was to be held in 

the last months of a government's mandate. 

 

I, Mr. Speaker, am the MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) for a constituency that was vacant prior to the 

general election.  The people of Souris-Cannington were not 

represented by an MLA prior to the election, but they were, 

Mr. Speaker, represented by a government in line with what 

they believed in.  The people of Souris-Cannington elected a 

Progressive Conservative MLA.  The fact that a by-election 

was not conducted saved the taxpayers money and saved the 

people of Souris-Cannington from going to the polls three 

times within one year.  I am, Mr. Speaker, taking into account 

the civil elections as well. 

 

The member from Kindersley, Mr. Speaker, was also elected in 

a constituency where a by-election was not held.  It is obvious 

that his constituents did not lack from the representation that 

they received from the government prior to the general 

election. 

 

In this legislature we must implement the public's wishes.  It is 

in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan that I 

support the amendment to this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate 

the member from Morse providing me with a copy of this 

proposed amendment some days ago.  And as a result of that 

courtesy, we have on this side of the House had the opportunity 

to carefully look at this question and revisit it again.  We had in 

fact in the drafting of this Bill considered the factors that the 

member mentioned.  The member may recall having raised this 

matter in the House at the very first time the Bill was spoken to 

on second reading.  And we appreciate the member's serious 

approach to this Bill and the sincere interest that has been 

demonstrated by the proposing of this amendment in an effort 

on the member's part to improve the Bill. 

 

After much careful consideration by the cabinet and the caucus, 

I'm sorry to tell the member that we are not prepared to accept 

the amendment, and I want to give my reasons for that. 

 

We think the essential value here, the essential value, is that 

constituencies be represented in this House as 

quickly as possible after a vacancy, and in no event should a 

seat remain vacant for more than six months.  That's the 

essential value.  So for that reason we are unable to agree with 

the contents of clause (b) of the proposed amendment, which 

covers the situation where a seat becomes vacant in the period 

that is 42 months or more following the immediately preceding 

general election. 

 

The constitutional provision that applies to elections is that a 

government has to have an election within five years of the . . . 

has to call an election within five years of the date of the return 

of the writ from the last election, which is a period of 60 

months.  And this would enable governments, either this one or 

some succeeding government, this amendment would permit it 

to actually allow a seat to remain vacant for up to 18 months, 

the difference between the 42-month period in the Bill and the 

60-month period that is the five years set out in the 

Constitution of Canada.  So we are unable to accept the idea 

proposed in clause (b) of the proposed amendment. 

 

With respect to clause (c) we certainly recognize that this is 

Saskatchewan and that the weather can get pretty difficult to 

have an election in.  We will all remember the by-election in 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg called in December of 1988.  And I 

was tramping around the streets of Willow Bunch.  And it was 

cold, difficult work, and I wouldn't like to do that again.  And I 

don't mind tramping around the streets of Willow Bunch, but 

not in December. 

 

So I understand the concern, but it seems to us that in the 

period of six months judgements can be made as to when the 

weather is likely to be good. 

 

In the case of a resignation, such as was the case with 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the election machinery can be brought 

up to speed quite quickly and we can have a by-election within 

a relatively short time -- I would venture to say within two 

months.  I would venture to say that the Chief Electoral Officer 

could organize a by-election to be held within two months -- 

perhaps less, perhaps six weeks. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did you check this . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member asked it I have checked it 

and the answer is no, but we have some knowledge of how 

these things work and that is our estimate.  Although I have to 

say to the member that I haven't checked it with Mr. Lampard 

specifically. 

 

But the point I'm trying to make is that within a six-month 

period in Saskatchewan we ought to be able to select a month 

in which the weather is likely to be at least passable, as it was 

in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  I mean that election was held, if I 

remember, about the 10th of December or 16th of December, 

something like that, just before Christmas, as I recall.  And at 

least half of that election, the weather was tolerable.  You could 

do the canvassing and the kind of work that you have to do. 

 

I'm sorry to be so long-winded about this, Mr. Chairman, but 

I'm simply trying to make the point that it seems to us that a 

by-election can be held within six months. 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 377 

The danger with (c) in our view, in the hands of a government 

that doesn't want to call the by-election because the polls don't 

look so good, is that a government could use its majority in the 

House to pass a resolution to the effect that the by-election not 

be held within the six-month period, and therefore by that use 

of the majority, in effect gut the thrust of this provision, which 

reflects the basic value that no seat ought to go unrepresented 

by a member for a period of longer than six months. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate the effort of the member to 

improve the Bill, and I quite understand the point that's 

attempting to be made.  We appreciate the serious approach to 

the Bill.  And it is with regret that I must say to the member 

that we have concluded that we cannot accept the amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Mr. Minister, I 

would like to ask you if you would have on hand the cost, on 

an average, of the elections in the province of Saskatchewan 

this last election. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry I don't have 

any idea of the cost either of a general election or of any of the 

by-elections that have been held. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, this committee stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


