




















































Hansard: December 10, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 189 

 December 10, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce to 

you and to all members of the Assembly, nine people who are 

seated in the Speaker's gallery who are taking treatment, I 

believe, at the Pasqua Hospital.  They're staying at the Cancer 

Patient Lodge in the constituency of Regina Elphinstone, and I 

want to welcome them here today to observe question period. 

 

With them is Mary Peterson, I believe, who works with them 

and works at the lodge.  And I want to wish you all the best.  In 

the trying times you're going through, know that our thoughts 

are with you, and welcome to the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, through you and to you and 

members of this Assembly, I would like to take this 

opportunity to introduce 11 students -- they are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker -- from the Tisdale Unit Composite High 

School, more proudly known as TUCS, and their teachers, 

Cindy Dickie and Donna Fritshaw. 

 

This group of grade 10 and 11 students are extremely interested 

in the legislative process and have travelled nearly 300 

kilometres to be here today.  I ask all members to join with me 

in welcoming them to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

extend my welcome and the opposition's welcome to the people 

from the Cancer Clinic at the Pasqua Hospital.  I had the 

privilege, I guess you would say, of being a patient there for 

eight months myself some five years ago, and can attest to the 

excellent quality of work and the wonderful people that are 

associated with the Cancer Clinic at the Pasqua Hospital.  And 

I would just like to join the member from Elphinstone in 

sending our regards to you, and a speedy recovery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'd like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 

and through you to members of the House, Mr. Chris 

Axworthy, Member of Parliament from Saskatoon-Clark's 

Crossing, who is in the west gallery today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to take this opportunity . . . I was not aware that Mr. Chris 

Axworthy is in the gallery there, but as my MP (Member of 

Parliament) I would just like to welcome him into this 

legislature too, and hi, Chris. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Remuneration of Government Executives 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Premier.  Last week the opposition asked in a written question 

for information regarding one Jack Messer, the NDP's (New 

Democratic Party) provincial campaign manager.  As you 

know, Mr. Speaker, the minister for SaskPower, who is also the 

House Leader, converted that question into an order for return 

(debatable).  In other words, Mr. Speaker, the minister believes 

it's debatable whether or not such information should be 

released to the people. 

 

I therefore ask him today: will you table a copy of Mr. Messer's 

contract, as well as providing the information asked for in the 

written question?  Or is it your intention to hide this 

information from the public? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the Assembly that far from hiding the information, we expect 

to in the very near future make it all very public, to announce 

the salary.  It won't be a contract; it will be a salary. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- What I can guarantee, that it will be 

considerably less than the 430-some-odd thousand that the 

previous president was making. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Supplementary to the minister since the 

Premier didn't reply.  I'm glad to hear that the minister will be 

tabling those contracts, and will he be tabling those contracts 

for all new people hired? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'm not absolutely sure what the 

question was, but I want to indicate again that we do not intend 

to have a contract with the new president. 

 

But I want to tell the Assembly, in regards to the new, acting 

president of SaskPower, one of his first duties was to check out 

the salary of the previous president.  And what we found out is 

not only was he earning 400-and-some-odd thousand dollars 

but had set up a secret trust fund in which had been placed $1.3 

million dollars.  One of his first acts as the new acting president 

of the corporation was to retrieve $1.3 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- And in regard to that trust account, I 

have here a copy of the cancelled cheque that was retrieved 

from a trust account from a Saskatoon law firm made out for 

the amount of $1,356,622.45.  I do intend to table that.  And I'll 

tell the member opposite, that the new agreement . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member has 

  



190 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

sufficiently answered.  He's going beyond the scope of the 

question that's been asked.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question for the 

Premier. 

 

Will you table a copy of the contract you ordered for your law 

partner, one Donald Ching, in this House today?  If not, why 

not? 

 

This is the law firm that had to change its name because all the 

partners are now part of the NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate 

clearly when it comes to the staff person, Mr. Ching, there is no 

contract. 

 

But I want to indicate clearly to the Assembly that there are 

many contracts that we are releasing.  I have here a contract of 

one person by the name of Mr. Arden Knoll. 

 

Mr. Arden Knoll, the previous premier will know, is a golfer.  

He is employed by SaskPower, being paid 30,000 a year to 

golf.  Many say that he golfed many times with the premier in 

Estevan.  He has no role in SaskPower other than golfing.  He's 

presently golfing in Florida at taxpayers' expense. 

 

I will be tabling this, but I would ask the previous premier, if 

you can help us in our . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Sask Works Project in Saskatoon 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think 

we have just seen a classical example of a member who's very 

skilled at artfully dodging questions, refusing to answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I direct my question now to the Minister of Social 

Services.  In view of the classic example that we have had here 

of the sweetheart jobs that the NDP government is giving to 

their friends, while at the same time the Minister of Social 

Services is busy killing jobs for those people who are most in 

need, Madam Minister, my question to you is: are you aware 

that the Department of Social Services under Sask Works was 

in the process . . . and culminated a deal from Winnipeg to 

create 200 jobs for welfare recipients in Saskatoon, 

Martensville, Warman and Dalmeny? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I said about Sask 

Works in the legislature.  I repeat, any applications that have 

been processed will proceed.  So if that application has been 

processed, it will proceed.  We are not accepting more 

applications because the budget for Sask Works has been 

expended, and in fact is overspent . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Yes.  Yes.  Yes.  And I wonder if it has anything to do with 

the fact that there was an 

election. 

 

The previous government spent too much money.  The budget 

was 3.585 million.  What has been committed already is 3.7, so 

we're overexpended.  And it's not our fault; it's your fault 

because you overexpended it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister.  I 

am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatoon and 

surrounding area are just appalled at the ignorance expressed 

by the Minister of Social Services.  She does not . . . ignorance 

of the fact that she does not even know of 200 jobs for 

single-parent welfare recipients that was created with Nygard 

from Winnipeg, so that they would come in, train, and develop 

200 jobs for the welfare recipients of Saskatoon . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, are you not aware of those 

200 jobs?  Are those 200 jobs . . . Is that contract that we made 

with Nygard going to be pursued and culminated?  I want your 

answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I have said again 

and again is that this government, this new government, is 

going to learn to live within its means.  You constantly 

overexpended.  You expended money that you didn't have and 

that's why this province is in such a disastrous financial 

situation.  There are all kinds of people out there who deserve 

much more money than they're getting, but we will not be able 

to give it to them because you have blown the kitty.  There's no 

money left. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister.  

I don't think that the people of . . . (inaudible interjection)) . . . 

Pardon me? 

 

The Speaker: -- The members have to be recognized by the 

Chair first.  The member from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  Madam 

Minister, the people of Saskatoon and surrounding area must 

still be in shock.  There were 200 jobs for single-parent 

individuals on welfare that were now going to be hired, trained 

as seamstresses, as tailors for the cost of $160,000 -- $800 per 

job. 

 

You are now saying, Madam Minister, that you're going to 

close down, eliminate, cut off Sask Works and prevent these 

individuals from having permanent, productive jobs because of 

$160,000.  Madam Minister, is that your answer: there will be 

no Sask Works.  There will be no jobs for 200 single parents, 

social aid recipients in Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What I am 

saying is the budget is overexpended already, and the  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 191 

budget is overexpended because the members opposite 

overexpended the budget. 

 

If you are talking to me abut giving assistance -- long-term, 

job-training, skills development assistance -- to single parents, 

you just watch what this government will do as we get into our 

budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The 

point is, Madam Minister, that the people of Saskatoon and 

surrounding area have been watching what this minister did.  

And they are saying to me, we want those 200 jobs.  Are you 

going to supply them or are you not going to supply them 

because you have eliminated . . . you have cut out Sask Works.  

You're no longer in . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  That same question has been 

asked three times.  I think the minister has answered.  The 

member may not like her answer.  We'll go on to a new 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You're right.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

you're certainly right.  We do not like her answer and her 

saying that she is not going to create 200 jobs that were put in 

place by this government by this minister.  I think that's a 

shame, Madam Minister, a shame.  And you're sitting there 

laughing and grinning at that kind of a response.  I think that is 

a shame. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, my question to Madam Minister is 

this.  You have gutted Sask Works.  You have eliminated Sask 

Works.  So why did you fire David Bucsis, and why did you 

move $300,000 that was left over in Sask Works and have put 

it directly into the direct payment of social aid recipients?  

Madam Minister, why did you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have never seen three 

questions full of so many inaccuracies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- You had a written answer provided 

to you yesterday.  Mr. Bucsis was not fired.  He was a 

temporary employee who could only work for two years 

without having some change in his status.  His contract in 

effect wasn't renewed.  He was not fired.  Let's start there. 

 

The second thing is, no money was moved out of Sask Works 

projects.  As I have said again and again, you spent more 

money than was in the budget.  You overspent it.  So you're 

information is simply not accurate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 

the minister.  Madam Minister, you're playing fast and loose 

with some facts here.  You have indicated that David Bucsis 

was let go because he was on temporary.  I 

 know how that works, Madam Minister.  You are on 

temporary for two years.  You're saying now that on December 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  You simply cannot comment further on the 

minister's answer.  If the member has a question, I will 

recognize the question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a . . . as I indicated to you 

I had a new question and I was putting forth the premise on 

which that question was going to be asked.  And the premise is 

this -- that David Bucsis was a temporary.  We know that.  Two 

years were up on December 3.  We know that.  You let him go.  

Normally what is done, it's extended or he's put on 

permanency.  Why did you in effect fire David Bucsis and gut 

the program?  The man who set up Nygard, who made the 

contact to develop 200 jobs in Saskatoon, you have let him go.  

You have not renewed his contract. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I recognize a new 

question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Financial Management Review Commission 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier, 

Mr. Speaker, because it was the Premier who set up the Gass 

Commission and I think that's clear to all because of his 

signature on the order in council. 

 

My question then is to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  Elizabeth 

Bilson has confirmed in the Star-Phoenix that she not only is a 

card-carrying member of the NDP but also a financial 

supporter and activist for the party of the Premier.  We have 

heard nothing from the other friends of the Premier on this 

particular tribunal, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Will the Premier now order that members of the Gass tribunal 

disclose both their political activities and political contributions 

so that people in Saskatchewan can know, Mr. Speaker, that 

this is truly a balanced and fair tribunal? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before the Minister answers, that question is 

not within the jurisdiction . . . Political contributions that are 

made by individuals in this province are not within the 

administrative jurisdiction of any member of the government, 

and I just want to indicate to the member that question is really 

out of order.  I'll ask the member to rephrase his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Given the fact that, as I said, one of the members of the tribunal 

has come public and said that she is a political activist in the 

province of Saskatchewan and is on the Commission, would 

the Premier now tell the Assembly what the conflict of interest 

guide-lines for members of the commission are, and will he 

table those conflict of interest guide-lines in this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



192 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

remind the member opposite that democracy still exists in this 

province although it was at risk during the term when the other 

members were on this side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I, also in response to the member's 

question, want to say that the members of the commission are 

competent and skilled and have the expertise which is required.  

The members of the commission are Saskatchewan citizens and 

have an interest in the future of this province.  The members of 

the commission are there to do a job, and they will do a good 

job.  Whatever their political affiliation is, is irrelevant, Mr. 

Speaker.  They're simply there because they are qualified for 

the job and that's why they have been appointed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I could only gather from that response, Mr. 

Speaker, that the only qualifications necessary are to be an 

NDP activist in this province. 

 

New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, wouldn't you say 

that, in light of the fact that Mr. Stevenson, who is I agree a 

prominent individual in this province, but also acts for one of 

the larger companies that is very integrated in our society 

today, a company that's in fertilizer and other things, wouldn't 

you agree, Mr. Minister, that perhaps it wouldn't be proper 

without conflict of interest guide-lines for him to be looking at 

the books of a competitor such as Saskferco. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, wouldn't it be appropriate that a 

member of the commission who works for a major law firm 

which has the Co-op upgrader as a client maybe wouldn't be 

appropriate in the absence of conflict of interest guide-lines to 

be looking at the books of the Husky upgrader. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, to the Premier:  how could 

you possibly put a commission in place in this province which 

you say is to do this right and fair and in a non-partisan way 

without conflict of interest guide-lines for those individuals? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want the member to know that if and when there is a 

potential conflict of interest in the work of the commission on 

the part of the members because of specific areas, the members 

will declare that conflict of interest, and they will not be 

involved.  That is required as part of the appointment under 

which this commission has been appointed. 

 

And the member, I submit, Mr. Speaker, should stop getting up 

in this House and questioning the credibility and the confidence 

of these people who are good Saskatchewan citizens, who are 

concerned enough about the future of this province and the 

financial mess of 

this province to dedicate their time so that the books can be 

opened and the people of this province can know what the real 

financial situation of Saskatchewan is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  If the minister 

is so absolutely sure that this is going to take place, wouldn't he 

agree, Mr. Speaker, that this process would have been far better 

accepted by the public of this province and the members of this 

Assembly, if these declarations were taking place in full view 

of the public and full view of the media because, Mr. Speaker, I 

have a list here -- a whole page long -- of potential conflicts of 

interest because of the members of this commission being 

involved in different things. 

 

Those members will be meeting behind closed doors, taking 

votes on whether they will look at a particular transaction or 

not.  How can we be assured -- and I ask the Minister -- how 

can we be assured as citizens of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

that those votes will not be prejudiced and that those people 

will not in fact view something that would indeed bring upon 

litigation in this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I want the member to 

remember that the reason why we need to go through this 

exercise is because he was on the treasury benches on this side 

of the House when that former premier and that government 

took a province with a surplus of $139 million and left the 

people of Saskatchewan a debt of $14 billion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And, Mr. Speaker, while members 

opposite in government were doing that, they secretively made 

deals.  They would not provide information to the auditor about 

the deals that they made and the money that they expended, 

and the public didn't know.  And I submit, Mr. Speaker, the 

public has a right to know and they will know, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  One thing is 

abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, to this Assembly, and that is 

that the minister opposite has a clear political agenda in this 

province.  What isn't clear to the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, and I think needs to be asked is: how can his stated 

objective of having a new way of handling the finances of this 

province, as this commission is supposed to identify, be done 

behind closed doors by partisan people who do not have 

conflict of interest guide-lines behind them?  How can that be 

an open process, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And I say to the minister: will you now this day, because of all 

the deficiencies in this particular tribunal, Mr. Minister, will 

you now do what is right and appoint the Provincial Auditor as 

the sole arbitrator with the power to do this job properly and 

open so that all members of Saskatchewan will feel confident 

with this process? 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 193 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the commission is 

able to hold public meetings if it should so decide that in the 

completion of its work it has to do that.  It's an independent 

commission that is looking into the ledgers of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That is an option that the commission has and 

the commission will decide whether and when it needs to be 

able to do that in order to do its work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I say to the members opposite that I am somewhat surprised 

that they would publicly in this legislature be so openly 

admitting that they are afraid of opening the books in 

Saskatchewan.  And I simply ask the members opposite, what 

are they afraid of? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  And the 

question is directly to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, this member 

from Riversdale clearly went around this province during the 

last campaign and over a number of months saying that 

Saskatchewan needed to achieve a new direction in how the 

money of this province was managed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deficiencies . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, the deficiencies that have been 

clearly pointed out in this Chamber by members of the 

opposition and by many members of the public at large demand 

that the Premier this day . . . and I say to you, Mr. Premier, will 

you now disband this unholy commission that you have put in 

place and do the right thing and appoint the Provincial 

Auditor? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from 

Thunder Creek is right.  The people of Saskatchewan wanted a 

new direction and the people of Saskatchewan are going to get 

a new direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They're going to get a new 

direction because the books of this province are going to be 

opened, Mr. Speaker, and they're going to stay open.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the Provincial Auditor's role will be enhanced because 

the members on this side of the House are going to allow the 

Provincial Auditor to do his work in the future in such a way as 

it was denied him the opportunity to do that work when that 

member from Estevan was the Premier sitting on this side of 

the House. 

 

That kind of process, Mr. Speaker, will no longer continue.  

The Provincial Auditor's office will be strengthened and he will 

do the job that he must do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Devine: -- A very sincere and straightforward question to 

the Premier: Mr. Premier, you shouldn't be 

afraid of guide-lines for the commissioners -- conflict of 

interest guide-lines. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the Premier, why would you be afraid of 

guide-lines, for it's a public process?  Why wouldn't you invite 

the media in, Mr. Premier?  Why wouldn't you allow the full 

access of the public auditor and all of the decisions, whether it's 

going to be deciding on what you're going to do, whether 

you're going to pick on this company or that company? 

 

You said on December 4, Mr. Premier, that you're not going to 

seriously jeopardize negotiations with other companies in 

public.  Well you can imagine the conflict of interest that might 

be there.  Companies would say, boy, will I come into 

Saskatchewan with that kind of an operation without 

guide-lines?  Mr. Premier, why don't you just open it up, clean 

it up, do it in public, so that we can all be confident that we 

know what's happening? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the 

commission has a job and a mandate and the terms of reference 

under which they will look at the financial affairs of the 

province to find out the kind of financial crisis that that 

member opposite left this province in when he was defeated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public will have access to all of the 

information that the commission provides and the report that it 

makes.  Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor and the provincial 

Public Accounts Committee of this legislature will review that 

in full view of the public.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Public 

Accounts Committee can, and I suggest, will -- it's not for me 

to tell the committee how to operate -- will be able to call 

people who can be witnesses to this committee in order that 

this debate and this discussion can be made in front of the 

public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Local Government Election Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER  



194 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

Ruling on a Point of Privilege 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, I would like 

members to have a little patience with my statement today.  I'm 

going to be ruling on a point of privilege that was made last 

Thursday in this House.  And because the point of privilege 

was rather detailed, this statement, which I hope will not set a 

precedent for further rulings by the Chair, is rather lengthy and 

I ask members to bear with me. 

 

On December 5 I deferred my ruling on a question of privilege 

raised by the member for Thunder Creek.  In his statement the 

member argued that the privileges of the House, of individual 

members, and the Public Accounts Committee had been 

breached by the establishment of the Financial Management 

Review Commission, and in particular by the authority given to 

the commission to engage the Provincial Auditor as a special 

advisor.  I then heard comments from several other members 

on the matter. 

 

Before proceeding to the substance of the privilege question I 

wish to bring forward two points regarding the process. 

 

I ask members to ensure that the notice sent to the Speaker 

contains the gist of the case and the relevant arguments.  To do 

so helps to demonstrate that indeed the matter should have 

precedence over other business and also would enable a 

decision to be brought back to the House more quickly. 

 

Subsequently the member's presentation in the Assembly 

should be brief and deal only with establishing that a breach of 

privilege has occurred. 

 

The other point regarding process is that the member raising 

the point should conclude his or her remarks with the text of a 

motion to provide the House with an opportunity to take some 

action in the matter.  While this has not always been required, 

it has become the accepted practice and is strongly encouraged.  

In this respect I refer members to a ruling of the Chair dated 

November 28, 1984, Journals of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It is now my duty to determine two things: first, whether 

privilege appears to be sufficiently involved to justify giving 

precedence to this matter over the notices and orders standing 

on the order paper; and second, whether the matter has been 

raised at the earliest opportunity. 

 

With regard to the question of whether the matter was raised on 

time, as pointed out by the member of Regina Elphinstone, this 

question could have been presented as early as Tuesday, 

December 3.  The two-day delay weakens the argument that 

this debate should take precedence over other business and the 

whole matter could be set aside on these grounds. 

 

I refer members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and 

Forms, 6th edition, citation 115 and 117.  I caution members to 

be mindful of this restriction in the future.  But at this time I 

believe it is important for me, first of all, to clarify the 

procedure involved in raising and considering 

a question of privilege; and secondly, to ensure that the 

complex issues raised in this claim are dealt with on their 

merits. 

 

The first point argued by the member for Thunder Creek in his 

question of privilege was that the Financial Management 

Commission, and I quote: 

 

 usurps the rightful, traditional, and constitutional 

responsibilities of the legislature for oversight and 

accountability functions; 

 

And further argues that parliament has the, and I quote: 

 

 unquestioned right and indeed need to be the sole agent of 

accountability for the executive government. 

 

While the member's research has outlined the development of 

parliament's responsibility to scrutinize the actions of the 

executive government, the arguments have failed to 

substantiate that the Assembly has any exclusive right to be the 

agent of accountability for the executive. 

 

And further I see no evidence to suggest that an exclusive right 

to hold the executive accountable is necessary for the House to 

be able to perform its functions.  Rather it seems to me to be a 

given fact that in a democracy, there are many checks and 

balances to the power of the executive.  The important role of 

the Legislative Assembly and its officer, the Provincial 

Auditor, in holding government to account is supplemented by 

the media, the electorate, and interest groups. 

 

Indeed I would go further to say that it would be novel to 

suggest that the executive itself has no role or responsibility in 

ensuring that appropriate processes are in place to provide 

adequate information and accountability mechanisms. 

 

To summarize this aspect of the question of privilege, I can 

find no precedent in this Assembly or in the procedural 

authorities to support the claim that the Assembly has an 

exclusive right to scrutinize government as one of its 

privileges.  Nor is there any support for the argument that an 

accountability review by the executive is an interference with 

the ability of the House to do its work and thus would be a 

breach of its privileges.  It is also a fundamental principle that 

no new privilege can be created.  I refer you to May's 

Parliamentary Practice, 21st Edition, page 145.  On these 

grounds, I find that privilege does not appear to be sufficiently 

involved and thus there is no justification for giving this issue 

precedence over the regular business on the order paper. 

 

The second point raised by the member in his question of 

privilege was the argument that the executive government has, 

by order in council, inappropriately attached the Provincial 

Auditor to a creature of the executive government, thereby 

damaging the independence of the auditor and impairing his 

ability to serve the Legislative Assembly and the Public 

Accounts Committee. 

 

There are many arguments that can be put forward to 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 195 

show that it is either appropriate or inappropriate for the 

Provincial Auditor to advise the commission.  But these 

arguments are not my concern.  It is my role to determine 

whether the member has sufficiently established that the order 

in council authorizing the commission to engage the Provincial 

Auditor as a special advisor amounts to impairment of the 

auditor's ability to serve the legislature, and thus constitutes a 

breach of privilege. 

 

I have reviewed both the terms of the order in council and the 

relevant sections of The Provincial Auditor Act.  Order in 

council no. 955 of 1991, subsection 3, recommends that an 

order do issue, and I quote: 

 

 authorizing the Commission of Inquiry to engage the services 

of the Provincial Auditor as a special advisor to the 

Commission of Inquiry. 

 

I refer all members to The Provincial Auditor Act, sections 

16(4) and (5) as follows: 

 

 (4) Where: 

 

  (a) the Lieutenant Governor in Council: 

 

   (i) requests the provincial auditor to perform a special 

assignment; and 

 

   (ii) causes the provincial auditor to be provided with the 

funding that the provincial auditor considers 

necessary to undertake the special 

assignment; and 

 

  (b) in the opinion of the provincial auditor, the special 

assignment will not unduly interfere with his other 

duties prescribed in this Act; 

 

 the provincial auditor may perform the special assignment. 

 

 (5)  The provincial auditor shall submit, as soon as is 

practicable, a special report prepared pursuant to subsection 

(4) to the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

My reading of the above section indicates that the Legislative 

Assembly has considered in a general way the propriety of the 

executive asking the Provincial Auditor to carry out a task on 

behalf of the executive that is in addition to his normal duties.  

The Act gives the Lieutenant Governor in Council the ability to 

ask the auditor to do a special assignment and also empowers 

the auditor to accept or not accept the assignment at his 

discretion. 

 

I believe the terms of the order in council respect the right of 

the auditor to agree or not agree to advise the commission.  The 

Legislative Assembly itself has provided the authority for the 

auditor to advise an executive-appointed commission.  I can 

only presume that the House, in passing the legislation, 

confirmed that should the auditor accept a special assignment 

from the executive, it would not necessarily compromise his 

independence nor impair his ability to serve the Legislative 

Assembly. 

I therefore find that this argument does not sufficiently involve 

privilege to justify giving the issue precedence over other 

business. 

 

The last argument raised by the member for Thunder Creek 

concerned the ability of the Public Accounts Committee to 

carry out its scrutiny, responsibility, especially in regard to the 

activity of the commission.  The member asks how the 

Provincial Auditor could at once perform as the committee's 

chief advisor and investigator, as well as a special advisor to 

the commission.  He concludes that this dual role must 

necessarily prejudice the Provincial Auditor's relation with the 

committee and its chairman. 

 

(1445) 

 

As I have already outlined, the Assembly itself has provided 

the means through statute for the auditor to advise the 

executive on certain matters.  The member for Thunder Creek 

might think this provision is an inherent conflict of interest, but 

it exists none the less.  It is not for the Speaker to make 

judgements as to its perceived merits or disadvantages.  It is 

not the Speaker's role to second guess the Assembly's decision 

in this regard. 

 

Therefore given the existence of such provisions, I can only 

review this case in present terms and not in terms of what 

might happen.  I have no reason to believe the auditor would do 

anything less than his utmost to fulfil his duties to the Public 

Accounts Committee.  Given the evidence before me, I find no 

prima facie breach of privilege relative to the Provincial 

Auditor's duties to the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

In conclusion, I rule that the grounds presented by the member 

are not sufficient to establish that a breach of privilege has 

occurred which merits setting aside the normal business of this 

session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would ask leave of the Assembly to consider item 1 under 

government motions on condition that when the debate on item 

1 under government motions has been completed, that the 

Assembly will revert back to special orders. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Forty-second Anniversary of the Declaration of Human 

Rights 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today marks 

the 42nd anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human 

Rights.  It was a historical date in 1948 when the General 

Assembly of the United Nations convened to affirm its 

commitment to maintaining world peace and the promotion and 

preservation of basic, fundamental human rights.  This 

universal declaration emerged in response to the horrific 

atrocities committed against humanity during the Second 

World War and today serves to remind us of just how extreme 

the results of an  



196 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

intolerant society can be. 

 

In commemorating the anniversary of this declaration, a variety 

of celebrations are scheduled to take place across Canada.  In 

Saskatchewan this week, December 9-13, has been proclaimed 

Human Rights Week with various activities planned in 

celebration of this province's past achievements. 

 

These achievements have been secured only because of the 

journey which this province embarked upon many years ago.  It 

is a journey to which there is no certain destination, but rather a 

continual struggle by progressive men and women committed 

to strengthening the very foundation of our society, a 

foundation based upon the guiding principles of fairness, 

equality, and compassion. 

 

Saskatchewan has a long and proud tradition in recognizing the 

value of our differences.  We have in the past and will continue 

to cherish our mosaic society, and we will continue to 

overcome the challenges which lie before us by building upon 

that tradition of community, co-operation, and compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let us on this day of celebration examine for a 

moment the accomplishments of which I speak.  Saskatchewan 

was one of the first provinces to establish its own Bill of 

Rights, which was introduced by the first CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) government of Tommy Douglas in 

1947. 

 

More recently, this province established the Human Rights 

Commission in 1972 as well as a comprehensive Human Rights 

Code passed in 1979.  Although much has been achieved 

throughout the years, much more needs to be done.  It is simply 

not good enough to rest upon these past accomplishments.  I 

want to assure all members of this Assembly, and the people of 

this province, that this government is committed to those same 

guiding principles of equality and fairness that guided former 

generations in this province in creating a more just society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have as well over the years witnessed several 

improvements on the national and international stage regarding 

human rights.  The Canadian Bill of Rights and the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms guarantees equal rights for all Canadians.  

We as Canadians enjoy freedom of conscience and religion, 

freedom of thought, belief, opinion, expression, and of 

assembly. 

 

These inherent rights, secured under the Charter and offered to 

each and every Canadian citizen, must never be taken for 

granted.  They are, after all, not empty words, not words devoid 

of any meaningful application or purely symbolic of our 

society's ideas.  Rather they are intended to remind us of who 

we are.  These rights should be viewed as part of a living, 

breathing document known as the Canadian Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms, meant to guide our democratic institutions, our 

legislators, our law enforcement agencies, and our judiciary.  

Furthermore and most importantly, these fundamental rights 

serve to remind each and every Canadian of the way we wish 

to treat one another. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not only a time of celebration in 

recognition of the progress that has been made.  This is as well 

a time of reflection -- a time to reflect upon the benefits which 

we, as free men and women, enjoy in living in a free and 

democratic country such as Canada.  It is a time to reflect upon 

those individuals or groups of individuals who have 

experienced or continue to experience some form of 

discrimination.  We must renew our commitment to those 

members of our society, so that we will continue to work 

diligently to eliminate all forms of inequality. 

 

I wish to conclude, Mr. Speaker, by asking all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in reaffirming our commitment to 

building a more secure, a more just and equitable society for 

all.  It is our duty and responsibility as a democratically elected 

Assembly to continually search for ways to improve the quality 

of life for the citizens of our province. 

 

We must recognize that our communities are enriched and 

strengthened by our differences.  We must begin to turn our 

attention to broadening the traditional definition of human 

rights to more accurately reflect the public's concerns.  We 

must take this opportunity to acknowledge the extremely 

serious problems which continue to ail our society. 

 

I refer specifically to problems of violence particularly aimed 

against women and children, to racism, to sexism, to the 

problems faced by the disabled, and to poverty.  In addition, 

this government is committed to ensuring that all 

Saskatchewan citizens have equal access to quality health and 

education services, to meaningful employment opportunities, 

and the right to live in a clean and safe environment. 

 

I also want to take this opportunity to reaffirm our commitment 

to work with the aboriginal people of this province in 

developing solutions to the outstanding issues which have been 

neglected for far too long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to conclude with a quotation which I 

believe accurately and appropriately sums up the essence of my 

remarks on this very important day of celebration. 

 

In the words of Eleanor Roosevelt, and I quote: 

 

 Where, after all, do universal human rights begin?  In small 

places close to home -- so close and so small that they cannot 

be seen on any map of the world.  Yet they are the world of 

the individual person: the neighbourhood he lives in; the 

school or college he attends; the factory, farm or office where 

he works.  Such are the places where every man, woman and 

child seeks equal justice, equal opportunity, equal dignity 

without discrimination.  Unless these rights have meaning 

there, they have little meaning anywhere. 

 

I would urge all members of this Assembly to reaffirm their 

commitment to furthering the cause of human rights by 

supporting the following resolution.  Mr. Speaker, I move, 

seconded by the member from Regina Lake Centre: 

 

 That this Assembly, on this 42nd anniversary of 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 197 

the Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly of 

the United Nations, formally recognize the extreme 

importance of advancing the cause of human rights in our 

quest for creating a truly just society. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to second the 

motion of the member from Saskatoon Fairview and to reiterate 

what he said, that one of the most outstanding features of our 

democratic process is that our work is never done.  We have 

never yet, in the conditions of this world or this province, 

reached a situation where we can say that we've achieved our 

highest ideals. 

 

And there's many reasons for that.  Some of them are based on 

our individual behaviour, but some are based on our collective 

behaviour as a society.  This morning, myself and several 

caucus colleagues had breakfast, an information session, with 

the Saskatchewan Council for International Co-operation, and 

they represent many, many community groups who are 

interested in furthering the cause of peace, justice, and 

development throughout the world.  But one of the board 

officers of that organization reminded us that whatever happens 

to the weakest link in our society eventually comes to rest on 

all of us. 

 

It's my personal belief that all humans, by virtue of being born 

on this earth, are entitled to some share in the social, economic, 

environmental, and political equity.  And in an enlightened and 

productive society, each individual must have a right to a 

meaningful role, to contribute to the production of wealth and 

well-being and to share in the wealth and social benefit that's 

created. 

 

Full employment not only provides the means for economic 

self-sufficiency but also provides an avenue for each individual 

to be fully participating in their community. 

 

Another area in which I believe people need active 

participation is regarding the decisions that affect our daily life, 

because to be removed from the decisions that affect our 

communities, our families, and our children is to lose our sense 

of self. 

 

The increasing concern over human rights at the international 

and local level I think is reflective of the degree to which 

people feel excluded from the decisions.  In Canada and in 

Saskatchewan we have the benefit of expressing our views 

through the electoral system and the ability to change direction 

through the electoral process.  We can seek to improve this 

system both from the point of view of accessibility and 

accountability, but we do need to recognize that we have a 

degree of stability in moving forward on these fronts that many 

nations would be happy to share.  And this stability creates an 

environment where we should ideally be more able to pursue 

human rights, but it's not always realized. 

 

A specific example in Canada has been brought forward over 

the last decade on the issue of child hunger and 

poverty.  Due to these and other concerns around the world of 

children being adversely affected by war, civil strife, poverty, 

and a myriad of other abuses, the United Nations saw fit to 

introduce a convention on the rights of the child.  This 

convention embodies all of the rights conventions previously 

drafted by the United Nations, and it places children first in the 

fulfilment of all rights. 

 

The convention recognizes that children live in the context of 

families, and it affirms that families have an obligation to their 

children.  However it further affirms that communities have an 

obligation to families, to ensure that families have sufficient 

resources to meet the needs of their children. 

 

In the past we have sometimes dealt with this problem by 

removing the role of the family and institutionalizing the needs 

of the child and the needs of families in poverty.  And although 

this might be good emergency medicine, it does nothing to 

further the long-term ability of the family to sustain its 

responsibilities to its children, and it soon ensures that they are 

pushed into the non-participating fringe of our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the convention on the rights of the child, 

the United Nations seeks to assist the countries of the world in 

focusing their attention on this critical issue.  And in order for 

Canada to be a signatory to this convention, each province 

must ratify this agreement.  In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this 

would obligate us to ensure that all of our legislation reflects 

the priority placed on family and children, and would require 

us to ensure that resources as far as possible are dedicated to 

these purposes. 

 

(1500) 

 

Many of the families who are most adversely affected by the 

inability to meet their obligations to their children are people 

who have been effectively excluded from decision-making and 

full participation in the economy by virtue of gender, race, 

location, ability, and orientation. 

 

Over the next decade the ability to come to terms with ensuring 

that all members of our society are fully participant and fully 

productive will be one of the main challenges of governments, 

as we cannot afford a society of socially and economically 

alienated and dependent people. 

 

To end on a positive note, I believe we have the necessary 

political momentum for these changes.  And on this 42nd 

anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights by the General 

Assembly of the United Nations, I wish to reaffirm the value of 

this international body in continuing to help us to rise above the 

pressures of daily survival, and to reach toward the principles 

reflected in this important declaration in the pursuit of peace, 

justice, and development. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to rise to 

deal with this motion as presented by the Minister 

  



198 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

of Justice.  I feel that is a very important part of our existence 

in this Legislative Assembly, as a part of a group of people 

who have been selected by our peers as an example of the 

dignity of the human being and the rights of the individual, to 

speak and to allow them to speak. 

 

All of us take examples from who we are and what we are in 

rationalizing ourselves in relation to how we view the human 

right of an individual. 

 

I guess I would bring an example to this Assembly of one of 

the events in my life that occurred that focused its attention on 

demonstrating what the fragile existence of the dignity of the 

human being are. 

 

And I had the experience of going and visiting the refugee 

camps in the Sudan in Africa.  And I travelled around for four 

or five days with David Lewis and other people from the 

federal government.  And in my travels I stopped at about a 

half a dozen refugee camps.  And in those refugee camps there 

were a variety of numbers of people, from 30 to 60,000 people 

in these refugee camps.  They were people who had fled from 

Ethiopia, Uganda, other parts of all of the countries around the 

Sudan. 

 

And as I went into these communities, I was struck and almost 

overwhelmed by the lack of the dignity that was represented 

there of humanity.  People lying by tent doors, dying, and other 

people stepping over them as if it was what we would consider 

a dog or a cow.  And that was the kind of thing that these 

people did.  There was no respect for the human dignity, the 

life that these people had. 

 

Point out a number of other things that struck me as a part of 

that desire of individuals to realize a better opportunity for 

themselves.  And one person that we talked to had left Ethiopia 

and was on the camel for five days without food or water with 

his wife and one child, fleeing from the ravages of war, from a 

system that he did not want to be involved with, and came to a 

place where he could just have peace -- peace with himself, 

peace that he didn't have to struggle against someone to protect 

his family, his wife, and himself. 

 

These are the kinds of things I believe, Mr. Speaker, that make 

an indelible impression on each one of us.  And as I talked 

about that or looked at that and I saw the different groups of 

people, we went to another community where they had about 

30,000 people, and those are the ones that had fled from 

Uganda. 

 

And they had a three-ton truck or a military truck with stock 

racks all the way around this truck, and they had people 

standing wall to wall in that truck.  And they weren't young 

men and women in that vehicle.  There were grandmothers and 

grandfathers who were so thin and fragile, and all they did was 

open the end gate at the back and these people would have to 

jump off. 
 

We think we've got it tough in Regina when the street cars 

don't run, but when that's the means of transportation that they 

have to flee from a country that has no privileges, no rights, no 

respect for the human dignity that we so . . . we highly cherish 

it.  But we look over it . . . we overlook it, I should say, in 

viewing what we need to do in minute and 

minuscule ways of dignifying the human being.  We have not 

seen those in a personal way.  They would make their home by 

putting a blanket over a dead tree and they would crawl in 

underneath there.  But there was some dignity there.  And I saw 

this over and over again. 

 

I walked to this one and it had a rug spread out in front of this 

little patchwork quilt put over this bush, and sitting inside there 

were all of what that individual owned.  And on the blanket in 

front was a little pile of food.  And he had put the pile of food 

in six different locations for the six days that he was going to 

have that food available to him.  And there was human dignity 

there. 

 

And I asked them, wouldn't someone who was hungry come 

along and steal that?  And they said no.  And in dealing with 

the dignity of the human being, I believe that there is in people 

like that the dignity to respect the other person's possessions 

and his right to his own food.  And, Mr. Speaker, they had the 

respect of that individual even though they had pressures from 

their families about the individual . . . maybe they even had 

children of their own that were starving, and they would not go 

and eat that food. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that each one of us 

have touched at some point in time in our background that is 

relevant to the dignity of the human life.  And that's the kind of 

thing that I think that we need to show to other people.  We 

need to dignify our existence in this legislature and those 

people around about us with the kinds of things that we have 

provided for ourselves, and give ourselves an opportunity not 

only to say that we should do things better, but we also have 

come a very long way from those kinds of existences. 

 

I want to point out one other area that is very close to me.  My 

grandfather came from the Soviet Union in 1906 and he came 

as a result of severe harassment based on religious freedom.  

And that harassment drove him and his family to come to 

Canada. 

 

On my mother's side they came earlier, in the 1870s, to the 

United States, to Kansas, and they settled in Kansas, driven by 

an expression of inequality of rights.  I have the law and I will 

dictate to you what has to be done.  And because of religious 

freedom, both my parents and grandparents came to this 

country to settle in Saskatchewan and in Kansas and then later 

on my mother's family moved into Saskatchewan. 

 

That's the kind of background and backdrop we have had.  And 

I heard my grandfather talk lots about how at night they would 

baptize in the middle of the river with a lantern so that no one 

would see, giving dignity to what they believed to be their 

religious freedom.  We need to have that kind of sensitivity to 

the kinds of things that are so very important for each one of 

us. 

 

So for me and my family we consider these rights not as rights; 

we consider them as privileges.  Mr. Speaker, it's a privilege 

for me to be in this Assembly.  It's a privilege for me to have an 

opportunity to vote.  It's a privilege for me to be able to walk 

up and down the streets knowing that society and this province 

has protected me to the place that I can do that.  It's a privilege 

for me to be involved in  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

this Assembly and to be able to discuss.  It's a privilege, Mr. 

Speaker; it's a right and it's the right of the human dignity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out three places that I believe that 

we should really evaluate just a little bit more closely what we 

do with human rights.  I believe that the dignity of the unborn 

child also has to be begun by us to be made as a right, to have 

that individual have a right.  Mr. Speaker, that is a very fragile, 

individual human being that is being carried by its mother and I 

think it's important for us to establish that that has dignity, too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my nephew has a son that has Down's and he's 

five years old.  And he lives in British Columbia and they're 

coming home for Christmas.  And I'm looking forward to 

having Nick come into my home and be a part of my 

community and be a part of my family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is just as important for Nick to be involved as a 

human being in society in Saskatchewan and in Canada as 

anyone else is, as the unborn and as the grandmother.  I believe 

in that.  That's a fundamental right.  But, Mr. Speaker, never 

underestimate the value of it as a privilege.  And I want to 

make that point here today. 

 

The other area that I think is really important for us to consider 

. . . and I noted in the Maclean's magazine two pages of an ad 

there really struck at the heart of what I think is wrong.  When 

a group of people have a right that is superseded by the 

individual, I believe society then has a problem. 

 

And I refer to an article about three grandmothers who decided 

to go to work and cross the picket line.  I believe that the 

dignity of those individuals was -- and their own privileges and 

rights -- was superseded by the group and I don't believe that 

that's the right thing to do.  I honestly believe that there is a 

necessity for us to always recognize that the individual must be 

recognized along with the group of people that they are 

associated with. 

 

The third item that I want to identify as a way to express the 

intensity with which I feel about the dignity of the rights of 

individuals and the human right and the right are laid before us 

right here in this Assembly with the representation of the mace 

as a part of the dignity of the parliamentary system.  And the 

example of Her Majesty, the example of the Lieutenant 

Governor, the Governor General, are examples of where we 

have come from.  They're symbols of the things that we have 

gained because people were prepared to give up those dignities 

of the . . . or give the dignity back to the human being and the 

rights of that individual.  I believe that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you are an example of the dignity of the 

human right because you as a single person have the right to sit 

in that chair.  You have been given that right by the laws of this 

country.  And I believe that that is fundamental to the belief of 

one person having the right to be here, the right to speak here, 

and the right and dignity and the privilege to exist in this 

forum. 

 

So that leads me to the conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that these 

rights are not exclusive to themselves unless they deal with a 

sense of responsibility in our relationship to 

society.  We have to think about them not as rights; they are a 

position of rights, but they have to appear to have not only the 

dignity of the human right, but they have to have the dignity 

and respect that we place on them and the responsibility we 

have towards society.  So I, as an individual, have to think 

about them as a privilege and a responsible attitude towards 

them. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is how I view what we are doing here today.  

And I am pleased that the member opposite presented this 

motion in view of the anniversary of the human rights being a 

part of the United Nations.  And I respect that and I will be 

supporting the motion that you have put forward, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, my remarks will be brief, Mr. Speaker.  I 

wanted to follow up on a few of the remarks made by the 

member for Morse.  He talks about the dignity of human 

beings, and I too agree that all human beings have dignity.  Not 

only the unborn, but also the women in our society have 

dignity, and we have to recognize, respect that, and understand 

that women do make choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse gave us a lot of 

anecdotes about his very moving and compelling trip to 

Ethiopia, and I was touched listening to those anecdotes.  I 

know, as someone who has also travelled in many parts of this 

world, that there is a great deal of sadness and human 

degradation in this world.  And we do have to, all of us, as 

committed men and women in this society, we have to work to 

stop that sadness, that degradation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the member from Morse said that in Canada 

we've come a long way, and I have to take exception to what he 

said because unfortunately we do see around us daily, still in 

1991, many, many poignant examples of just how far we have 

not come.  We see an incredible amount of poverty.  We see an 

incredible amount of hunger.  We see an incredible amount of 

sexism and of racism.  We see a lack of respect for the basic 

rights of human beings as individuals and as part of larger 

groups whether that's trade unions or what.  We all do have 

rights.  We all do have to respect them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people have often said to me, why would a 

group bother proclaiming a day?  It's simply a pro forma thing 

and it doesn't really make much difference.  To them, Mr. 

Speaker, I say no, that simply is not true.  Because what we do 

see on a day like this, the human rights day, is that many, many 

volunteers in our communities all across Saskatchewan get 

together and do special celebrations to mark the occasion, and 

they use these days as opportunities to further educate their 

fellow citizens about the rights and the concerns that they have. 

 

I have been very privileged, Mr. Speaker, to work with the 

United Nations association in Saskatoon, to work with the 

Pakistan-Canada association, to work with the Saskatchewan 

International Labour Program, and finally to be founding chair 

of the city of Saskatoon's Race Relations Committee.  I have 

worked with hundreds of volunteers in the community of 

Saskatoon and basically I  



200 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

have learned from them, Mr. Speaker, that human rights must 

always be considered to be rights, not privileges.  Privileges are 

things that an elite group can take away; rights are something 

that are ours just by virtue of the fact that we are human beings 

born on this planet.  We will always have to work to maintain 

those rights -- that's certainly true -- but nevertheless we do 

have those rights by virtue of being human beings, by being 

alive. 

 

We must never forget, Mr. Speaker, that we are enriched by all 

people.  It doesn't matter what the colour of their skin, it doesn't 

matter what their sex is, it doesn't matter what their sexual 

orientation is, it doesn't matter what their religion is -- all 

people have a very important and valuable contribution to 

make. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, on a day like this in Saskatchewan in 

this legislative chambers, we do need to give pause to reflect 

on the importance of human rights, on the need to continue 

struggling to ensure that all people do have human rights.  And 

we need, I think, to reflect what that means for us individually 

and how we can change our behaviours so that we can as 

legislators start to become examples in this society; so that we 

can individually and collectively rid ourselves of vestiges of 

racism and sexism; so that we can truly go out and raise our 

heads high with dignity and say, yes, we do respect the rights 

of all human beings and we will work to ensure that all human 

beings have rights.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I, too, Mr. Speaker, support the hon. 

member's motion on this 10th day of December which marks 

International Human Rights Day.  We in this Assembly should 

be most thankful for the basic human rights and the basic 

freedoms with which we are blessed in our country.  And we as 

elected representatives in one small corner of this earth called 

Saskatchewan have a tremendous responsibility to be 

caretakers of the democracy and freedoms which we were 

entrusted to by our predecessors in this province, in the nation, 

and indeed, our Commonwealth. 

 

Much of what has been willed to us showed vision and 

forethought.  Much of our tradition shows a great respect for 

the rights of the individual and for the value of society as a 

whole.  But there are some things which must change and we 

must accept responsibility as the instruments of that change. 

 

There is a revolution in this world and there is evolution.  All 

over the globe people are struggling to move forward in their 

societies.  For some this means a struggle to achieve the barest 

of necessities -- food, clothing, and shelter.  For others, there is 

the fight for freedom and democracy which has taken on 

tremendous focus for our world in the past few years.  We 

remember Tiananmen Square, the dismantling of the Berlin 

Wall, the fight for freedom in the Ukraine and Soviet Russia, 

South America, and of course, the emotional saga of the 

hostages held in the Middle East. 

 

However, we must not ever become so smug as to think that 

the problems are all in someone else's country, Mr. Speaker.  

Canadians, indeed Saskatchewanians, have to 

be very introspective when it comes to human rights and we 

must realize that we are not the world leaders that we could be. 

 

We've only to look at the treatment of Canada's first peoples to 

recognize that there are Canadian citizens being mistreated in 

our justice system, denied access to quality education and 

quality health care.  And we must look at the unprecedented 

numbers of people lining up at food banks.  We must account 

for the heavy burden of responsibility being placed in our 

interval houses for battered and abused women; the 

unprecedented numbers of abused children; the continued trials 

of the disabled; the increases in racism. 

 

And we must ask ourselves what we as individuals, as 

representatives of the people, are really doing to protect the 

basic human rights of our own people. 

 

It is one thing for us to sit here in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, 

and for our federal counterparts to sit in Ottawa and pass 

judgements on others through economic sanctions against 

South Africa, and other such measures which reflect our 

condemnation of apartheid in that country, but we must not get 

so caught up with self-righteousness.  We must not become too 

comfortable.  We must not continue to take for granted our 

liberties and our freedoms. 

 

The burden is upon us in this institution every day to 

acknowledge the scars on our record as a government, as a 

people, and to begin the healing of our society. 

 

We must take bold action to protect our children, the women, 

and the elderly, the disabled, from abuses.  We must be open 

and honest about our treatment of native peoples in this 

province and in the nation.  And we must ensure that our laws 

truly prohibit prejudice and inequality.  This is not a fair and 

just world, Mr. Speaker, but it our job to make it more fair and 

more just. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me say this: we can have an impact 

on the global level through our local actions and we can begin 

here in this House to promote fairness and equality for all of 

our citizens.  We can begin by setting an example of respect for 

our democracy, for the people who have elected us to this 

position of judgement and responsibility, by exercising good 

judgement and by taking responsibility for Saskatchewan's 

image in the nation and in the world. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I say to my hon. colleagues on the 

government side, I am but one voice, but I represent the voice 

of many people who feel that the system does not hear them, 

that the people within this Chamber have lost touch with the 

people who elected them.  And I will use my voice and I will 

urge all members to do similarly.  I will use my voice to echo 

the concerns and the priorities of the people every day.  We 

must rise above the temptation to put ourselves or our political 

parties first when we rise to speak in this Assembly.  The very 

foundations of democracy have been shaken by this type of 

abuse.  And it is time that each of us took responsibility to 

change that regretful reality. 

 

We must make our moments here count, for there are  

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

people who see us as the solution to their despair, Mr. Speaker, 

who turn to us for guidance and leadership.  And it is ordinary 

people who share their incomes with this government in order 

to finance this forum in the hopes that we can make every 

citizen's life more secure as the result of our guidance and our 

leadership. 

 

And if we truly accept this onerous responsibility, we must be 

far more considerate of how we handle the trust they have 

placed upon us.  We must truly assess the goals and the 

priorities of our people, and we must work together to achieve 

them. 

 

And every day when I leave this Chamber, I will ask myself 

whether I have made a contribution to the people of my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, to the citizens of this province, that 

will add more fairness, more justice to their lives. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that each elected member the 

world over, if they were to make that a goal day by day, the 

world would become a more fair and just place for all humanity 

to share. 

 

And I would like to quote Horace Mann.  I think we should 

leave with this in mind:  "Be ashamed to die until you have 

won some victory for humanity."  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Toth. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on 

your election to the position of Speaker.  I have had the 

opportunity to get to know you over the past five years.  And I 

realize, Mr. Speaker, that you now represent many of the 

constituents that I used to represent, and the constituency that 

you now represent is the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, my 

old riding. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that you will approach your duties with 

fairness.  The one thing I've come to learn about you is that you 

do speak your opinion.  You are direct and forthright, and the 

one thing that you are, Mr. Speaker, is honest -- regardless of 

what people may think about you.  And I can assure the 

members of the opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party 

that we have elected one of the most honest and principled men 

in this legislature, and he deserves our support. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- The other thing I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

I want to congratulate the new members of the legislature.  I 

have spent the last week listening to their speeches, and one of 

the things that struck me is that the new members of the 

legislature know the history of their 

constituencies.  They certainly know who they represent.  I 

have learned a great deal about various parts of this province in 

the last week.  These new members of the legislature come to 

this Assembly with lots of new ideas and visions for the future 

and enthusiasm.  And I look forward to working with all the 

new members on both sides of the legislature in the years to 

come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- The other thing I want to do, Mr. Speaker, is 

congratulate the old members.  I know how hard it is to be 

re-elected.  I note that many of the old members were defeated 

in the last election, particularly the old members on the 

opposition side of the House -- or the government side of the 

House in the past five years.  Some of those members that were 

defeated I am going to particularly miss, and I will particularly 

miss Peter Prebble. 

 

Peter Prebble was the member of the legislature for Saskatoon 

University.  He also was a man that I had the opportunity to 

share my constituency office with during the past five years.  

And I also got to know Peter Prebble on a personal basis.  I had 

known him as a political ally, but I had not known him on a 

personal basis. 

 

Peter Prebble is a man of great principle and honour.  He is a 

very intelligent man.  I think he's one of the few members of 

the Assembly in the past five years that had a degree in 

business.  He was a Governor General's medal winner in the 

province of Prince Edward Island.  And Peter, in my view, did 

a most able job of representing the poor and the dispossessed in 

our province.  He brought to the attention of the public the 

whole issue of child hunger and poverty.  And I know that 

Peter will continue to advocate his views on the environment, 

on uranium mining, and on poverty.  And I look forward to 

seeing him in the next years ahead. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the constituents of Saskatoon 

Broadway for re-electing me as their representative in this 

legislature.  I can say that I am deeply honoured to once again 

represent over 11,000 constituents in the city of Saskatoon.  I'm 

pleased that they have once again placed their faith in me to be 

their representative. 

 

I want to assure the members and the constituents living in 

Saskatoon Broadway that I will do what I always have done.  I 

will represent their interests with honesty and integrity.  I will 

fight and advocate on behalf of them as citizens living in our 

province.  And I will approach the challenge of governing -- 

and we are now government; we're not in the opposition -- in a 

manner that is fair and reasonable.  And I will do my very best 

on behalf of the people I represent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's interesting, I went 

home on the weekend and several constituents came to see me 

on the weekend.  And I ran into several people in downtown 

Saskatoon and on Broadway and 

  



202 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

they asked me what it was like to sit on the government side of 

the legislature. 

 

And I had to tell them that it was the most different experience 

and that I had this tremendous urge to run over and teach the 

Conservative members how to ask questions.  And I say that 

because I found it most interesting that the Conservatives used 

to be the government.  They used to answer the questions; we 

used to pose the questions.  And I want to tell the members of 

the opposition that you've got a great deal to learn about asking 

questions.  And I can assure you that I won't be offering any 

advice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to briefly talk about the people I represent.  

The people that live in the constituency of Saskatoon 

Broadway are not unlike many others that live in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  We have a wide array of people who come 

from all walks of life. But in particular, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

whole community of people who are very much involved in 

culture in our province. 

 

We have visual artists, painters, and photographers.  We have 

performing artists, people who are involved in the theatre.  We 

have writers and poets.  We have a publishing house, 

Thistledown Press, that's located in the constituency I 

represent.  We have film and video makers.  And we have a 

large number of musicians living in Saskatoon Broadway. 

 

As well, because we are so closely connected to the university, 

we have people who are professional, and non-professionals 

who work at the University of Saskatchewan -- professors and 

secretaries and maintenance people as well as administrators.  

Saskatoon Broadway also has over 200 teachers that live in the 

constituency.  We have farmers, and we also have business 

people who work and live in the constituency. 

 

Saskatoon Broadway is the only constituency in this province 

that straddles both sides of the South Saskatchewan River.  Our 

boundaries are Idylwyld Drive, Queen Street, then down 

Spadina to 25th Street Bridge, along College Drive up to 

Cumberland, back down 8th Street to Idylwyld Freeway.  

We're the only constituency that has the Idylwyld Bridge, the 

Victoria Street Bridge, the Broadway Bridge, and the 

University Bridge that connect the downtown with the east side 

of the river. 

 

We also have the Meewasin Valley Authority, that has a 

mandate to look after and protect the river and to ensure that 

the citizens have access to parks and much beauty. 

 

Saskatoon Broadway, because it includes the downtown of the 

city of Saskatoon and the east side Broadway Avenue, also 

houses, or is home to, many of the businesses in the city of 

Saskatoon.  We have lots of small, independent merchants that 

have their businesses in our constituency.  These are people 

who contribute to our community in the way of being active 

volunteers.  They are not absentee landlords, Mr. Speaker, but 

they are active participants in our constituency and in our city. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we also are home to a number of 

non-government organizations: Aids Saskatoon, Big Sisters, 

Immigrant Women, Interval House, Crisis 

Nursery, to name a few. 

 

We also have most of the senior citizen housing located in our 

constituency. And we also, Mr. Speaker, have a couple of very 

famous collegiates: Nutana Collegiate, which was the school 

that John Diefenbaker attended in his formative years; and we 

also have the Joe Duquette High School which I am proud to 

say, Mr. Speaker, is graduating most of the aboriginal grade 12 

students in the city of Saskatoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm also pleased to report that I am the MLA for 

the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, and I'm also the 

MLA for the Leader of the Liberal Party.  And if the Leader of 

the Opposition, the member from Estevan, was still living on 

Albert Avenue, I would be his representative as well.  Senator 

Berntson and Senator Buckwold also live in the constituency I 

represent. So I can say that I represent some people in this 

province who are very active in political life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, October 21, 1991 marked a most historical day 

for the people of this province, and it marked a most historical 

day for the people of this province because a New Democratic 

Party government was elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I say it's historical, Mr. Speaker, because 

what we have seen and witnessed is an end to the politics of 

division.  And when I say an end to the politics of division, I'm 

talking about a deliberate attempt on the part of the previous 

administration to divide people along rural and urban lines, 

along white and non-white lines, along sexual orientation lines, 

along lines of business and labour, along lines of men and 

women, along lines of pro 

_life and pro-choice, along all kinds of lines, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can't help but recall the Premier of the province, some 

months ago when he was Leader of the Opposition, told a story 

about being in the North and he ran into an aboriginal man who 

was wearing a baseball cap.  And on that baseball cap were the 

following words:  We may have come here on different ships, 

but we're all in this boat together. 

 

And I would say to the people of this province and to the 

members of the opposition that we may have come here on 

different ships -- we may have come to the province of 

Saskatchewan on different ships -- but we're all in this boat 

together, as the Premier of Saskatchewan has said. 

 

And in order to alleviate some of the very serious economic, 

social, and political problems that face our province, we will 

have to engage in the politics of consensus and unity.  We can 

no longer, in my view, afford to have divisions on the basis of 

what we do or who we are or where we live or what race we 

have or what sex we have.  The politics of division were ended 

on October 21, 1991. 

 

And when I see all the new members that are members of the 

Government of Saskatchewan, I can say that they represent 

both rural and urban citizens, men and women.  They represent 

a wide spectrum of view, Mr. Speaker. 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

And it will take all of us, all of us working as government, all 

of us working in this Assembly, to come to grips with some of 

the very real problems facing Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think we saw a first signal on the part of our government 

to end the politics of division.  I come from a farm family that 

has been actively engaged in agriculture since 1903.  And the 

farm family that I come from has been active in agricultural 

politics.  One of the things that I have come to know is that 

farmers are an independent lot of people.  They are fiercely 

independent and they have their opinions.  And some farmers 

are open marketers, others are for marketing boards; some are 

free enterprisers, others aren't. 

 

But when the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of this 

province were appointed and elected, they made the decision 

that they were going to go to Ottawa with a coalition of farmers 

-- a coalition of farmers representing all kinds of views in this 

province -- and they were going to go to Ottawa to do one or 

two things.  They were going to go to Ottawa to lobby for more 

money and lobby for a strategy that would come to grips with 

the agricultural crisis facing our province. 

 

And we saw over 100 farmers get on a plane and go to Ottawa 

representing various perspectives.  But they had come together, 

they had formed consensus, and the one thing that they were 

sure of was that there was an agricultural crisis in 

Saskatchewan and that the crisis needed to be dealt with 

immediately and it needed to be dealt with by Ottawa. 

 

And I want to congratulate the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Premier of our province for having the will and the courage and 

the foresight to get people from various perspectives together 

to go to Ottawa and to lobby -- to lobby for more farm aid and 

to lobby for a long-term agricultural strategy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- In my view, that was the first signal to the 

citizens of our province that the days of the politics of division 

had ended and that we were going to work co-operatively to 

come to grips with our problems. 

 

Now I had the opportunity to listen to the member from 

Rosthern the other night.  And the member from Rosthern 

continually asks us where our plan is, where our plan is for the 

future of this province.  Well, members of the opposition, one 

of the things that we will not engage in is what we have come 

to know in the province of Saskatchewan for the past nine and 

a half years.  What we've come to know is no plan, but if you 

wanted something, all you had to do was ask, particularly if 

you were friends of the government, and dollars would be 

made available to you.  We saw no plan and lots of spending 

on the part of the province. 

 

One thing I can assure the members opposite is that we will 

spend but we will think before we spend.  We will think before 

we spend.  What we had before was spending but no thinking, 

and consequently our province is faced with one of the highest 

per capita debts in this country and one of the largest deficits in 

this country per capita. 

We have lots of ideas.  We do have a vision of the future in this 

province.  We have ideas about spending, but we will ensure 

that we have a long-term plan in place before we spend the 

taxpayers' dollars.  We can no longer afford fiscal insanity, and 

that's what we've come to know in the last nine and a half 

years. 

 

We know that the people of this province do not expect 

miracles overnight.  We know that.  We know that the people 

of this province have had a great deal of patience in the past 

and they will have patience in the future.  We know that if we 

explain to the people of this province what we are doing in a 

logical and rational way, they will support us.  We know that if 

we listen to what people are saying and respond to what people 

are saying, they will support us. 

 

We know that we have to think before we spend.  And I can 

assure the people of this province that this government will 

think before it spends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, there are some 

serious problems facing our province.  We have the agricultural 

crisis.  We have a crisis when it comes to poor people in this 

province.  We have the largest number of children living in 

poverty in Canada residing in our province.  We have children 

who don't have enough food to eat; we have people who don't 

have enough food to eat.  We know that we have to have an 

economic development strategy where jobs are created in our 

cities, towns, and villages.  We know that we have to come to 

grips with rural depopulation and the need to provide services 

in rural Saskatchewan that are meaningful and in a fiscally 

responsible manner.  We know that we have to be fiscally 

responsible, but at the same time provide services to the people 

who elected us. 

 

These will not be easy tasks.  We know that.  But we believe 

that with all of the ideas coming from the members of the 

government, we believe with ideas coming from members of 

the opposition, that we will be able to priorize the people's 

priorities in such a way that they will have access to economic 

development strategies and services. 

 

We know that we can convince the federal government of the 

need to provide a long-term agricultural policy for this country.  

And if we can't convince this particular federal government, we 

surely can convince the next one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Because, Mr. Speaker, for the first time in 

Canada we have the opportunity to elect a New Democratic 

Party government under the leadership of Audrey McLaughlin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past five years the members of the 

opposition, the New Democratic Party, had the opportunity to 

raise all kinds of issues in this Legislative Assembly.  We were 

concerned about health and 

  



204 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

educational services; we were concerned about social services; 

we were concerned about municipal services; we were 

concerned about a lack of economic development and a 

reliance totally upon large megaprojects, money to 

out-of-province businesses, corporations.  We raised all kinds 

of issues in this legislature. 

 

And the other night the Leader of the Opposition tallied up 

some of the costs associated with the concerns that we raised.  I 

can assure the people of this province that those concerns are 

still very much on the minds of the government members. 

 

I can assure the people of this province that we will do 

whatever we can to come to grips with underfunding in 

education, underfunding in health, underfunding in municipal 

affairs, underfunding all over the place.  But we will have to 

priorize government spending; we will have to look at where 

government gets its revenue, and we will have to provide 

services in such a way that the most people will benefit from it.  

And we will have to provide services in a cost-effective 

manner. 

 

But I know we have the will to do that; I know we have the 

means to do that, and I know that the one thing people can rely 

on when it comes to our government is that we will be open 

and honest with people and we will listen to what they have to 

say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to let other members of this Assembly who 

have not yet spoken speak in this Assembly on the throne 

speech. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to say something about my 

parents.  As I said earlier, my family has been involved in the 

business of agriculture since 1903.  My parents farm in the 

constituency of Biggar.  They farm in the Springwater area.  

After I was elected in 1986, my mom and dad brought me some 

items that they thought it was important to have on my 

constituency office wall. 

 

One of the things that they brought me was a painting of my 

home town.  And my dad said to me: Pat, whatever you do, 

never forget where you came from.  You came from the land, 

you came from rural Saskatchewan, and even though you may 

represent an urban riding, never forget where you came from. 

 

The other thing that my mother gave me was a picture of 

Woodrow Lloyd who was the previous premier of this province 

prior to Allan Blakeney.  Woodrow Lloyd was a high school 

principal in the town of Biggar, and he was the architect of our 

school division system that we presently have in the province.  

And Woodrow Lloyd was a most principled man who stood on 

principle in this legislature.  And he brought in medicare.  And 

my mother said, never forget the constituency that you came 

from; never forget your roots; never forget Woodrow Lloyd. 

 

And the other thing that she gave me, Mr. Speaker, was a 

poem.  It was a Robert Frost poem which we will find outside 

of this building.  And it's a poem about taking different roads.  

And I've often thought about that poem in the past five years.  

I've thought about the different choices that people make in 

their lives, and the choice to 

be involved in politics or to be involved as a teacher or to be 

involved in other areas of endeavour. 

 

There is nothing wrong with being a politician.  There is 

nothing wrong with representing people.  We as politicians 

have to return to the days when politicians were a most 

respected group of people.  And we can do that, Mr. Speaker, 

by doing one of three things. 

 

When people ask us questions, we should answer the question 

with honesty.  If we don't know the answer, we should say we 

don't know the answer.  And if we can't tell the person the 

answer for confidential reasons, then we should tell the person 

we can't answer the question. 

 

And I've found in the past five years that if you are honest with 

people and you tell them where things are at, they will trust you 

and they will respect you.  And I think as all politicians in this 

Legislative Assembly, we have a commitment and a duty to the 

people of this province to tell people the truth and to be honest. 

 

And if we can all do that as politicians, we can restore the 

image of politicians as honest people who are elected to serve 

their constituents.  And I can assure the people of the 

constituency that I represent that I will always be honest with 

them and I will always tell them the truth.  Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would like to first of all congratulate you as being 

elected as Deputy Speaker.  I thought perhaps you would be 

our Speaker, and I would have accepted that too.  I have 

worked with you before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I'm quite 

prepared to work with you as Deputy Speaker and other things. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pass through you to the 

Speaker, my congratulations to him.  And before we get to 

thinking that this is a pat on the back, maybe I'd better get into 

my remarks.  As you know, Mr. Speaker, you and I have had 

some conversation before, and I guess we haven't always 

agreed, but I think we have come to a mutual respect of each 

other. 

 

It's a pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for me to respond to the Speech 

from the Throne.  And I would like at this time to congratulate 

all of the new members on the opposite side as well as on our 

side. 

 

I don't think there's a feeling that gives you much more 

satisfaction or a good feeling as to know that more people in 

your constituency voted for you than they voted for the others.  

It's an emotion that you have to experience, I believe, to know 

what it is.  I know when I was elected I felt a bit humble.  And 

when I was elected the second time, Mr. Speaker, I also felt 

very, very good. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You should have. 
 

Mr. Britton: -- And I do.  And I also would like to draw your 

attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my favourite critic is here 

and well.  And I hope he will do his very best to encourage me 

along as I go.  Applause is acceptable;  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

silence is preferable; but it's quite acceptable to applaud once in 

a while. 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I must thank the constituents of 

Wilkie for their hard work and support through the years, and 

especially during the election.  And I appreciate their 

confidence in me, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to 

representing them for another term. 

 

The Wilkie people are tough, they're independent, they're 

innovative.  And most importantly, Mr. Speaker, they have an 

unconquerable spirit.  They have learned to expect drought, 

grasshoppers, and almost anything just as many times as a 

bumper crop.  And while we're having some tough times out 

there, Mr. Speaker, I find the optimism out there rewarding and 

encouraging.  We are in trouble; they know it.  They're in 

trouble, but they're not giving up. 

 

The silver lining to this, Mr. Speaker, is out of necessity people 

from Wilkie, along with the people of Saskatchewan in general, 

are strong and resourceful, recognize this, and building on 

these seems to be helping the people find their full potential. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the past nine years much has been 

done in the Wilkie constituency on that potential.  For example, 

four new schools have been built in Wilkie and several others 

have received renovations.  And through combined support 

programs for farmers and community development and 

diversification programs like the rural development 

corporations and the community crossroads projects, the 

Greenhead Rural Development Corporation, they have formed 

and completed their opportunity survey. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could spend some time talking about Wilkie 

alone, but I think I have other concerns that I would like to 

express. Concerns that all the growth and all the development 

experienced in Wilkie and the rest of Saskatchewan for the past 

nine years, what it's all about, Mr. Speaker.  Concerned as to 

what a destructive and yes, I might say, deceptive NDP 

government has in store for the province.  They have promised 

much along the way, Mr. Speaker, before becoming 

government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you.  I have 

my favourite critic going again, Mr. Speaker.  It's reassuring. 

 

Promises such as increased funding, health care, education, 

and, Mr. Speaker, the open government, the open government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- For the last few days we've found out what 

open government's all about.  That's open for everyone but 

them.  Everybody else but them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're looking forward to the elimination of waste 

and mismanagement.  The member from Riversdale was all 

over the country for many years now telling that four and a half 

billion dollars is all you need.  All you have to do is stop the 

waste and mismanagement.  We're looking forward to that, Mr. 

Speaker, because in that he says he will give us decreased 

taxes, he will eliminate the deficit and have a balanced budget. 

And those promises have not gone unnoticed on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker.  And surely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

media and the people of Saskatchewan have kept track of these 

empty promises themselves.  And I along with the entire 

province is waiting for the NDP to tell me how they plan to 

honour those promises. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We'll get you as the Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- That's right.  That's right.  I accept the position 

as Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the money going to come from?  We've 

got to find this out.  Where is the money going to come from to 

fund the NDP promises like bringing back the old dental plan? 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  Where's his money? 

 

Waste and mismanagement.  Well that's fine.  Under waste and 

mismanagement we're going to find a significant amount of 

money, to the tune of sixteen and a half million dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, to bring back the old dental plan; or about 83 million 

needed to bring back the old prescription drug plan; and over 

481 million to eliminate poverty.  We're going to find that in 

waste and mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well we're hoping that that turns out because . . . Now it 

sounds a bit outrageous since the member from Riversdale has 

promised to do these things without raising any taxes.  No tax 

increase.  No taxes.  I commend the member for that.  I'm 

waiting patiently.  I'm patiently waiting to see this happen. 

 

And I would like the member from Riversdale to answer this 

question.  It's not a hard one.  Or my critic could maybe do that.  

And it shouldn't be too hard anyway.  He has repeated many 

times, where did the money go?  And for months now, he'd 

been saying the same thing.  Now can he at least answer my 

question: where are you going to get the money?  Please 

answer that question today. 

 

Where are you going to get the money?  Would the member 

from Riversdale answer that question, Mr. Speaker?  I would 

be pleased to take my seat for a moment while he did that. 

 

(1600) 

 

Okay.  That's fine.  He's not going to answer.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, the following quote from the member from Riversdale 

just a year ago clearly shows that increased taxation is part of 

his plan for government. 

 

In response to a question, I quote what the member said: You 

want to take a look at whether or not there are any sources of 

taxation in the large resource area.  And that was on Cable 

Regina Night Views, March 20, 1990. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is Saskatchewan's resource area?  

Well it's the oil industry, Mr. Speaker.  But in fact the NDP 

have already claimed that they could have taken $2 billion 

more from the oil industry over the past eight years.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, the NDP are totally wrong.  There 

  



206 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

was not $2 billion more for the government to take -- not even 

close to that amount, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The fact is that under the present oil royalty structure the 

former government received -- that's the former government, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, being our government, the PC 

government -- $863 million more in oil revenue than we would 

have under the royalty system used by the old NDP, not to 

mention how the system stimulated growth in the oil industry 

and increased oil revenues for the provincial treasury and 

created thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan families. 

 

Stifling the oil industry to become a cash cow for the NDP 

would be disastrous, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for families, for 

small businesses, and for all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I used to be a bulk fuel dealer and I know where 

the large oil companies react and how they react to increased 

taxes.  They vote, Mr. Speaker, with their feet and either shut 

down all exploration or leave for greener pastures.  The ones 

left behind are the small producers.  And what happens to 

them, Mr. Speaker? They go bankrupt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, NDP members have promised increased oil 

royalties to fund everything from education to the farm safety 

net programs.  This proves once again their lack of 

understanding of our province's economy, and that the NDP is 

still the same old NDP . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

member from Riversdale says, I'm not a socialist; I'm new; I'm 

clean; I'm different; I'm a good guy.  But he's still a socialist. 

 

The same NDP, Mr. Speaker, that drove the oil industry into 

Alberta in the '70s, and they're sitting right across there doing it 

all again, Mr. Speaker.  The same old NDP that made up 

figures to make good TV.  Do you remember that?  Yes, and 

they're right there.  They're right there. 

 

The member from Riversdale who scoffed, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, at a document bearing my name last year, had each of 

the NDP promises costed out by bureaucrats.  He has to answer 

a few of those questions, Mr. Speaker, questions like where's 

the money going to come from to fund these promises?  Waste 

and mismanagement is what he said.  That's what he said.  All 

of this money's going to come. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when you have about 70 to 80 per cent of 

your income in fixed costs, it's pretty hard to find this kind of 

money in waste and mismanagement. 

 

Does the member from Riversdale intend to keep the NDP 

promises that he made to the people of Saskatchewan?  That's a 

question he'll have to answer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it may have been easy.  It may have been easy for 

the member to ignore the figures a year ago and even the 

updated version just two months ago, but now it's time for him 

to lay out for all of us to see what his intentions are. 

 

And I challenge the member from Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, to 

do just that -- stand up today and let the people know if his 

word is any good.  Can the people trust 

him? Can he trust his colleagues? 

 

Mr. Speaker, but I won't hold my breath while he answers that 

question because I do value my health.  But I assure the people 

of Saskatchewan that I eventually will get to the bottom of 

these questions.  These questions will have to be answered.  

And I will do the best I can to wring the answers out of that 

member from Riversdale. 

 

Sooner or later the member from Riversdale is going to have to 

let us know what we can expect from him.  Will he live up to 

his promises; will he live up to his word?  The people of 

Saskatchewan voted him in because they believed him.  Now 

we want him to fulfil those promises. 

 

And judging from the last two months, the next five years will 

be filled with plenty of those broken promises, trying to lay the 

blame, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on myself and my colleagues.  

Well the opposition NDP, they done plenty of finger pointing 

when they were in opposition, Mr. Speaker -- many times, 

shame, shame. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, things have changed.  Things have changed, 

Mr. Speaker.  The member from Riversdale and the member 

from Regina Dewdney can no longer make up imaginary 

figures to scare the people of Saskatchewan.  The member from 

Regina Dewdney has hopefully learned a lesson about using 

fantasy figures in a very real world. 

 

The funny-figure man, Mr. Speaker, should have been taught a 

lesson in his bloated budget that he released a few days ago.  

And I would like to read an article, Mr. Speaker, which 

pertains to this.  This explains my point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It comes from the Leader-Post. It was dated November 23, 

1991.  And I quote Mr. Johnstone's article.  And I'm going to 

read this into the record, Mr. Speaker, in its entirety.  I think it 

has to be done. 

 

And the headline: "NDP's bloated deficit projection may have 

backfired" -- Bruce Johnstone. 

 

And I will read this: 

 

 Deficit projections, like loaded guns, have the tendency to go 

off in the wrong direction. 

 

 And the new NDP government may have shot itself in the 

foot with the loaded deficit projection it came out with 

recently. 

 

 You'll recall last week that Finance Minister Ed Tchorzewski 

solemnly announced that the deficit for 1991-92 will be 

$960.3 million, rather than the $265 million projected in the 

spring budget. 

 

 "I am sure that the people of Saskatchewan will be as 

shocked as I was to discover the extent of the deficit, and 

how badly they had been misled," said Tchorzewski with a 

straight face. 

 

 Yet (to go on, Mr. Speaker) Honest Ed knew that the 

$960.3-million deficit is as phoney as a three-dollar bill.  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

 (Maybe that's what the Department of Finance used in their 

calculations, since the projected deficit is three times higher 

than the budgeted one.) 

 

 The department's own number for the deficit was actually 

$888.3 million, since the government claims it will save 72 

million in cuts and efficiency measures, neatly offsetting the 

lost revenue from the repeal of the provincial sales tax (PST).  

(Coincidental.) 

 

 But even that number has been bloated out of proportion by 

some fiscal fiddling. 

 

 For example, the $888.3-million deficit contains 19 million 

for Fair Share Saskatchewan.  (Now) wait a minute?  I 

thought the government axed Fair Share back on November 

6, a full week before the release of Tchorzewski's deficit 

projections. 

 

 Since when does any government calculate the cost of 

non-existent programs and tack them onto the deficit?  Same 

thing with the $25-million "overexpenditure" in the mortgage 

protection plan. 

 

 Last March, the former government announced the threshold 

for the program's interest rate subsidy would be increased to 

thirteen and three-quarter per cent from the ten and 

three-quarter per cent, substantially reducing the cost of the 

program.  Of course the budget was never passed, and the 

program died with it. 

 

 Is the NDP government going to keep the program as is, or 

do what the Tories planned to do and save $25 million?  

Would any sane government leave it at ten and three-quarter 

per cent?  Of course, the big-ticket item is the $250-million 

dividend from the Crown Investments Corp. (CIC), the 

government's holding company.  By forgoing the dividend 

from CIC, the projected deficit basically doubles in size. 

 

 Yet no explanation was offered as to where the $250-million 

dividend went or why it wasn't taken. 

 

 These few examples show the NDP was more interested in 

tarnishing the Tories' already tarnished reputation for fiscal 

management than providing an accurate picture of the deficit.  

Of course, people outside the province -- who don't know the 

subtle nuances of political debate in these parts -- might 

mistake Tchorzewski's bogus budget deficit for the real 

McCoy. 

 

 Unfortunately, that appears to be exactly what happened. 

 

 Accustomed to believing the words of provincial finance 

ministers as gospel, the good, but gullible, folks at the 

Dominion Bond Rating Service in Toronto took Tchorzewski 

at his word. 

 They duly noted the new deficit figure of $888.3 million -- 

and lowered the province's credit rating (immediately). 

 

 And they lowered it from "A low" to "BBB high."  That puts 

Saskatchewan bonds in a class ahead of Newfoundland and 

Bob Campeau junk bonds and behind every other province in 

the country. 

 

 (Now) Downgrading our bonds to "BBB" could mean we'll 

have to offer a higher rate of interest to compensate investors 

for the higher risk involved.  It also means fewer investors 

are willing to buy our bonds, meaning still higher rates.  At 

this rate, the province will soon be borrowing . . . (on the) 

Money Mart. 

 

 Naturally, Tchorzewski and the other top Finance 

Department mandarins weren't around to comment on the 

credit rating downgrade.  They were in New York, talking to 

the good folks at Moody's, Standard and Poors and other U.S. 

bond rating agencies. 

 

 No doubt they were telling the New York money men that 

things really aren't as bad as they made them out to be. 

 

 So the moral of the story is (Mr. Deputy Speaker): Don't play 

around with deficit figures, because somebody may actually 

believe them.  And if that somebody is a national bond rating 

agency, you're really in trouble. 

 

 In other words, don't play with a loaded gun.  You might 

shoot yourself in the foot, or, as one Regina stock broker 

remarked, another part of the male anatomy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is a direct quote.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Johnstone 

did not take the member from Regina Dewdney's bloated 

budget figures at face value, but instead chose to prove what 

many members on this side of the House already knew -- that 

the NDP are playing games. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's quite easy to leave $250 million as a retained 

earnings until their budget and then pull it out and use it . . . 

and pull it out and say, hey look what we done.  Yes, look what 

we've done.  Look what we've done. 

 

Well the people don't believe it.  Mr. Blackstone don't believe 

it.  And anyone who watches will not believe that stuff. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, games like this are destructive to the people of the 

province and to our future as well -- games that destroy the 

credibility of our economic plans as evidenced in a second 

article, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have another article, and I 

will read the headlines.  And this is in the Leader-Post, 

Thursday, November 28, 1991: "Sask. is put on credit watch." 

  



208 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

 Downgrading will cost an additional $2.5 million on the $1 

billion the province plans to borrow this fiscal year.  For the 

second time in less than a week, a major bond rating agency 

has lowered Saskatchewan's credit rating due to the concerns 

over the rising debt and the weak economy. 

 

 The S&P report noted the NDP government has promised to 

balance the budget, but "has yet not defined a clear strategy . 

. ." 

 

Mr. Speaker, they don't have it.  The bond people are nervous, 

down goes our credit rating. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, a credit watch means that it can go lower.  

It can go lower yet at a cost to the Saskatchewan people.  And 

directly as a result of the NDP minister's financed, pretend 

deficit figures, major bond rating agency are lowering our 

credit rating.  And the article I just displayed, Mr. Speaker, 

quotes again -- and this was in the Leader-Post: 

 

 Standard and Poor's Corporation of New York noted the NDP 

government has promised to balance the budget but "has not 

yet defined a clear strategy to achieve this target." 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Got to open the books first. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Open the books.  We would like to open the 

books back about 20 years.  Take a look at Nabu.  Take a look 

at Cablecom.  Yes, yes let's take a look at those. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new bond rating makes Saskatchewan's credit 

the lowest, or second lowest in Canada.  Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan has also been issued a credit watch as I 

mentioned.  And it was just a warning -- just a warning that the 

rating could go down further.  That should be considered quite 

serious over on the other side, but they just have a lot of fun 

over there. 

 

My special critic is having a lot of fun.  He thinks it's not 

serious, Mr. Speaker.  I think it's serious.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

this is dangerous, and I certainly hope the Minister of Finance 

has taken heed of the warning instead of trying to pass the 

buck.  The minister has already tried to lay the blame on the 

fact that one of the main reasons the province won't receive any 

money this year from the Crown Investments Corporation is 

because of a dilution of share value resulting from a Cameco 

share offering. 

 

While claiming to be a Finance minister while standing behind 

such bunk as that, Mr. Speaker, is ridiculous. 

 

The Minister of Finance is acting like a home owner who rents 

the basement suite for $400 a month.  Then the real estate 

market takes a downturn and the value of his house drops by a 

thousand dollars.  The home owner still gets $400 a month for 

rent and the thousand dollars has not left his income.  Even 

though the home owner has not lost a thousand dollars, he 

reports to his spouse that the family is a thousand dollars more 

in debt than they originally anticipated. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney is the 

home owner, and he knows better.  He's playing and 

fiddling with the figures, as was noted by Mr. Johnstone.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that funny figures will come home to roost some 

day. 

 

Dilution of the Cameco shares does not remove one penny 

from the accounts of Crown corporations, and the Finance 

minister has to know that.  If he doesn't know that, indeed then 

I should be your Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like the Finance minister to stand up 

today and show the people of the province and this Assembly 

where a hundred million dollars actually left the coffers of the 

government.  Stand up and open the books.  Show us that.  Mr. 

Speaker, tell the people what happened to the over $250 

million from CIC dividends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's not just the bond-rating agency that 

questioned the credibility of the NDP.  I have many questions 

to ask the NDP too, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, because 

of the open, honest government over there, I expect the 

answers.  And I intend to get the answers for the people I 

represent in Wilkie and for the rest of the people of the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are no longer in opposition where they 

can skirt responsibility.  Along with government comes 

responsibility.  This side of the House is here to see that the 

NDP are kept in check.  And I'm looking forward, Mr. Speaker, 

to becoming more familiar with the new people and 

organizations that will help me do my job. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's good.  You can quit now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- It's your turn . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

As a member of Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, my new 

responsibilities include seniors, the Women's Secretariat, and 

Highways and Transportation. 

 

Great accomplishments have been made over the past nine 

years in all of these areas, Mr. Speaker, and I will be watching 

the NDP very closely to ensure that things like moratoriums the 

NDP placed on special home care beds are really and truly a 

thing of the past.  I will look out for the best interests of 

seniors, the Women's Secretariat, and the people involved with 

the Highways and Transportation department. 

 

And if the NDP continue not acting in the best interest of the 

people, they will hear from me, Mr. Speaker, and they will hear 

very often.  And the NDP and myself, Mr. Speaker, have had a 

history of not necessarily agreeing all the time.  And I am sure, 

I am sure the next few years will probably see a . . . I see you're 

smiling, Mr. Speaker.  You're remembering a few of the boards 

we sit on.  That's fine; I accept that. 

 

I accept, Mr. Speaker, disagreements in this House.  The 

people in this House are all strong-minded people or they 

wouldn't be here.  There are also people who have their people 

at home respect their opinions or they wouldn't be here.  So it 

doesn't bother me to disagree; it doesn't bother me to have 

someone disagree with me. 
 

What does bother me, Mr. Speaker, is when the other people 

don't listen to your argument.  And I find that very,  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

very hard to accept.  There are people on that side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, have closed their mind to anything but 

their own rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been a pleasure for me to address the 

Speech from the Throne and I thank you for the attention you 

seem to have given to my remarks.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

first of all, Mr. Speaker, to join with other members to 

congratulate you on assuming the Speaker of the legislature.  I 

may only say that during the past week I was out in the area 

where you grew up, and I want to say that the reports and the 

reception to that appointment have been very, very positive. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I want also to take this opportunity to 

congratulate all of the new members that have been elected to 

the Assembly.  And I want to congratulate them on their 

speeches that they have given to the Assembly on the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge my constituency 

which I have represented now for some 16 years.  This is the 

fifth occasion, consecutive occasion, that the people of Quill 

Lakes have placed their trust in me to represent them, and 

indeed I'm very pleased to carry forward that trust. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- As a veteran member of this legislature -- and 

may I say effective -- I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, just a 

few comments in respect to the Assembly.  I think it's 

important that if we start talking about changes to the rules of 

the Assembly that we would be very careful in analysing what 

changes we're going to propose. 

 

We may want to say that this is an inefficient legislature.  Some 

may want to say that there's a waste of time.  Some may say 

there's repetition in speeches.  But I want to say to you that we 

have to guard against the principle the Tories have propounded 

across this nation, that if a government is elected they can do 

what they want and the people can vote them out after four 

years, or five years in the case of the Tories.  And I say we 

have to guard and protect the people's rights as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I want to demonstrate how the rules of the 

past of this Assembly served the people well.  And some may 

have said they were inefficient or we were hijacking the 

legislature.  Let me give you a couple examples. 

 

I recall that the premier of the province at that time was on the 

kick on privatization.  And the Tories across this province in 

their own literature indicated to the people of Saskatchewan 

that they would never privatize a public utility.  That was in 

their 

documents.  That was in their literature.  And they said they 

would never privatize.  And that was the word of the premier in 

this House. 

 

And what happened?  As soon as they came back and got 

re-elected, they decided they were going to privatize 

SaskPower by splitting Power and Energy.  And I'll tell you the 

rules of the House provided that you could in fact ring the 

bells.  And I'll tell you we rang the bells and the people of 

Saskatchewan responded, and I'll tell you we stopped them in 

their tracks on the privatization of SaskEnergy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I want to say that when the Tories also put 

in the PST, we in opposition and the public of Saskatchewan 

opposed the PST.  And they came and they expressed that, and 

they provided to the opposition a hundred and twenty thousand 

petitioners' names opposing that PST. 

 

And we used the rules of the House and we may have been 

wasting time, but I'll tell you the voice of the people of 

Saskatchewan was heard under those rules. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- And I don't want a legislature that suddenly 

becomes committees and hidden rules.  I want as much in this 

legislature an open debate as possible.  And I don't like 

limitations on speeches either because I think there are 

opportunities when you have to challenge and you have to 

protect the rights of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I'll tell you, I would rather have us here either 

ringing the bells and organizing with the public to oppose 

oppressive actions of governments, or filing petitions, than to 

have merely the press give the interpretation of what's 

happening in politics.  I would rather have it over television 

where the people of Saskatchewan can view it. 

 

And so when we start talking about waste and inefficiency, 

remember this.  It is not a waste if the people of Saskatchewan 

and their voice can be heard, and the rules provide for that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I was somewhat amazed when on the first 

occasion of the opening of the legislature here, or the first day 

on the debate on the Speech from the Throne, the Leader of the 

Opposition came roaring into the legislature.  I guess he still 

thought he was the premier.  Here's a man that has been 

decimated, totally decimated his party in his leadership, comes 

roaring into the legislature -- I guess he still thinks he's the 

premier -- repeating the same old worn out slogan that he's 

been using in the campaign, yelling out, what's the plan?  No 

plan. 

 

Well I want to tell you, members of the legislature, that in fact 

we have a plan, and I'm going to deal a little bit with what the 

plan is. 

  



210 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

First of all we're going to clean up the financial mess that we 

inherited from the Tories across the way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- This is probably the most disgraceful 

performance financially of any province in the history of this 

nation -- the legacy that is left behind by the members opposite, 

the official opposition.  Five point eight billion -- somewhere in 

that neighbourhood, once we count up the overrun this year -- 

$5.8 billion on the backs of future generations. 

 

Deferred taxation, and the member for Wilkie starts standing 

up and starts talking about a lower credit rating.  Well I wonder 

whether it just happened in the last 32 or 35 days.  No. No, I'll 

tell you, the credit rating is down because of the record of the 

Tories opposite, and that's the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- We have a financial mess because as we look, 

as we look at the exorbitant salaries that were paid to political 

hacks -- $423,000 to a George Hill, and the list goes on -- 

exorbitant severance packages to the friends of the Tories; 

patronage, waste, mismanagement, scandals, and improper 

privatizations.  That's our first priority.  Just as if you took over 

almost a bankrupt company, you have to clean up the mess, the 

financial mess of mismanagement in the past.  And that 

financial mess rests right at the feet of the former premier, the 

member from Estevan. 

 

And the second thing we're going to do, and do it rapidly, is to 

determine where all the money went.  As I went around during 

this campaign, person after person kept saying to me, where 

has all that money gone?  They got a deficit of 5.8 billion, and 

with the Crowns, something like 14 or $16 billion.  And we're 

going to find that out.  They say, where could that money have 

gone?  We're taxed to death.  They've sold off the assets, we 

got deficit, we got cut in services.  Where's the money gone?  

That's what the people of Saskatchewan want. 

 

And I'll tell you, that's a plan -- plan to clean up the financial 

mess, to determine how bad an operation you ran across the 

way.  That's a plan.  And the people of Saskatchewan deserve 

to know how bad you were, and they're going to find out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- You know, what a wonderful legacy that you've 

left behind.  You took over a province with the lowest per 

capita debt in all of Canada; you took over a province with 

investment rate second to none in Canada.  And today what do 

we have?  We have the largest per capita debt in the nation.  

We have the highest personal income tax in Canada.  We have 

the second highest rate of poverty incidence other than 

Newfoundland.  That's the legacy of your management -- rather 

your mismanagement.  And we're going to change that. 

And I want to say that why are we surprised by this mess that 

we have inherited?  To me it's not particularly startling because 

of the basic philosophy of the right-wing Tory government. 

 

I've read a book by Kevin Phillips who's a Republican.  And he 

used to work for Richard Nixon, and he wrote a book called 

The Politics of Rich and Poor. And in that book he analyses 

the Reaganomics or the Reagan years and he traces the history 

of what happened in the United States. 

 

And he said, in the U.S., almost like clockwork, every 50 years 

there is a right-wing movement in the United States: 1870, 

1920, and the latter part of the 1970s when Jimmy Carter was 

president of the United States.  Every 50 years, he analyses, 

there is unbridled capitalism has hit United States.  And at that 

time government is made out to be the enemy of the people, 

perceived to be the hindrance to the economic development.  

Social programs are destroyed. 

 

And under the Ronald Reagan years what happened most of all 

was the massive transfer of wealth to those who were already 

wealthy.  A very small percentage of people in the United 

States control over 50, 60 per cent of all the wealth in United 

States. 

 

And what has happened?  Debt in United States has climbed as 

it has climbed here in Saskatchewan.  The U.S.A. prior to 

Reagan was the greatest creditor nation in the world.  Today it's 

the largest debtor nation in the world.  And worst of all, what 

he says, maybe there is no longer a possibility of the fulfilment 

of the American dream.  Because he said . . . worst of all, what 

happened during this transfer of wealth to those who already 

had it, he says that there was very little development took place 

in North America, very little development.  Mostly what it was 

primarily was a paper transfer.  The merger of corporations and 

the consolidation of . . . massing of greater, greater wealth in 

the hands of fewer and fewer.  And as a consequence, what has 

happened is that the middle class has been eroded. 

 

And that's what happened in Saskatchewan.  We saw much of 

the same things carrying on.  We saw the deregulations and we 

saw the privatization.  We saw the Free Trade Agreement, and 

we have seen a shift of wealth from the people to certain 

privileged groups. 

 

I look at the potash industry.  And here we have brought in an 

American to run the public corporation.  Absolutely totally 

opposed to the concept of public ownership of a potash 

corporation.  How could you possibly expect that individual to 

run it in the interest of making it a working corporation? 

 

Better still, let it run down.  Sell it when it's losing and then 

control it.  And today Chuck Childers walked away with the 

most advanced technology and the best minds anywhere in the 

world.  And as chief executive officer of a privatized 

corporation, he is instantly in control of the potash in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know the Weyerhaeuser story; we know the Cargill -- $64 

million in cash, $305 million in guarantee.  We 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

know the hand-out to Pocklington.  And so what we have had 

here is a corporate welfare while the people of Saskatchewan 

have had to struggle and to be abused with the ever increasing 

debt placed upon their backs and their children.  This is the 

legacy of the Tory government -- of waste, hand-outs, 

mismanagement, scandals. 

 

You know during the campaign a business man said this to me 

and I don't think it could ever be said better.  He said, I don't 

want only to defeat the Tories.  He said, I want to defeat them 

so bad that I never ever in my lifetime have to deal with them 

again as a ruling party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Those were the comments of a business man 

and those are the comments of a lot of people across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to turn also to another area that I think the former 

government betrayed, and that is agriculture.  And what I can't 

understand is how the premier of this . . . former premier of this 

province would have the unadulterated gall to walk into this 

House proposing an emergency debate after we're in office for 

32 days and he had been there for nine and a half years saying 

to the people of Saskatchewan: we've got a crisis in agriculture; 

what are you going to do? 

 

Well I'll tell you what his record has done.  I'll tell you the state 

of agriculture that you people have left it in.  If you look at the 

revenues, realized net income in 1991 was projected at $378 

million.  And that was a small increase over the net revenue in 

1990, which was $226 million.  The 1990 and 1991 realized net 

incomes are substantially below the 1985-89 level of $786.4 

million. 

 

The point I'm making here is that the revenues to the 

agricultural community in 1990 was substantially one of the 

lowest in the last decade.  And did the then premier of this 

province, did he go to Ottawa to seek further assistance?  No, 

sir.  But about 10 days beforehand, after the farmers extracted 

it, he went down for a pizza and a Coke and came back and 

said, I got $800 million. 

 

Look at the situation that exists in agriculture.  Foreclosure 

notices to Saskatchewan farmers have increased from 477 in 

'86 to 1,359 in 1990.  Bankruptcy filings have increased from 

41 to 189 in the same period.  Farm Debt Review has handled 

6,142 applications from 1986.  And foreclosures, voluntary 

assignment, agricultural lenders have acquired 2.1 million acres 

of land during the Tory regime.  When Mr. Agriculture was in 

charge, that's what happened. 

 

I say that they let the farmers down.  He hasn't defended 

agriculture.  He's allowed the federal government to off-load 

the responsibility.  He allowed them to cut out the two-price 

wheat system of some $280 million.  He allowed the cash 

advance to be cut.  We had to force him to bring it back in.  

Crop insurance was shifted to the province, and no debt 

restructuring. 

 

And if you look at the debt, Mr. Speaker, you find that 

one-third 

of the farmers have 71 per cent of the total debt; one-third have 

about 27 per cent; and the top one-third have about 2 per cent.  

And for years this premier, the former premier, so-called 

agricultural economist, couldn't figure that out that he needed 

to address the debt restructuring. 

 

And I want to commend the government and the Premier of the 

province for his efforts and his trek to Ottawa, and the Minister 

of Agriculture, and all of the concerned farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I think the biggest disappointment was that the 

former premier, the former minister of Agriculture -- Mr. 

Agriculture himself -- saw fit not to go.  But then with what he 

has really done for agriculture, better that he stay at home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan.  We're 

going to clean up the financial mess.  We're going to open the 

books to see what kind of deals were transacted which were not 

in the interest of the people.  And I'll tell you we're going to set 

up a government to deal with the priorities facing the people of 

this province. 

 

We're going to introduce new management, new fiscal 

responsibility.  We're going to open the books.  We're going to 

cut waste and mismanagement.  We're going to generate 

revenues and give opportunities to our young people to get 

jobs.  And I'll tell you we're going to address as best as possible 

the magnitude of the agricultural crisis. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that the people of 

Saskatchewan have a long and honourable tradition of working 

together for their mutual advantage.  They've created a great 

province through individual initiative and mutual co-operation.  

They have rejected the politics, the Tory politics of misery, the 

Tory politics of confrontation, the Tory politics of exploitation.  

They reject the dismal Tory prescription for the future. 

 

They're looking once again to the New Democratic Party, a 

party that measures success in the terms of the sensitivity to the 

rights and the needs of others, and most particularly to those 

who are most in need.  They are once more looking for a new 

deal for all, a fair deal for all.  They're looking to the New 

Democratic Party to provide a new decade of progress, a new 

dimension of purpose.  A New Democratic Party government 

will provide that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we accept this 

responsibility.  And I am confident that, working with people 

of this province, that we can rebuild the province from the 

ruins left behind by the former Tory government, and we can 

build a province to give security and opportunity to all our 

people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to enter this debate, to join with my 

colleagues here to support the initial plans of rebuilding 

Saskatchewan, as outlined in the throne  



212 Saskatchewan Hansard December 10, 1991 

speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

The Speaker: -- The debate will continue on the main motion. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to sincerely congratulate you on your election 

to the Chair.  I'm convinced that your impartiality and your 

fairness and your honesty will be a distinct contribution to the 

reordering of the proceedings of this Legislative Assembly and 

to the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan in the long run. 

 

I want to say that it strikes me as very fitting that this 

legislature convenes in these dying days of December and of 

the new year, as we pass through the very darkest and some of 

the very shortest days of the year, that we should have the 

legislature sitting, so to speak, in a historic twilight zone in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The election has been held; an old government has died.  A 

new government has come to life, much as a new day comes to 

life.  It strikes me that we're very much about 5 or 10 minutes 

after midnight in the life of the province in this transition 

between the governments. 

 

We live with the legacy of darkness and despair across the 

province, but there also is the promise of some light on the 

horizon.  But we still have a long wait until dawn breaks and 

there is an awful lot of darkness and despair to be dealt with 

these next days.  And I'm not going to deal with that despair 

and that darkness. 

 

The record of the previous government is only too well known 

-- the destruction of our social programs, the senseless 

give-away of public assets, the mountain of debt that we've 

inherited, the exorbitant, excessive patronage, the trampling on 

democratic rights.  These are symptomatic of a government 

that had gone wild and out of control and lost contact with the 

public and its own priorities.  And all of us here in 

Saskatchewan are going to have to pay for that, and are going 

to have to live with the consequences and the darkness for 

some time to come. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, while we must live with darkness and 

despair, much as people live with darkness in the opening 

hours of a new day, we also have the promise of some hope 

and some light.  And I'd like to focus on those dimensions, or 

those aspects, of our experience right now. 

 

And first and foremost, I want to say that there is new hope, 

and there is a new day for Saskatchewan people.  And this new 

day and this new hope is based on a very simple and ancient 

and sacred promise or principle, namely that we are our brother 

or our sister's keeper.  And that's why . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- I want to send the signal to the people of 

Saskatchewan that this government is going to address 

the realities of poverty and hunger.  It's one of the things our 

colleague and my friend, Peter Prebble, worked for and 

laboured for while he was in opposition.  And while he's not 

here as part of this Legislative Assembly, his efforts are going 

to live on and his colleagues that are here are going to see that 

poverty and hunger are eliminated from Saskatchewan and will 

never scourge families and children again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- The first responsibility that any government 

owes its people is to feed them.  And we're going to do exactly 

that. 

 

And the cousins of poverty and hunger, racism and sexism, are 

going to be tackled by this government as well; the crying need 

to eliminate racial injustices across the province.  The 

injustices suffered by Indian and Metis people for years and 

years are going to be dealt with. 

 

We're going to eliminate discrimination either on the basis of 

sexual orientation or physical or mental handicaps.  We're 

going to stand with the victims of violence and abuse and 

support interval houses for them.  And we're going to help 

those who are struggling with alcoholism and criminal records 

and other personal problems in their lives.  Why?  Because we 

believe we are our brother and our sister's keeper.  It's that 

simple. 

 

And a second principle I want to talk about briefly, that gives 

hope to the people of the province, is the principle that there's 

enough still left here in Saskatchewan, and there's enough still 

left in the government of Saskatchewan, for everyone's need 

but not for their greed.  And that's why we're going to fight the 

privatization of medicare that we've seen these last number of 

years.  The imposition of user fees, subtly the erosion of public 

funding for medical care, the dental care program, the 

prescription drug program, symptomatic of the selfish ethic of 

the strong, is going to give way to a new ethic of caring and 

sharing.  And we're going to fight for a return to universal, 

publicly funded, accessible medicare across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And we send signals to the people of 

Saskatchewan then that in spite of the enormous financial 

problems that we face, there's enough for everyone's need but 

not for everyone's greed when it comes to something like 

health care.  And we're going to support some of the poorest of 

the poor.  I'm going to work to see that this government funds 

agencies like the Saskatchewan Council for International 

Co-operation, that works with people who are hungering across 

the world. 

 

And there's a third principle to bring hope to the darkness and 

despair surrounding us, and that is that this government is 

going to serve and protect the public interest.  We're going to 

review the deals that have been made in secret by the previous 

government with the Financial Review Commission and give 

the people an accounting for what's happened, to protect the 

public interest.  We're going to fight for a fair tax system, 

  



December 10, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

eliminating the provincial GST (goods and services tax) in this 

session of the legislature.  We're going to take a first step with 

that toward a reform of the tax system, to reworking the unfair 

flat tax that has to go along the way of the flat earth society. 

 

And we're going to make a commitment to the education of our 

children, and I want to say a commitment to the accessibility of 

higher education in the province at the University of 

Saskatchewan, which is in my constituency. 

 

A fourth principle that's going to guide this government -- and 

it's going to see the dawning of a new day in Saskatchewan -- is 

that we are going to start to pay the bills and forget the frills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- I want to say to the people of Saskatchewan 

that we are going to cut to the bone government advertising and 

travel.  We're going to cut out things like free booze at 

government functions and end the freebies and the special 

favours, even for MLAs (members of the Legislative 

Assembly).  And the people of Saskatchewan ought to know 

that at the beginning of this first Legislative Assembly there 

was no traditional opening of the legislative . . . party or dinner 

for MLAs and their families.  And I think that's a tribute to a 

new style of leadership that we're seeing from the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And I want to say to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they are going to see a lot more leadership 

from this Premier and this government with respect to paying 

the bills and forgetting the frills.  And we invite public 

suggestions in this regard, incidentally. 

 

A fifth principle, just briefly, that will guide us to the new day 

here in Saskatchewan is that we are going to act with an eye to 

future generations and what we owe them and not just what we 

can take for ourselves.  I think . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- The implications of this are very clear in 

terms of the environment, for anybody who thinks about it.  

We're going to act on the conservation ethic that was proposed 

or announced in our election campaign.  We're going to nurture 

and protect our environment as stewards.  And I personally am 

going to work to see that there is no CANDU 3 reactor in this 

province or slowpoke reactor on the University of 

Saskatchewan campus. 

 

Closer to home, when we look with an eye to the future and 

future generations and what we owe them, when it comes to an 

issue like abortion, this government just isn't going to posture 

on the issue with a plebiscite wanting an expression of public 

opinion.  We're going to tackle the issue of abortion head on 

and we're going to work to eliminate or obviate the need for 

abortion across Saskatchewan and support our young 

people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- We're going to support our young people with 

contraceptive education and by providing day care for single 

parents in schools.  That single mothers should have to give up 

their education or their child is not good enough, and we're 

going to see that they can continue their education and their 

pregnancies to term, and do something about the scourge of 

abortion in this province. 

 

And finally, a sixth and final principle that will lead us to the 

new day that's going to dawn in Saskatchewan amidst the 

darkness, is this government is going to commit itself to 

democratic reform, that true democratic reform. 

 

And we see this in fact in legislation that has been introduced 

already in this legislative session.  That any constituency like 

Indian Head-Wolseley here in Saskatchewan should go one 

year, nine months, and two days without representation is 

reprehensible.  And we are legislating for the fixed provision of 

by-elections within six months.  We're going to rejuvenate 

legislative committees, and we're going to legislate in this 

session a return to the option of the ward system across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, opens with 

reference to the need to restore public confidence and trust in 

elected office, to restore that confidence and trust in the context 

of the values that built this province.  And I want to close on 

that note and say that across the province, in spite of the deep 

cynicism that gnaws at the public about politicians and their 

political institutions and the political process, we need a 

renewal of the values that built this province and that were 

abandoned the last nine years. 

 

And I want to say that I intend in the coming months, as I have 

opportunity both here in the legislature and outside, to advance 

some of the values and some of the priorities that I've just 

talked about. 

 

And in conclusion I want to thank the people of Saskatoon 

Sutherland for putting their confidence and trust in me by 

re-electing me, and thank my wife and family for the sacrifices 

they have made to allow public service to take place.  Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 

 


