




















































Hansard: December 19, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 379 

 December 19, 1991 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 

 

Clause 2 (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I've listened to the minister 

deal with the concerns that he had about the amendment, and I 

recognize that there are those and . . . I will however say that I 

still think that there needs to be some discretion on this. 

 

If I point out to you and to the Assembly that there . . . in my 

constituency alone and yours probably too there's . . . If each of 

the parties that were running there spends $35,000, that's  

$105,000.  Then the party has some that they can spend, and I 

don't know how much that is.  That's not only a drain for the 

public purse, it's a drain for the candidates who are 

campaigning, if they're going to have an election one month 

preceding a month of a general election.  And that's the reason 

why we raised the amendment, to try and prevent that.  I guess 

we'll have to just see how it works out. 

 

If you're not going to do it that way we will . . . we know when 

you're ahead.  However, we really strongly believe that's a 

function of what we think is necessary.  As I said earlier on, we 

agree with the intent of the Bill but I definitely see that there is 

going to be some very difficult provisions there, having to deal 

with it in the context as you suggested.  And therefore we will 

move on. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 

and Certain Consequential and Other Amendments to 

Other Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman.  I realize that this is the 

identical Bill, I believe, to the one that the former government 

introduced.  I would ask the minister though, if they have 

engaged in any consultations regarding this Bill before its 

reintroduction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, my colleague the 

Minister of Finance is going to be carrying this Bill through 

committee, and he now being in his seat, I'll refer the question 

to him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, my officials are just 

coming in, so can we wait for them, please? 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  I've introduced 

Bill Jones earlier today.  Gerry Kraus, the Provincial 

Comptroller over here, and Susan Amrud is remaining from the 

consideration of the last Bill. 
 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I realize that this is identical to 

the Bill that was introduced by the former government.  I'm 

wondering if you have engaged in any consultations before 

reintroducing this particular Bill. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- From the departmental point of 

view there has not been consultation.  I have met with the 

Provincial Auditor, as I did with everybody who reports to me 

or I report to, when I became Minister of Finance.  He did ask 

if this was going to be reintroduced, and I indicated that it 

would be, because we did believe it was important to have this 

clear statement about how annual reports should be introduced, 

and that's why it's here. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister might 

give us the list of documents that the Bill would apply to in its 

current form, an example of various types of documents that 

this would apply to. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, if the member would look at 

the Bill, they are all listed in the Bill itself. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- I've, Mr. Chairman, read the Bill.  I just 

wondered if the minister had and would give us a list of the 

similar type things. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes I would, because I have the 

Bill before me. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask the 

minister for a copy of the form that would be required by 

Treasury Board as is referred to throughout the Bill and its 

references to financial statements. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am informed that the form that is 

used is according to accepted accounting practices; that it 

comes to the Treasury Board and the Treasury Board disposes 

of it.  I do not believe there's a specific form that you can table.  

There's not a specific form that you can table, but it's 

something that happens through the process of the Treasury 

Board. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister has 

thought about giving the . . . with the introduction of this Bill, 

about changing the various forms that are out there and coming 

up with one type of form that would be similar for all areas of 

government then. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, it's a good idea that the 

member . . . I agree with the member that would be desirable, 

and I think there's certainly an effort that's going to be made to 

try to standardize it. 
 

Really what happens now is that the Provincial Auditor has a 

big role to play in determining the kind of form that it needs to 

be presented in, and different organizations have different 

forms.  But as long as they meet the requirement of the 

Provincial Auditor or the standards of accounting 

  



380 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

practices, then it's been acceptable.  But to the extent that it can 

be standardized, I'd be quite prepared to take a look at that and 

as best as possible try to develop that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister has 

consulted with the Provincial Auditor and other officers of the 

Assembly regarding the tabling of documents when the 

Assembly is not sitting.  Have you specifically discussed that 

with them, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I have not, but I have actually given 

it some thought.  I think there is some desire in looking at that 

possibility of making some documents that one can under the 

rules of the House available even when the House is not sitting. 

 

In fact I have thought it might be a useful thing for the Public 

Accounts Committee to do, to study that and make some 

recommendations, because I think that's one of the major roles 

of the Public Accounts Committee.  And I'd be quite prepared 

to refer to the Public Accounts Committee for consideration. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the opposition 

has a number of amendments which we will be proposing on 

this Bill and I believe the Clerk of the Assembly has provided 

them to the minister.  They basically do look to the 

accountability process in government, certainly the question of 

the role of the auditor, the nature of the tabled documents when 

they're tabled, whether the session is in or it's out. 

 

I think these are all fundamental tools that are available to 

certainly members of the opposition, and to all members, to 

make sure that government makes good on its commitment to 

open government and be acceptable to reasonable and 

thoughtful amendments.  And certainly, sir, as we go through 

this particular process I will be proposing these particular 

amendments. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to: 

 

 Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by deleting clause (a) and 

substituting the following: 

 

 "(a) "document" means: 

 

  (i) a document that is required by an Act to be laid before 

the Assembly; or 

 

  (ii) a document or information ordered by a Committee of 

the Assembly by the Chairman of a Committee of 

the Assembly; 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, and to the minister, 

the amendment changes the definition of a document for the 

purposes of the Bill to include documents and information that 

might be ordered by a vote of a committee in the Assembly or a 

request of a chairman of a committee, fully realizing that in this 

case all committees that possibly could order this would indeed 

have a majority of government members on them. 

Therefore I think any such order would come by a unanimous 

vote of a committee.  It wouldn't simply be a partisan exercise.  

And particularly I think this would empower the Public 

Accounts Committee and the auditor, because often we do see 

the instance where documents become available and aren't 

tabled because the Assembly isn't in session. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Well, Mr. Chairman, I 

know, and I'm interested in how we can improve the system, 

but I don't think I can support this amendment.  For example, 

this amendment would allow the chairman of a committee to 

take it upon him or herself to do certain things.  I don't think 

that that is appropriate.  I think that's why we have a committee 

system.  The committee should have a role, and it should make 

that kind of a decision. 

 

And I think that there may be other implications here that this 

Assembly may not be aware of.  As I said earlier, these kinds 

of questions, I think we would be well advised to take some 

time to have the Public Accounts Committee consider so we 

could hear, for example, from the Provincial Auditor and other 

such officials of the Assembly and have their input before we 

approve such an amendment. 

 

I'm not rejecting it outright, but I think for the purposes of our 

consideration here today, unless we have done a thorough 

study by the Public Accounts Committee, I think we would be 

well advised not to proceed with that amendment at this time. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well certainly, Mr. Chairman, I have no 

problem with the Public Accounts Committee being more 

empowered to look at these things.  I think the minister fully 

realizes that the chairman, whether he be a government 

member or opposition member, usually . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Chairperson. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Chairperson . . . only expresses the will of the 

committee.  I don't know of a situation in government today 

where the chairman would take it upon him or herself to order 

such a document.  I would be prepared to say to the minister, if 

you wish to, delete the specific on chairman, if you will, but at 

least allow the committee of the legislature to have the power 

that is suggested within the amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now I think, Mr. Chairman . . . I 

don't want to be difficult on this because I don't want to reject 

the idea outright.  But I think the appropriate way would be for 

having a committee of the legislature consider these kinds of 

very important changes so that we could hear from the people 

who can advise on their implications.  There may be 

implications in that that I don't fully understand. 

 

As a minister responsible, I don't want to agree to something 

that I haven't had the best advice I can have on it.  So I still 

maintain that I think the responsible thing here for us would be 

not to proceed with that amendment, leave the Bill as it is, let 

the Public Accounts Committee 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 381 

consider it, and then if the Public Accounts Committee after 

due consideration makes a recommendation, we can deal with 

it. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to: 

 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by deleting the phrase 

"90 days" where it appears in subsection (1) and substituting 

the phrase: "60 days". 

 

Mr. Chairman, if I might just speak to the amendment for a 

moment. 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, you have spent a fair amount of time 

yourself on the treasury benches of government; I spent a 

modest amount of time there myself.  In most cases, 60 days is 

not an unusual period of time in order to prepare a document. 

 

One other thing in our particular legislature also in my mind 

makes sense on this particular amendment, is that we generally 

have about a 70-day sitting time in this particular legislature.  

Members of this House are paid for 70 days.  And although we 

do go over that and we do go under that, we often come very 

close to that 70-day area.  And I think it would be reasonable, 

given that a lot of documents are tabled during the sitting of the 

legislature that 60 days would ensure that most documents 

would be into the hands of the various committees and 

chairmen during that time frame. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I have to rely on the advice of the 

people who deal with this year after year, and they advise that 

to get the statements audited, to get everything prepared, to get 

everything printed, 90 days is not an unreasonable amount of 

time.  Sixty days, or as another member proposes 30 days, may 

in many cases mean that if the Bill requires it to be done, we 

will be in contravention of what the Bill will say.  Ninety days 

is not unreasonable; it's the way it's done in all jurisdictions.  

And I think that because of the difficulties with that kind of a 

time frame -- once again, I don't want to be unco-operative -- 

but really I don't think that that's an amendment that's 

appropriate here. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister . . . Mr. Chairman through 

you to the minister, I fully realize that that is the normal 

practice in other jurisdictions.  I don't know if other 

jurisdictions are working around this normal 70-day type of 

legislative session that we are.  Well I know it's, Mr. Minister, 

close to the norm.  Sometimes it's less, sometimes it's more. 

 

In order for those documents to be tabled normally during that 

time frame, 90 days doesn't allow that.  Mr. Minister, most of 

the documents that we're talking about, the 

person responsible knows a full year in advance that they must 

have that particular document prepared.  So if you know a full 

year in advance whether it's 90 days or 60 days, they're still 

going to have it done, because most of these people know that 

they're a matter of course. 

 

And it just would seem that the 60 days would fit closer to how 

this particular government operates than would 90.  And it 

would also enhance the ability, I think, of members to view 

reports perhaps when they're more relevant. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure that that applies 

because all the reports for 1990-1991 will be prepared within 

90 days of the time when the people who are responsible have 

to get them prepared; so that means when the House sits next in 

the spring of the year. 

 

There is also provision that they have to be tabled within 15 

days of when the House is sitting again.  So the government is 

bound, and ministers are bound, to make those reports available 

within 15 days, and therefore the argument of the 70 days 

really is not a relevant argument. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

The Chair: -- There is another amendment for Clause 3. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman: 

 

 Amend section 3 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words "period for which the document is prepared" 

where they appear in subsection (1) the following: 

 

 or within 30 days of the date the document was ordered by a 

Committee or a Chairman of a Committee. 

 

The Chair: -- The amendment is before us.  Would the 

member from Thunder Creek like to speak to the amendment? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- This second amendment, Mr. Chairman, 

includes provision for a more expedient tabling of the 

information required by the committee of the Assembly.  If 

tabling is not reasonably expeditious, then the committee well 

may have already reported to the Assembly and possibly the 

Assembly would not be sitting. 

 

It, I think, is reasonable in the context of the way that things are 

done here that 30 days would normally cover most situations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The only point I want to make, Mr. 

Chairman, is that this amendment is consequential to the 

previous amendment which was just defeated.  And because 

that was defeated, this one -- I'm not going to suggest is out of 

order -- we should dispose with it.  But because it's 

consequential, it really has no relevancy and so the House 

should dispose of it in the same way. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would only say, Mr. Chairman, to the 

minister that I think that the second amendment can stand alone 

on its own merits.  It doesn't necessarily have to have clause 1 

or the first amendment agreed to.  It's 

  



382 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

something that I believe would make this type of information 

more relevant to the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just to try to be helpful here, Mr. 

Chairman.  As I commented earlier on the first amendment, 

this is another matter which I think is really quite relevant to 

the Public Accounts Committee.  And although I'm asking, 

because we have not considered all of the implications here, 

that we proceed with the Bill which is a good Bill, but not 

totally reject some of these ideas. 

 

I think we should once again refer this to the Public Accounts 

Committee so that the Public Accounts can give it due 

consideration and get all of the experts who are called to the 

Public Accounts Committee to provide all the information and 

then give the House a recommendation at another time. 

 

Public Accounts Committee will be meeting with the next 

session of the legislature.  It can do that at that time. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to amend 

section 4 of the printed Bill by adding immediately after 

subsection (2) the following: 

 

 (3) If the Assembly is not sitting at such time as a document 

would otherwise be laid before the Assembly pursuant to this 

Act, the presenter shall deliver the document to the Speaker 

of the Assembly, who shall forthwith inform Members the 

document has been delivered and is available to them. 

 

 (4) Where the Speaker receives a document pursuant to 

subsection (3): 

 

  (a) the document shall be deemed to have been laid before 

the Assembly; 

 

  (b) the Speaker shall provide copies of the document to 

any Member Who so requests; and 

 

  (c) the Speaker shall lay the document on the table of the 

Assembly at the earliest opportunity after the 

Assembly resumes sitting. 

 

A little explanation, Mr. Chairman, to the committee.  This 

amendment provides a mechanism for members to obtain 

documents when the House is not sitting.  This has been a 

historic problem not only for members but for those who report 

to the Assembly and by those who rely on information 

contained in tabled documents in order to do their business. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm not 

going to disagree with the member on this one because I have 

for some time had some thoughts on it. 

But once again there may be some other legislative changes 

that have to come along with this in other legislation.  And 

rather than dealing with this in isolation and then having some 

problems created, I again would ask the House to refer this to 

the Public Accounts Committee.  I just assume that the Public 

Accounts Committee will deal with it. 

 

So I'm not objecting to the principle.  It may very well be a 

good principle.  In fact I believe that some other jurisdictions, 

in some reports, actually do this.  So I'm not objecting to it. I'm 

just saying we want to make sure that we cover all of our bases, 

so by simply passing an amendment without knowing all of the 

facts that we need to know, we don't create a greater problem. 

 

So I think we should defeat this thing, unless the member 

wants to withdraw it, and let the Public Accounts Committee 

consider it, consult with the Provincial Auditor so that we can 

have the benefit of his advice, and then deal with it after the 

Public Accounts Committee has done its work on it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the Provincial 

Auditor would look very favourably upon this particular 

amendment.  I know in my short discussions with him over the 

last two weeks pertaining to some matters that are occurring 

today that the auditor would very strongly, I think, recommend 

this. 

 

And, sir, I think before the Public Accounts Committee begins 

on a new round, certainly the pronouncements that your 

government has made to a more open government, one that will 

do things differently, I would think that this would indeed set 

the tone for a new Public Accounts Committee going into the 

next four years.  I agree with you, sir, that some of the other 

amendments that I have been proposed are ones that the Public 

Accounts Committee can discuss and can come back to this 

legislature with a report. 

 

But I think this one is absolutely fundamental to many of the 

arguments that I've heard the member himself make in 

opposition, and certainly the Provincial Auditor has expressed 

many times wishes very similar to this amendment, and I think 

it would serve us well as we began a new session to take this 

on. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I'm not going to argue 

with the member opposite.  Certainly this government is very 

interested in open and accountable government.  This 

government was elected to a large extent on a platform which 

promised to bring open, and accountable, and responsible 

government.  We intend to carry out that commitment which 

we made to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We are interested in having all the members of this Legislative 

Assembly involved in bringing that about.  That's why I 

welcome some of the input that the member opposite has made 

to this process.  But at the same time I think it's important that 

whatever we do in this Assembly, we have to make sure that 

we fully know what the implications will be, so that along with 

open government 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 383 

we make sure that we have effective government.  We make 

sure that we have the appropriate consultation process that 

brings us to some final conclusions.  And that's why I think it's 

important that we refer this to the Public Accounts Committee.  

In fact I will write . . . I intend to write the chairman of the 

Public Accounts Committee, sometime soon, in which I will be 

asking the Public Accounts Committee to consider these things. 

 

But I really do believe that even the legislature, on these kinds 

of very fundamental issues, should not act in isolation from the 

people who we should be consulting in order that we can 

benefit from the advice that they can give us: the Provincial 

Auditor, others the Public Accounts Committee may choose to 

call, and look at what other jurisdictions are doing which I 

think the Public Accounts Committee might do as well. 

 

And so I think we would be well advised to not proceed with 

this amendment but give it an opportunity to be very carefully 

and methodically considered so that when we finally come 

around to some conclusions, we can deal with it appropriately. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't wish to be difficult on 

this particular item, but I think the member knows full well . . . 

I could ask the minister, for instance, how many times it has 

occurred that a document would have been tabled except that 

the Assembly was not sitting.  And then in many cases we have 

had months elapse between the time it would have been tabled 

and the sitting of the Assembly when it is actually tabled. 

 

And I think, Mr. Minister, this has gone through a long period 

of time over many different stripes of political party and 

government. 

 

So I would say to you that -- and I heard this criticism so many 

times from members of your party when I sat on the 

government benches -- that the only reason you wouldn't accept 

an amendment such as this is if it was interfering with some 

political motive or timing that might be going on that you . . . 

And I heard that remark cast many times by members of the 

now government when they were on the Public Accounts 

Committee, saying that you have political motives, Mr. 

Minister, for not tabling this particular document and we can't 

get at it. 

 

And I can only say to you, sir, after listening to the speeches 

and the rhetoric of members of your party over the last six and 

a half years that I've been in this Assembly, where you hit on 

this point time and time and time again, that you would now 

not be prepared at the beginning of a new government, a new 

session, a new Public Accounts Committee where you hold the 

majority, sir, 7:3, that you would not want to start off on, shall 

we say, the right foot, and get on with the job of providing 

public access to the documents; that we don't wait until the 

Assembly is in session, that these documents be available to all 

members, all interested parties, and that they be able to proceed 

with the business of scrutinizing government. 

 

And I find it odd, sir, that after the speeches infinitum -- and I 

mean infinitum -- that I heard on this particular document, I 

thought when someone brought forward such an amendment 

that you would almost be falling out 

of your seat in order to approve it because it was, in your very 

own words, put into legislation that you so long desired -- 

legislation brought forward by the former government.  But 

certainly these amendments, I think, are a very prudent 

beginning where you are beginning, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not taking issue 

here with the principle.  I'm taking issue here with the timing.  

And I want to respond to the member's comments by giving 

him a little comment on history.  I know what has happened in 

this Legislative Assembly for some time.  I'm one of those 

who's been privileged to be a member of this House now for 

almost 18 years.  And I want the member to remember that the 

only time, at least in my memory that I've been a member of 

this House, in which there has been difficulty with late 

reporting of accounts, of reports, annual reports and other 

reports of the legislature, that in that period of time the only 

time there was a problem with late reporting here was in the 

last nine and a half years. 

 

It never was the case with the former Liberal government 

before 1971; it never was the case with the New Democratic 

Party government in the 1970s; it became a serious problem in 

the 1980s.  When I tabled the Public Accounts here a couple of 

days ago, I reminded the House, Mr. Speaker, that the last time 

the Public Accounts were tabled in the month of December 

were in 1991. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 1981. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- 1981.  And then of course the next 

time was in 1991.  And it so happened that I happened to have 

been the Minister of Finance at that time so I tabled them, but it 

could have been somebody else.  So the problem is one of 

commitment and the problem is one of showing responsibility 

to the legislature. 

 

But that doesn't mean, Mr. Chairman, that what the member is 

proposing here is not a good principle.  I accept it.  I'm not 

arguing with the principle.  I'm just simply saying that another 

thing we should be avoiding in governments in the future is a 

slapstick approach to bringing about policy and bringing about 

legislation. 

 

I am advising the House that I think it would be far better 

advised to take an amendment like this, make sure it gets all of 

the consideration it needs in a committee of the legislature with 

all of the people who have to do the reporting present so that 

they can give the members the benefit of their advice, and then 

deal with it in the legislature when it is reported from the 

Public Accounts Committee. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister makes my 

point.  In 1982 the legislature didn't sit till late summer and 

early fall of that particular year.  Most of the documents that 

were prepared for the 1981-82 year could have been tabled that 

year before the session came in under this particular 

amendment. 

 

And the same circumstance may occur again where you would 

have a budget brought in, a speech, prorogation because of an 

election call, or whatever.  You would then 

  



384 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

not necessarily have the House called for a number of months 

because the government didn't have time to prepare a budget or 

whatever have you. 

 

And therefore this particular amendment would be in place.  

Those documents would be tabled on time.  And all of those 

interested parties that would need to deal with them could deal 

with them without the minister perhaps backsliding on his 

resolve as time wears on and things become more difficult 

being Finance minister, for instance. 

 

So I think those tendencies are not above all stripes of 

government.  This particular amendment, I would even be so 

bold to say if the minister is having a problem with a member 

of the opposition proposing it, perhaps he could have one of his 

own members, who was so vociferous on the topic in another 

day, stand up and make the amendment. I'd gladly second it 

and we could get on with life. 

 

But obviously the minister wants to shove it off to the side into 

the Public Accounts Committee.  He does have the majority 

there.  And they are, from what I've seen so far, good and 

honourable members and I'm sure will take the minister at his 

word that it will be dealt with expeditiously. 

 

But the temptation as time goes on may be to talk and talk and 

talk and not have action.  And I just say to the minister again, 

the opportunity for him to start with a very, very clean slate as 

far as the public is concerned, is right before him in this 

legislature tonight.  As I said before, I've heard it over and over 

and over again.  And it was very easy drafting the amendment 

because I simply listened to the verbatim for the last five years 

and it was there.  And how this minister can now say that he 

wants more time is absolutely beyond me, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just a final comment, Mr. 

Chairman.  In order to comfort the member opposite with his 

new aura of responsibility I can assure him here tonight that all 

of the reports, annual reports and other reports that the 

government has to present to the legislature, will be presented 

in a timely way.  He need not be concerned.  I'll give him that 

commitment.  I will personally supervise to make sure that 

that's done, while the Public Accounts Committee considers 

this proposal, which I have not objected to. 

 

I have accepted the principle, but in the mean time, while that 

is being responsibly considered by a committee of this 

legislature, I can assure the member opposite that all annual 

reports will be provided to the Assembly on time. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:40 p.m. until 7:44 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd Haverstock  

 

Martens 

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Keeping 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Upshall Carlson 

Koenker Renaud 

Lorje Langford 

Lyons Jess 

Pringle  

-- 39 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

The Chair: -- The member for Thunder Creek has moved the 

same amendment to clauses 6, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 

21, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, and 50 of the Bill, 

and they can be dealt with simultaneously at this time if the 

member from Thunder Creek would like to move the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to: 

 

 Amend the printed Bill in the sections as set out above by 

deleting the words "to be in the form required by the 

Treasury Board" where they appear therein and substituting 

the words "to be in the form required by the Provincial 

Auditor". 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This series of amendments, Mr. 

Chairman, enhances the accountability of tabled documents, 

and it also enhances the role of the Provincial Auditor.  If 

financial statements are tabled in the form required by the 

Provincial Auditor, the Assembly can have a much stronger 

assurance that appropriate and full information is being 

provided.  And the Provincial Auditor can better exercise 

oversight on behalf of the Assembly. 

 

This amendment provides the opportunity to find out just how 

serious the government is about opening the books.  And I 

think failure to support this amendment, Mr. Chairman, would 

represent a repudiation of the government's stated policy of 

open government and open books. 

 

I think it could be, in fact, a statement that perhaps the 

Provincial Auditor's forms aren't quite as good as what 

Treasury Board's are.  And I think it would just show a  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

whole lot of confidence by this new government in the 

Provincial Auditor, if they took this amendment and changed 

the way that their financial situations are reported. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this is another 

example of where I think there needs to be some careful 

consideration of this before we can proceed in the committee.  

And here's the important point to keep in mind. 

 

It is important that the auditor can consider all of the 

accounting of the government, all of the expenditures of the 

government, completely independent from the government.  

That is a principle that we have to always defend and protect in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

What we're talking about with this amendment is two separate 

functions.  One function is the function of government.  It is 

the function of the government and the Executive Council and 

the officials that work with the Executive Council to prepare 

the appropriate forms, to provide the appropriate reports, and 

do so in consultation with the auditor. 

 

It is the function of the auditor to report and comment on 

whether the government, the Executive Council, has followed 

the appropriate procedures as prescribed in those forms and 

those requirements. 

 

And so there are two separate functions which this amendment 

combines into one and, Mr. Chairman, therefore prejudices to 

some degree the auditor's independence. 

 

I think therefore, Mr. Speaker, as far as I am able to conclude, 

having just seen this amendment, we may very well be putting 

in a principle that is not an appropriate or a correct principle. 

 

Once again, in the Public Accounts Committee, if the Public 

Accounts Committee wishes to consider this, I think that's the 

appropriate place to do it, because I for one would think it's 

extremely important that we have the opinion of the auditor on 

this kind of an amendment before we proceed with it in order 

that we do not stand in the way of the auditor being able to 

independently carry out his functions. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe the minister wasn't 

listening to closely.  I said, to be in the form required by the 

Provincial Auditor. 

 

And I think one of the things that we often find in the public 

today is a criticism of the way government works, that 

government has not kept up the same pace of reform that other 

institutions have. 

 

And one of the things that's always amazing to people outside 

of government is the amount of paper, for instance the paper 

flowing, and all of the different forms and red tape and the 

various things that occur that many people in the public find 

quite baffling, actually when they're studying documents and 

that type of thing, because lots of times there's a heavy dose of 

legality attached to them. 

the language is very difficult to read at times, and many of the 

reforms that I know that people are talking about today, the 

Reform Party is very big on these days.  And almost everyone 

of whatever political stripe have talked about streamlining, 

about making public documents easier to read.  And certainly if 

all of the things that we're talking about here, Mr. Chairman, 

were in a form that would be easier for the auditor to deal with, 

that members of the public would find easier to deal with . . . In 

other words, as the Minister himself said, that he would be 

looking at making these things more comprehensive in the 

future; that we didn't have documents ad infinitum. 

 

And certainly my recollection of some of the Treasury Board 

items that I dealt with, they are not a particularly easy 

document to read.  I'm sure they're . . . could be streamlined, if 

you will. 

 

All I'm asking for the minister is that this type of commitment 

would once again show that his new government is on the 

move; that we're looking at change.  That we are moving off 

into the next century and that we simply won't stand pat with 

the way that things were.  That we're not going to refer it off to 

a committee and we're going to talk it over and over and over 

and over again. 

 

And I thought that this whole series of amendments, Mr. 

Chairman, on a topic that has been so near and dear to the 

hearts of most members in the New Democratic caucus, at least 

the older ones, would have engendered that type of new fervour 

that has been talked about so often.  And instead I find in each 

of these cases that the Minister wants to refer and talk and . . . 

The very things that he criticized the former government for on 

an almost daily basis. 

 

And I truly do, Mr. Chairman, find this an extraordinary 

performance, that out of six amendments, all taken almost from 

the lips of former members of the opposition, and that we now 

are simply going to study them to death.  I find it rather 

strange. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not to be argumentative here, Mr. 

Speaker, but I think probably the most extraordinary 

performance is the member opposite who sat on the treasury 

benches while a government was on this side of the House 

which totally ignored all . . . totally ignored out of all the 

protocols, all of the requirements for providing a regular 

reporting to the legislature, never reported on orders for return 

for as much as two years at a time. 

 

I repeat again, Mr. Chairman, that on this particular motion . . . 

This one I even questioned whether in principle it is a good 

motion.  Because what the member does not seem to 

understand is that the auditor and the government are two 

separate, and should be, two separate entities.  It is not the role 

of the auditor to be a watch-dog.  It is the role of the auditor to 

make sure that all of the prescriptions that are put in place, 

under which government must operate and under which reports 

must be made, are being followed.  If they are not being 

followed, the Provincial Auditor then is required to report those 

things to this legislature. 

 

And if members would look at the Public Accounts for the year 

1990-91, you will find that the auditor has many  



386 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

statements in there in which he says that certain procedures 

have not been followed.  That is what the Provincial Auditor is 

required to do.  Our government will be looking at those.  And 

we will be looking at how the appropriate corrections could be 

made to make sure that that is all done appropriately in the 

future. 

 

What this amendment does is lumps together the function of 

government and the function of the Provincial Auditor, which 

is quite inappropriate.  That is not the way it's supposed to 

work.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that this amendment 

is a bad one.  And I believe that this Assembly should reject it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't agree with the 

minister on this particular item.  But that is fair in the light of 

some of the comments that he's made. 

 

But this minister has made the statement to the legislature that 

he personally is going to take a hand in making sure that these 

particular amendments are properly dealt with at the Public 

Accounts Committee.  And this minister says that he has no 

political agenda to deal with.  And yet, Mr. Chairman, I find it 

very difficult to take the minister at his word.  Because this is 

the minister that is in charge of the Gass Commission.  And 

we've heard in this Assembly many times, Mr. Chairman, the 

deficiencies with that particular body. 

 

I mean, a government that is committed to all of these things . . 

. The minister has stood here for the last hour and told us how 

open and above-board everything is going to be.  And yet one 

of the very first acts that that minister undertakes is a secret 

tribunal staffed with NDP (New Democratic Party) partisans by 

and large, behind closed doors, no access to the public, no 

access to the media. And I'm sure that the report will see a 

certain amount of political scrutiny by the minister before the 

public ever sees it.  Because at no point in that particular 

process has the public ever had a chance to verify the votes of 

the members of the commission, how they dealt with certain 

items as they did their deliberations -- all behind closed doors. 

 

And now this is the minister that when some amendments are 

brought forward on a Bill that he has fundamentally agreed 

with for a great deal of time -- amendments that simply 

enhance the process that I've heard about -- and he says, I'll 

take a personal interest in it, I'll make sure that it is guided 

through the process so that all of these things happen.  And yet 

his first credible move in this province as a minister of the 

Crown is to set up a tribunal which in fact is everything but 

what we're here discussing tonight. 

 

It breaks every last rule that we are talking about here tonight.  

And that minister knows full well what I say is true.  Otherwise 

he would not have designed his hand-picked commission in the 

way that he has. 

 

So it gives me a great deal of difficulty, Mr. Chairman, to stand 

here tonight and accept the minister saying that he is going to 

make sure that these things happen.  Because he has given me 

no evidence that that is the case. 

 

And I think if the minister, as I said, had handled things a little 

bit differently at the beginning, I could have relied 

upon him.  I am going to be very surprised, Mr. Chairman, if in 

fact these amendments all see the light of day very soon.  I'm 

sure there will be a great deal of discussion about them. 

 

I just say I want the minister to be on record tonight as saying 

that it will get done, and that he in the future will not structure 

similar commissions as the Gass tribunal to do things behind 

closed doors in this province in a very partisan way. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I want to reiterate 

some of the points that are made by the member from Thunder 

Creek on the matter of the selective amnesia by the member 

from Regina Dewdney, I believe, the Minister of Finance, on 

the scope that he uses in telling us here that the auditor should 

be exclusive to himself as apart from the executive branch of 

government as possible.  And I find that rather striking. 

 

(2000) 

 

As the member from Thunder Creek has pointed out, I find it 

striking on a number of occasions.  He has set down and he has 

defended in this House the Gass Commission which he wants 

the auditor appointed to in holding their meetings in secret.  

And he doesn't even want to have the auditor become involved 

in a form, printing matter that would be as separate and apart 

from the executive branch of government as you could possibly 

get. 

 

Printing a form isn't going to make the difference between the 

kinds of things that would happen here.  And yet you take, sir, 

the liberty in making political appointments and then turning 

around and twisting the auditor right into it.  And I think that 

that's wrong.  I've always thought that that's wrong.  And you 

are promoting that kind of an attitude with your Gass 

Commission. 

 

And your tribunal is number one, political.  It is exclusive to 

itself.  It's going to vote in secret.  You haven't yet presented to 

this Assembly the guide-lines on conflict of interest that you 

said that they were going to sign.  And, Mr. Chairman, I think 

that that's ridiculous.  I really think it is. 

 

You won't let the media in.  You won't let the public in.  You 

won't let any of that in because you said that you were going to 

do it on your own merit, you were going to open the books.  

But, Mr. Chairman, what they did is closing.  This amendment 

speaks to opening the books, allowing the demonstration of an 

open government, and what we have is just shutting the door.  

And I think, Mr. Chairman, it's wrong. 

 

The Minister of Finance talked about the independence of each 

arm of government, the auditor, the executive branch, and the 

legislative branch.  Well I agree with that.  Then why does he, 

on the other hand, turn around and turn the auditor into the 

system again, in the Gass Commission?  He wants him there to 

scrutinize from a distance so that it appears to the public to be 

the right thing to do.  And, Mr. Chairman, from the very first 

day I heard it as a part of a political process in a campaign and 

before a campaign, it turned inside me the wrong way.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

An Hon. Member: -- Because you're afraid of what it'll say.  

You've got something to hide. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't have anything to hide at 

all.  And, Mr. Speaker -- Mr. Chairman -- you watch what this 

committee is going to dig up.  We've just talked about the Bill 

that gives exclusive power to this Assembly and to the 

legislative . . . or to the executive branch to bring . . . to have 

defamation of character and all of that.  Get that apart.  Allow 

the . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I will ask the member to come to 

order.  I've listened to the member for Morse's remarks, and I'll 

ask the member to tie his remarks more closely to the 

amendment before us.  The amendment is really quite specific, 

and I remind him that it refers to converting the words "to be in 

the form required by Treasury Board," to the words "to be in 

the form required by the Provincial Auditor."  I'll ask the 

member to make his remarks and tie them to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to respond 

to the Minister of Finance's observation about the role of the 

auditor and dealing with the auditor, and moving the auditor to 

be separate from the executive branch of government.  You 

mentioned it, and you want it separate.  So do I.  And, Mr. 

Chairman, the Minister of Finance said that, and I agree with 

that.  But what I find in his conduct in this Assembly is that it's 

opposite to that.  And I was pointing to the minister that he 

should get his tribunal the same way as he expects the auditor 

to be separate, as we point out in this amendment, and as the 

amendment focuses his attention on streamlining government, 

not allowing it to become a part of the executive branch nor of 

the legislative branch, but as an independent agent of the 

government . . . or of the Assembly.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that that is exactly what we need to have. 

 

I don't intend to belabour this point, Mr. Chairman.  However I 

really believe that you are stretching a long bow by putting that 

connection together with this kind of an amendment. 

 

And as the member for Thunder Creek said, we're going to 

hold you to bringing this forward, possibly in involvement by 

the Public Accounts Committee and we'll be asking it more 

than once in order for you to define what you committed 

yourself to in this Assembly three or four times already in 

relating to this process.  And we will be asking you, sir, to 

provide that. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 6 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 7 to 52 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I move this Bill be now read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 

and Certain Consequential and Other Amendments to 

Other Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be 

now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2015) 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the Assembly 

will recall, yesterday I was just about to conclude my opening 

remarks on this subject and was   



388 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

about to begin the main text of my speech when the clock ran 

out.  So if you will indulge me a few minutes we will continue 

to demonstrate to you the reason why we are not in support of 

the motion for this supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has become apparent to us that as an opposition 

we will not have the normal opportunity in a budget process to 

question ministers on the expenditures of money from the 

taxpayers in this province for the next while.  And we need to 

have an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to find out ways of planting 

into the ministers' minds a sense of responsibility of where 

they're going to spend our moneys and what they're going to do 

with it, as well as to determine what the future of our province 

holds for our different people in different areas of private 

endeavour, as well as in areas of public responsibility. 

 

Now I refer in the area of public responsibility to things like 

our hospital systems.  We've had no opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

in not being able to question ministers on the money supply 

and the allocations of money to find out whether or not 

accusations, or implications maybe would be the better word, 

that have been made in the past few months by various media 

people supposedly reporting on the attitudes of the members of 

the NDP . . . that perhaps they would balance their budgets by 

closing rural hospitals and perhaps closing special care homes 

and that sort of thing. 

 

We've had various suggestions made that our hospitals would 

perhaps become more or less day-care centres where they 

might keep a nurse on staff and be able to put a bandage on 

something like a cut-off leg or something like that, and then 

have the patient shipped on to a bigger hospital in Saskatoon or 

Regina.  And of course if the leg wasn't already gone, they 

could probably still have time to amputate it to stop the 

gangrene.  And that would be the best anybody would hope for. 

 

That's the kind of fear we have, Mr. Speaker, in not being able 

to ask the ministers the questions about what kind of moneys 

are going to be made available in this document to keep our 

hospitals open for the rest of this year. 

 

We've also got that concern about our special care homes.  

We've got Maple Creek, for example, has a nice hospital.  We 

don't know if there's money enough to run that facility for the 

winter.  We don't know if Gull Lake will have its funding to 

run its hospital.  And then we've got a nice one over in Leader.  

We just don't know if it's going to be funded or not. 

 

And we've got to have an opportunity to ask of the ministers 

the questions whether this funding has been placed into place 

or whether we're looking at a situation where we're going to 

have down-loading on the municipalities again, and people on 

the land that are hard strapped for cash right now being asked 

in the future for more money from taxes to pay for these kinds 

of services. 

 

And the other suggestion that's being made here is that perhaps 

the moneys will be in place, but we don't know because we 

haven't had an opportunity to talk to the ministers and they 

haven't had a chance through this process to justify what they're 

doing.  And so we have to find out, Mr. Speaker, whether or 

not the plan to close 

facilities is the plan or if they plan on doing something about 

trying to keep them open. 

 

Education is another area that concerns us very deeply.  

Through the electoral process, and for the past six months that 

I'm aware of, or, I guess, probably even more now, we went 

around to different school units that asked us to come in, and 

they wanted to discuss with us, as candidates for the election, 

how we felt about the funding for education. 

 

The NDP candidates came in and, without any exceptions that 

I'm aware of, they all said they wanted to go to a 60:40 formula 

of splitting taxation between the provincial government and the 

property owners and business people in our communities. 

 

And we see that right now the funding doesn't appear to come 

anywhere close to that kind of a split.  And we're wondering if 

we can ask the ministers in charge whether or not that 60:49 

split is going to be achieved, so that there will be some relief 

on the taxpayers out in the country and people in business.  

Because they certainly can't keep up with paying a larger and 

larger percentage of tax load for education if we're going to, in 

fact, find these businesses and these farms surviving through 

these critical times. 

 

We need to know whether school boards are going to have to 

plan for shortages because they have to borrow a lot of money 

to keep going.  I know, for example, that one school unit 

borrows in excess of $2 million a year.  That's a lot of money 

and a lot of interest to be paid. 

 

If this split is to take place and if it's written into the new 

budgeting process that some of this money would be in place, 

then those folks out there could breathe a little easier, and they 

could see their way clear not to have to borrow quite so much 

money.  It would be a big help to them all. 

 

One of the problems that we have, Mr. Speaker, is that the 

NDP government is on its way to making history.  When the 

NDP succeed in passing their financial motion, they will be the 

first government in the history of Saskatchewan to succeed in, 

one, suspending all of the rules and procedures of the 

Assembly in an attempt to obtain supply without 

accountability; number two, refusing to place a budget before 

the Assembly, effectively suspending the province's 

constitution; and number three, refusing to table Estimates to 

avoid scrutinizing en masse firings of political hirings. 

 

The NDP would be the first government ever to allow an entire 

year to elapse without passing a budget in this legislature.  We 

in opposition are willing to co-operate and forgo the traditional 

budget debate of five days.  We are not opposed to passing 

interim supply for spending. 

 

What we insist on is the right to question the NDP ministers on 

where and how they are spending taxpayers' money.  We 

believe very strongly that these points are of concern to the 

people of Saskatchewan. And it is with great regret that I am 

forced to debate this motion.  It strips me of my rights as an 

elected member of this Assembly and of my freedom of 

speech. 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I fervently oppose this motion, and 

I encourage all of you to take a second look at it and to oppose 

it as well.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to say a few things about this motion.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

join this debate with some unhappy memories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember that when I sat on the other 

side of the House, I participated in what was genuine budget 

debates.  And in debate after debate, Mr. Speaker, the NDP 

criticized the government for not spending enough on 

municipal revenue sharing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we were not spending enough on hospitals; we 

were not spending enough on education; we were not spending 

enough on highways; and we were not spending enough on 

anything, according to the opposition of the day.  Mr. Speaker, 

you will remember -- you will remember, Mr. Speaker -- I said 

in my speeches then, and to the NDP, Mr. Speaker, I said, if 

you think you have a better way then present your own version 

of the budget of this House.  I said that.  I invited them to 

present a budget and then they refused, Mr. Speaker.  So I 

presented a budget for them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, here we are on this motion.  And I guess 

you know what it's all about.  The NDP are now the 

government and they still do not present a budget to the 

Assembly.  They haven't changed one bit, Mr. Speaker.  They 

have never wanted to present their alternatives.  And they have 

never wanted to take responsibility. 

 

And this motion, Mr. Speaker, is a try by them to avoid the 

responsibility as government.  The government is so cowardly 

that it is actually suspending the constitution of the province 

just to avoid presenting a budget to this Assembly. 

 

Why did the Minister of Finance not come to the opposition 

and say to them, I don't have time for a major budget.  I can't 

get it ready.  He didn't feel, Mr. Speaker, that he had to because 

he had such a large majority over there.  He didn't feel he had 

to consult us at all. 

 

Let me read you some portions, Mr. Speaker, of a newspaper 

column in the Leader-Post by Dale Eisler on December 18, 

1991.  And I want your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, because I 

believe it's appropriate to the debate we have here tonight. 

 

It starts up. . .it's in the Leader-Post on Wednesday, December 

18.  The headline says, "Mop-up may take longer". 

 

 The sign on the wall in the press gallery at the legislature just 

about says it all.  It reads: "No man's life, liberty or property 

are safe while the legislature is in session." 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to read.  I quote 

again: 

Instead of a budget, Finance Minister Ed Tchorzewski has 

tabled what is being called a 1991-92 financial report. 

 

That's this document here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 In essence it shows how much has been spent to this point 

and sets out the NDP's spending plans for the final quarter of 

the fiscal year, which ends March 31, 1992.  For the most 

part, the spending closely approximates what the Tories had 

set out in their doomed budget of last April. 

 

 The government argues it is too late for it to bring in an 

amended budget and go through the process of legislative 

review of the spending Estimates for the final quarter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't think that's so.  And I quote further: 

 

 Rather it wants to have final quarter spending as set out in the 

financial report approved by the legislature through an 

appropriations bill. 

 

 But the Tories are refusing to co-operate.  They say if the 

NDP gets its way, it will mark the first time in Saskatchewan 

history that a budget was not presented and approved by the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't like that over here.  We think it should 

be done.  We think there was time, and I'll carry on a little 

further, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 There is no good reason for a budget not being introduced.  

Essentially one exists in the financial report and all it takes 

now is the will of the government to put it in budget form. 

 

 This is the first real test of the NDP's commitment to proper 

legislative process, accountability and respect for tradition.  

As it turns out, they are being guided by the very expediency 

they so often condemned. 

 

 But this kind of troubling attitude goes beyond the budget.  It 

is being demonstrated in other questionable ways, including 

some ominous legislation that has been introduced. 

 

 We saw yesterday the bill that empowers the government to 

negate employment contracts inherited from the previous 

government.  Just the name of this bill makes you queasy. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quote further: 

 

 It reads: "An act to provide for the public disclosure of 

Crown employment contracts, to prescribe provisions in 

Crown employment contracts governing payments and 

benefits on termination or expiration of those contracts, to 

void provisions in those contracts respecting those matters 

and to extinguish any right of action and right to 

compensation for any loss or damage 

  



390 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

resulting from the enactment or application of this act." 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that you do not like long quotes but I 

believe this is pertinent to what we are saying on this side of 

the House, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate your indulgence: 

 

 Also introduced yesterday were amendments to the 

Municipal Board Act.  They remove the 10-year tenure for 

board members and will have them serve at the discretion of 

the cabinet. 

 

 The theory behind the lengthy terms was to ensure the 

independence of what is a quasi-judicial body that often 

makes decisions that can be politically sensitive. 

 

 By ending that protection, cabinet will have far greater 

control of the board.  In this case, the NDP's motivation is at 

least partly to get rid of Tory appointments to the board such 

as the former MLA Larry Birkbeck and one-time candidate 

Wilma Staff. 

 

And it concludes by saying: 

 

 The sign on the wall couldn't say it any better. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that column has some harsh criticism of the 

previous government.  And I say to Mr. Eisler, I acknowledge 

that criticism without necessarily endorsing it in whole.  But 

the point is, Mr. Speaker, that the previous government did 

make mistakes.  And the cost of those mistakes lies in the fact 

that I now sit on this side of the House.  And the members of 

the government laugh at the fact, Mr. Speaker.  They laugh 

there. 

 

And we on this side respect the will of the people.  We were 

defeated and we're on this side of the House.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

we are not prepared to give up our responsibility as opposition, 

while I can't in all honesty say that about the people who are 

now sitting in government. 

 

It's a terrible sign of disrespect, Mr. Speaker, when they hoot 

and holler at any member at any time when the opposition 

recognizes the democratic process.  We on this side of the 

House do recognize the democratic process, and we do respect 

democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask where, where is the new 

co-operation that we have asked.  Indeed yourself, sir, in 

conversation have said you would like better co-operation from 

us and from the members from the government.  The 

government have said they are now in a mood for co-operation.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, the previous government was defeated, and 

now the members opposite have the privilege and the 

responsibility of being the government. 

 

And what do we find, Mr. Speaker?  We find in this motion not 

a commitment to democracy, but a destruction of democracy.  

We find in this motion a government unwilling to present a 

budget.  And to accomplish its political agenda it uses the 

excuse that the previous 

government has done all the bad things. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the previous government is just that.  We 

are the previous government, and is not the government today.  

So there can be no excuse for the members saying that they can 

do evil because others did bad things as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is a shameful act.  It is a cowardly act 

and it's a get-even act.  And time will show you, Mr. Speaker, it 

is a get even with Mr. Opposition. 

 

It says the rules of the Legislative Assembly are to be done 

away with.  The constitution itself is to be ignored, simply to 

make life a little easier for the NDP.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what this motion is all about.  The NDP cannot hide from the 

facts, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The document that the Minister of Finance tabled as part of this 

motion consists of a budget, Estimates, and tax changes.  And I 

would quote from the Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister 

of Finance said in the Leader-Post Tuesday, December 17, 

1991 that: 

 

 Although he said the financial report is based on the 

Conservatives' spending plans, there have been major 

revisions to revenue and expenditure levels. 

 

Although he conceded he can't answer all . . . He said he would 

answer all the questions about their spending plans, although 

he conceded he can't answer specific queries about other 

departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we see by his own admission that there has 

been major changes in this document that he presents, we on 

this side of the House suggest that then we should have the 

right to question those changes. 

 

I notice in a quick review, Mr. Speaker, there was two changes 

in the Department of Highways of which is, you know, is part 

of my responsibilities.  And I believe it would be right and fair 

that I have the right to ask the minister what those changes are; 

where do they go.  Why am I not allowed to ask them 

questions?  I might even agree with him.  He doesn't know that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would also maybe like to ask where the 

$300,000 went that was left in the make-work Saskatchewan 

program.  We may agree that that was moved in a proper 

manner and the right place.  But we do believe we have the 

right to ask. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there they are.  There are tax Bills before 

this Assembly and those are the facts, Mr. Speaker.  All the 

elements of a budget are in place today, right now as we sit.  It 

is all there except for the rules. 

 

The Finance minister said, well I might have to speak for two 

minutes as part of the procedure.  Well, Mr. Speaker, with 

respect I say big deal.  It has nothing to do with the minister not 

having time for there not being a budget.  It has everything 

thing to do with the government hiding its cabinet ministers. 

 

Why not talk about it to our leader or to our House 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

Leader.  Why, I ask you, Mr. Speaker?  Why?  Where is the 

communication, where is the co-operation, where is this new 

open and co-operative government?  Why don't they have their 

ministers to be exposed to questions about the minister's own 

actions?  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the only possible excuse, is 

they want to hide them. 

 

But there is one more thing, Mr. Speaker.  The government 

never intended to do anything.  They said they would come in 

and present a throne speech that wasn't a throne speech.  It 

didn't bother them at all.  A throne speech that isn't a throne 

speech.  They admitted it themselves and so that's what we got. 

 

And now they say they can't present a budget unless it's a 

complete, detailed plan for the next full year.  Mr. Speaker, 

that's nonsense.  Why not a mini budget?  It has been done 

before.  Then why not use this document.  Why not use that 

document?  We were prepared to use that document. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, we sent an alternative across 

and we haven't had the courtesy of an answer.  Common 

courtesy would have said they should come back to us and give 

us a yes or a no.  Or they would maybe discuss it with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're not willing to put up with the 

inconvenience of democracy, to abide by the constitution and 

the rules.  No, sir, they will not present a budget, and then they 

will ram it down the opposition's throats.  They say they don't 

have time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote you a thing that used to be said to 

me by my father.  He used to say to me, you don't have time to 

do it right but you have time to do it twice.  And this is what 

we're up against, Mr. Speaker. We don't have time to do it right 

but we're going to have to take time to do it twice.  We on this 

side of the House are going to have to stand here and ask for a 

budget and we're going to have to stand here until we get a 

budget.  So I say to you, sir, we don't have time to do it right 

but we've got time to do it twice. 

 

They say, Mr. Speaker, they don't have time yet we have a 

motion that we move to extended hours.  Why did the 

government move to extended hours, Mr. Speaker?  They did it 

because the Government House Leader believes that he can 

wear down the opposition.  Well maybe he can; we're small in 

numbers, Mr. Speaker, but we do believe in democracy.  We 

believe in the reason we're here.  We're only 10 members and 

we have limited ability to challenge.  But we will challenge this 

government, Mr. Speaker, and the House Leader is counting on 

the fact that we are small in numbers. 

 

He has set the tone for the next four years with this motion, and 

the way he is running the House to try to use force to pass this 

motion. He will not give us the advance notice of the business 

of the Assembly, as he promised, and I even believe he 

promised it publicly on many occasions when he was in 

opposition.  He won't give advance notice because he knows if 

he can keep the business of the Assembly away from us until 

the last few hours before he throws it at us, we do not have a 

chance to challenge the government.  He knows that and he has 

so little regard for this institution that he's using these tactics 

against what everyone knows is a small opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill comes before us with threats of extended 

hours, secrecy on the agenda of the weekly agenda, weekly 

agenda of the House, suspension of the rules of the Assembly, 

and who knows what other clever tricks the government has to 

attack the opposition's ability to do its constitutional duty. 

 

This motion is an attempt by the government to get supply 

without presenting Estimates.  Mr. Speaker, you know, I know, 

we all know that that is not the procedure of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House Leader announced today that he is 

going to use his massive majority to force extended hours and 

he's going to try to wear us down.  Well let's get into it, and 

then see if we can stand up for awhile and deal with this 

attempt to muzzle the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a procedure motion so let us look at the 

procedures that it is overthrowing.  Mr. Speaker, again with 

your indulgence, sir, I want to read the provision from 

Beauchesne's, 5th Edition, on the procedures.  And if you'll 

abide with me a bit, it's small print and I'll have to read maybe 

a bit slowly, sir. 

 

(2045) 

 

In Beauchesne's . . . and as I say with all respect, we use 

Beauchesne's almost as our Bible in this Assembly, and on 

page 168 under "ESTIMATES", 483, (1), it says: 

 

 (1) The Estimates for the year are tabled by the President of 

the Treasury Board submitting them to the House with a 

message from the Governor General.  This message is read 

by the Speaker as the Members of the House of Commons 

stand in their places. 

 

Over on page 169, under the heading "Purpose", 484, it says: 

 

 The purpose of the Estimates is to present to Parliament the 

budgetary and non-budgetary expenditure proposals of the 

Government for the next fiscal year.  These Estimates include 

Votes, which Parliament is asked to approve through the 

Appropriation Acts, as well as other items called statutory 

items, for which the required expenditures have already been 

approved through existing legislation and are included only 

for information purposes.  The proposals with respect to 

items which the House may vote upon are conveyed formally 

in these Estimates in the wording and amount of the Votes 

which, when included in Appropriation Acts, become the 

governing conditions under which the expenditures may be 

made. 

 

Now under the heading "Contents of Estimates" on page 169, 

number 487: 

 

 (1)  The Estimates are limited to setting out only the 

  



392 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

sums which it is calculated will be required in the current 

year, and do not show the value of assets held or the 

liabilities outstanding from the previous financial year or to 

be spread over future years. 

 

 (2) The principle underlying the classification of Estimates is 

that each class of Estimates is designed to correspond to a 

separate programme; as far as possible, connected services 

appear together and all the Estimates for the services 

controlled by a particular department are mainly grouped in 

the same class. 

 

 (3) Each class is divided into a number of Votes, on which 

the standing committees of the House may decide separately.  

Votes are units of appropriation and are usually drawn up on 

a departmental basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate your patience with me but I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, these are pertinent to the arguments we 

are trying to make on this side of the House. 

 

And I will go further.  Under "SUPPLEMENTARY 

ESTIMATES", Mr. Speaker, on page 170, 488, number (1): 

 

 Supplementary Estimates may be presented either: 

 

 (1) for the further grant to an existing service, in addition to 

the sum already appropriated, 

 (2) for a new expenditure on behalf of a newly-enacted 

statute, 

 (3) to meet the cost created by an unexpected emergency, 

 (4) to transfer funds from one Vote to another, or; 

 (5) to extend the purposes of a Vote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we see in this document changes 

made to the original document.  And this clearly indicates that 

that is what Estimates are for -- to examine why those were 

done.  Why were those changes made? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to draw your attention then to number 489, 

"INTERIM SUPPLY". 

 

 Interim Supply provides the Government with money to meet 

its obligations during the time before the main Estimates are 

approved.  Interim Supply is normally requested in the first 

supply period for the first three months of the new fiscal year 

for all departments of government.  In addition, Interim 

Supply is requested for other items in the Estimates 

depending upon the need in each case.  The main Estimates 

and the bill based thereon are not disposed of until the last 

allotted day of the Supply period ending June 30. 

 

Mr. Speaker, number (1) in 490 says: 

 

 The motion to concur in Interim Supply is expressed in 

twelfths of the total Estimate for the year, depending upon 

the number of months for which Interim Supply is needed. 

 

Number (2) says: 

Interim Supply is usually granted on the last day of the 

Supply period ending on March 26. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this whole thing illustrates, in my opinion, the 

very nature of the Bill that we are debating. 

 

Number 494 on page 171 says, and this is under 

"PROCEDURE IN COMMITTEE": 

 

 The whole management of a department may be discussed in 

a general way when the committee is considering the first 

item of the Estimates of that department, which reads as 

follows: "Vote 1 -- Administration"; but the discussion must 

not be extended to any particular item mentioned in the 

Estimates of that department.  If, however, the words 

"General Administration" cover all the expenses to be 

incurred during the year by that department, it is relevant to 

discuss every phase of the department totally or in detail. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, sir, we are being denied 

that right. 

 

I will go on down to 497 on page 171, amendments.  It says . . . 

The heading is "Amendments in Committee."  Mr. Speaker, 

amendments in committee gives us the right to offer 

amendments when it's sitting in committee, and be discussed.  I 

want to read to you what it says. 

 

 (1) Amendments moved for the reduction of a Vote are 

proceeded with under the general rules governing 

amendments.  A proposal to reduce an Estimate is 

expressed in the form, "That (the Estimate) be reduced 

by ($)".  The amendment takes the form of the original 

motion offering, in lieu of the sum thereby proposed, a 

reduced sum for the acceptance of the committee 

(Committee of Finance). 

 

 (2) Rejection of the amendment leaves room for the 

proposal, without limit, of amendments in the same 

form and of ever-varying amounts. 

 

 (3) The reduction must be of a substantial and not trifling 

amount. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go over now to page 173 and I want to 

talk about under the heading "APPROPRIATION BILL" -- 509 

if anyone is interested to be following this because I think it is 

very, very interesting.  This motion that we're talking about, I 

believe, strikes at the very heart, very heart of what I'm talking 

about in Beauchesne's, Mr. Speaker.  Under "THE 

APPROPRIATION BILL", 509 on page 173: 

 

 (1) The concurrence by the House of the Estimates is an 

Order of the House to bring in a bill, known as the 

Appropriation Bill . . . 

 

 (2) Because of the guillotine procedure involved in passing 

the Appropriation Bill, the House has agreed to a 

departure from its regular practice by distributing 

copies of the proposed Appropriation Bill to all 

Members in advance of its actual consideration (which 

we never, 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

never received). 

 

 510.  There is a historical justification for including in a 

supply bill based upon the main Estimates, and even one 

based upon Interim supply, a clause which relates to the 

borrowing power of the Government.  An Appropriation Bill 

based upon supplementary Estimates, however, may not 

include a clause which gives the Government power to 

borrow money. 

 

 511.  Since 1968, some Appropriation Bills have been 

debated at the second reading stage and in a Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I draw your attention, sir.  In Beauchesne's 

it comes back always to Committee of the Whole, when we're 

talking about Estimates and asking for money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are some of the provisions of Estimates in 

the procedures of parliament.  And I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, my 

colleagues will be delivering a great historical lesson to the 

new members of the Assembly over the coming weeks.  There 

is a history of over 500 years that brought us to the important 

constitutional principle that a government must present a 

budget and Estimates must be presented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have in the budget $1.7 million for fighting 

forest fires.  We would like a chance to ask about that.  We 

want to know if those water bombers have got skis on.  We 

want to know how they're going to dig through the ice to get to 

the water.  We want to know what kind of money it's going . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I want to know about the snowblowers. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Snowblowers.  Mr. Speaker, that's our 

fundamental right.  And you, sir, I'm sure if you were in our 

position over here, would not give that up lightly.  I have stood 

in opposition to you, sir, and I have heard you challenge us 

when we were in government to be sure you had your right.  

And that's what we're doing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even the most basic principle of ministerial 

accountability is being destroyed by this motion, Mr. Speaker.  

Ministers shall not, under this motion, be expected to stand in 

the Committee of Finance and answer questions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not here to humiliate any of the new 

members over there.  We are not here to do that. 

 

We have in this proposal, Mr. Speaker, we asked if the Finance 

minister would present a budget.  We suggested that he could 

use this document.  We suggested in this we would be more 

than willing to co-operate, that we would not in any way try to 

hold the Bill up.  We would facilitate the passing of the budget.  

We didn't get the courtesy of a reply, sir. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that hits at the very basic roots of 

democracy.  And make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, these are 

questions that are related to the spending by this 

government and not the previous government.  It is this 

government, Mr. Speaker, that is paying Donald Gass $10,000 

per month.  We didn't pay him that. 

 

It's this government, Mr. Speaker, that's hired at least half a 

dozen political police in the Property Management 

Corporation.  They did that; we didn't do that.  We would like 

to ask him questions about that.  This is the government that is 

spending millions of dollars on outside lawyers to come up 

with these immoral and wrong-headed motions.  It is this 

government that has been spending on its political hacks, 

flacks, and hacks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the right to ask questions, we have the 

right to ask about that spending, and we insist on that right to 

ask those questions.  Mr. Speaker, we will be presenting 

amendments to seek those rights in the coming weeks.  And I 

thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your indulgence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I wish today to speak on a very 

important motion.  The issue at hand are the finances of the 

province of Saskatchewan, more specifically the fact that we 

have no budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am a new member of this House, as are many of 

the current members.  I came in here believing that on some 

issues it would be possible to co-operate; co-operation between 

the governments if the government was also of the spirit. 

 

I am sure something could have been worked out through 

negotiation.  Together we could have worked out a manner.  A 

true budget could have been introduced, debated, and passed -- 

passed without a great deal of time, but within the rules of this 

House, rules which would have allowed the public to ask 

questions and get answers. 

 

Instead what we have is a couple of ministers who want to 

wield a heavy club -- the club of the majority, the tyranny of 

the majority, beating down any opposition.  Why?  Just to play 

their petty political games. 

 

(2100) 

 

Well while I am a new member in this House, I have watched 

the proceedings of this legislature and that of other parliaments 

for many years.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that in all those years 

neither I nor anyone else have ever witnessed a motion like that 

presented by the Minister of Finance on December 16, 1991. 

 

The motion presented by the minister is unprecedented.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I must say that it is a sad day for our democracy 

and our legislature.  It is a sad day when a minister of the 

Crown would attempt to circumvent the constitution and 

practices of this House with such a motion -- a motion to make 

himself, the ministers of the Crown, and his government, above 

the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every jurisdiction presents a budget.  The type of 

motion presented which would suspend the rules was the same 

type of legislation carried out in Germany 

  



394 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

during the 1930s and Uganda during the 1970s.  This 

legislation may be within the NDP government's legal right, 

Mr. Speaker, but it is certainly not constitutional.  It is 

unconstitutional to change the rules, to bend them to suit your 

own actions -- actions which without this new legislation is 

illegal today and illegal in every provincial legislature of this 

country and in every parliament of the Commonwealth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this legislation can be compared to the old 

hard-liners' attempted coup this past August in the Soviet 

Union.  Those renegades attempted to turn back democracy, 

democracy which had been developing under Communism for 

the last six years.  Mr. Speaker, in Russia those coup leaders 

were attempting to disregard the rules that had been developing 

to make the executive and the legislature responsible for their 

actions and to follow the rules set out in their own parliament. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP Government of Saskatchewan, under the 

leadership of the member from Riversdale, is also trying to 

avoid its responsibility and to avoid the rules of this legislature.  

They wish to hide their ministers, and are trying to hide the 

spending practices of their departments.  Why do they wish to 

hide their ministers?  Are they afraid the ministers will 

embarrass the government or themselves? 

 

The ministers and this government should be ashamed of their 

actions.  This province must have a budget or at least the 

opportunity to question the Estimates.  They have already 

tabled a budget document, Mr. Speaker.  Why are we not now 

debating a budget? 

 

The members opposite are the elected government.  A 

government with a 55 to 11 majority.  Ministers of the 

government, your budget would be in no danger of failing to 

pass this House, unless that is, some of your own members -- 

back-benchers, would-be cabinet ministers -- would not even 

support your undemocratic acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are afraid of exposing to the public, the 

media, and to this House their minister's lack of ability, and the 

lack of understanding of the needs of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They are hiding, Mr. Speaker -- hiding ministers and their 

departments from answering questions concerning spending 

Estimates.  If this is not the reason, what is?  Are the members 

trying to hide the number of card-carrying NDPers they have 

hired?  Are they trying to hide the amount they are paying 

these people, these patronage appointments? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I assure you these are just the tip of the iceberg.  

For instance, Mr. Speaker, what will the nearly $2 million 

allocated to fight forest fires in January, February, and March 

be spent on?  Mr. Speaker, I don't recall any forest fires in 

Saskatchewan during January.  What are they going to do?  

Rent snowblowers just in case? 

 

Mr. Speaker, December 16, the day this motion was 

introduced, was the 218th anniversary of the Boston Tea Party.  

The member from Regina North Albert would like to know 

what this tax action was about.  The people of 

Boston were protesting the government taxing them in a 

manner they considered illegal, just as this government is 

proposing to do in Saskatchewan. 

 

The government of the day passed legislation in London 

making it legal to tax the colonies without those same colonies 

being able to question or have any input into those decisions.  

Mr. Speaker, we are witnessing a similar attempt here in this 

legislature -- an attempt to deny the people of Saskatchewan 

and Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition the rights fought for by 

those brave, patriotic democrats. 

 

The NDP government is saying, give us the money and when 

we feel like it some day we will tell you why we needed the 

money and where we spent it.  Mr. Speaker, you know it and I 

know it.  The people of Saskatchewan know it and even the 

members opposite know it; that is simply not good enough. 

 

The government over there came into this House preaching 

open and honest government, government with a spirit of 

co-operation.  Mr. Speaker, I want this House to be open and 

honest.  We on this side of the House want this legislature to be 

open, honest, and co-operative with the best interests of 

Saskatchewan people at heart.  We are prepared to co-operate 

with the government within the framework of the established 

rules and practices of the British parliamentary system and the 

rules and practices of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the practices of the British system have developed 

over generations and centuries stretching back to Magna Carta.  

While the rules evolve and change with time, they are not 

changed to make illegal actions legal.  They are not changed to 

hide the budgetary process, changed to hide the ministers of the 

Crown, or to exempt them from the scrutiny of the loyal 

opposition as they spend the Queen's money, the money of the 

taxpayers of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 21, 1991 there was an election in this 

province and a government was chosen.  The people of 

Saskatchewan elected the government of their choice.  Mr. 

Speaker, they chose the members across the floor to form that 

government.  However, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe the 

choice the people made was to choose a government which 

would execute unconstitutional acts.  The people did not vote 

for a government which would change the rules to make 

unconstitutional acts legal.  The people were not voting for a 

government which would declare itself and its ministers above 

the law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people were voting for a government that 

promised to be open and honest.  But, Mr. Speaker, I am sorry 

to say that is not what the people have received.  The 

Saskatchewan people have a government which operates 

behind closed doors, through committees like the Gass tribunal, 

without an open access to the people, without open access to 

the scrutiny of the public and the media. 

 

Why are the NDP replacing government employees with 

card-carrying NDP members like Jack Messer and Carole 

Bryant?  The members opposite preached often while in 

opposition of the vicious sin of patronage.  Is not the sin as 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

great no matter who performs it? 

 

This government is not only operated behind closed doors by a 

small group, but it also wishes to deny the citizens of this 

province, of this nation, the right to have any wrongs addressed 

before the courts of this land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what will be next?  Confiscation of our land to 

give it to other NDP card carriers?  And if citizens complained, 

the government could just pass a law exempting themselves.  

The NDP government could even make it illegal for us to 

challenge such a law or such an action.  Mr. Speaker, is there 

nothing sacred to the members opposite?  Is there nothing in 

our legislative tradition which the members opposite feel 

bound to? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not allow us to find out what is 

being spent or why.  We need to be able to ask the ministers 

questions, questions about the Rafferty-Alameda project. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, that famous one. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Yes that is a very famous one.  It put 

Alameda on the map, Mr. Speaker.  It put south-eastern 

Saskatchewan on the map.  Everybody across Canada now 

knows where Alameda is at; they now know where Estevan is 

at.  And I am proud to say that we have two very wonderful 

structures being built there.  And I need to know if the Minister 

of Finance is going to continue funding that program. 

 

There is still a lot of work to be done there.  For one thing the 

valve in the low level outlet has not yet been put in place.  

We've had good snowfall this winter and we need to know 

whether or not the run-off from that snow will be allowed to 

accumulate behind the dams. 

 

We need to be able to question the minister in charge of Sask 

Water as to whether or not he has any funding in place to 

complete that.  That valve has been paid for by our friends 

across the line and needs to be put in there to continue to save 

water. 

 

The members opposite claim that there was going to be no 

water behind those dams.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we have 40 to 50 

feet of water already behind the Alameda dam.  This is water 

that is below the low level outlet.  If we had been able to 

complete that project as originally planned, the dam had a good 

possibility of being half full by now. 

 

We need to be able to ask the minister in Estimates whether or 

not they will continue to fund the court cases that are being 

carried out to try and stop the project from going ahead. 

 

We need to know whether or not the land acquisition for the 

wildlife mitigation will continue.  There is quite a large portion 

of land to be purchased to provide for the wildlife mitigation 

that was demanded in the environmental studies. 

 

There's also one other concern with that land that's being used 

for wildlife mitigation.  Once it goes into the hands of the 

government, will the RMs (rural municipalities) concerned 

receive any grants in lieu of taxes?  Was there 

any money in the Estimates, in the budgetary statement, in that 

financial statement that the minister presented for that?  I am 

hoping that there will be some money provided for that.  The 

previous government was working on providing money for 

grants in lieu of taxes for that property. 

 

We have another issue down in Souris-Cannington which is a 

concern and that's our highways. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A new MLA (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly). 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The new MLA has a concern, yes, Mr. 

Finance Minister.  We need to continue our highway projects in 

that area.  No. 8 Highway, under the previous NDP 

administration, was nothing but an oil-surfaced road.  It was a 

good make-work project in the winter-time.  It took a lot of 

people to keep that oil surface up.  We need to rebuild that 

highway.  The previous government has already rebuilt a good 

portion of it and that needs to be continued.  This is an access 

from the U.S. into our province.  It's an access to the Moose 

Mountain Provincial Park and to Duck Mountain Provincial 

Park -- two very good tourist destinations in this province. 

 

Souris-Cannington also needs good east-west access.  We have 

a good highway on No. 9 going south.  But we have a lot of 

heavy traffic on that road with the potash trucks.  And it does 

need maintenance.  It was well built at the time when it was 

built but that was many years ago and it continues to need 

maintenance. 

 

We have another issue and this is an issue that affects not only 

Souris-Cannington but a good many of our rural communities, 

and that is our telephones, Mr. Speaker.  We need to be able to 

ask the minister in charge of Telephones whether or not they 

are going to continue to develop the digital switching systems 

which have started to be put in place but are just starting. 

 

We have one in Alida already, and we need to have the digital 

switches put in the rest of our area.  The reason we need to 

have this digital switching put in place, Mr. Speaker, is that 

once it is in there we can combine a large number of exchanges 

into one large exchange.  And I'm wondering if the Minister of 

Finance and the minister of Telephones have considered that. 

 

(2115) 

 

The member for Regina Albert North was in my constituency 

back in the spring discussing that very issue.  He met with a 

committee that we have down there, a committee of which I am 

a part, to find out what the needs were.  And what the needs 

are, Mr. Speaker, is to be able to have larger exchange areas.  

We have a large number of communities that have to phone 

long distance to talk to their high schools.  They have to phone 

long distance to get a doctor, to phone a hospital, even to phone 

the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 

 

We have another telephone issue also . . . is a cellular system.  

The cellular system is developing quite nicely in 

Saskatchewan, and I'm glad to say that the previous 

government's construction efforts has made our area 

  



396 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

probably the best covered with cellular system in any of the 

province.  But this system also needs to be expanded. 

 

As I walk outside of this building, I notice that a good many of 

the members here do have cellular telephones in their vehicles.  

And they are a great benefit to us.  But we need to develop this 

whole system throughout the province.  There are a good many 

highways, a good many communities that do not have this.  I 

was contacted by a gentleman up in the Neilburg area looking 

to get cellular service put into his area.  I'm sure that the 

member from Wilkie will be also encouraging the government 

to try and get cellular service put into that area.  It's an area 

where the oil patch is developing quite nicely.  They need 

communications.  The cellular system provides that.  It's a good 

revenue source for SaskTel and I believe it should be 

encouraged. 

 

And we don't even know if the minister is looking at it, Mr. 

Speaker.  We can't see the Estimates.  We can't ask him any 

questions about the Estimates as to whether or not he has 

included that kind of construction in his plans.  And if he has 

included that kind of Estimates into his plans, when will this 

construction be taking place? 

 

Health care is a big issue across this province, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

one-third of the provincial budget and we need to be able to ask 

the Minister of Health what plans she has for health care in 

Saskatchewan.  What plans does she have to keep doctors in 

Saskatchewan?  What plans does she have to keep our rural 

hospitals open, Mr. Speaker? 

 

In my constituency we have four hospitals.  We have 

Gainsborough, which is an integrated facility, a new hospital 

built by the previous government three or four years ago.  We 

have the Oxbow hospital, Mr. Speaker, which is an older 

hospital but which was approved for construction of an 

integrated facility this year.  I believe the Minister of Health 

was down there and visited our area and visited that hospital in 

the last year. 

 

Has the minister included in her budget, in her Estimates, the 

funds to construct that hospital?  The sod turning has already 

taken place.  I know that a number of the contracts have been 

let.  Will the money continue to come forward? 

 

We have two other hospitals in our area, Mr. Speaker, Arcola 

and Redvers.  Both of these communities wish to have the 

integrated facilities built in their area.  They have money set 

aside already for such a project.  They have generated through 

their own efforts more than a half a million dollars in Arcola 

and close to that in Redvers.  They need some sort of an 

assurance from the Minister of Health that they will be given 

some consideration, that they will be able to proceed with their 

integrated facilities.  And if we can't ask the Minister of Health 

any questions, how are we ever supposed to find out?  What am 

I supposed to tell the people in Redvers and Arcola: the 

Minister of Health won't tell us any answers? 

 

Rural doctors are a major concern, and not just in my area.  We 

have the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who is a doctor.  

I'm sure he is well aware of the problems faced by rural 

doctors.  How do we keep our doctors in rural Saskatchewan?  

They're paid 

well. They're paid perhaps even better than those doctors who 

practise in urban Saskatchewan and yet we seem to have a 

problem keeping them there. 

 

I notice that the government opposite has proposed some new 

funding for students, medical students in our colleges, to try 

and keep them in Saskatchewan.  I congratulate them for that 

effort, but I wonder if it's going to be enough.  If they give a 

grant to those medical students, which would be forgiven over 

a period of time, there is still nothing that keeps that student in 

this province.  That grant would be payable if they left. But if 

they can find employment elsewhere in Canada or some other 

country at a better rate than what they would receive in 

Saskatchewan, those doctors can still leave and we're still left 

in the same position that we're at with no doctors in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The hospitals in my area, particularly Gainsborough and 

Oxbow, have a real problem at the present time keeping 

doctors.  In Redvers we've been very lucky; we've had two 

doctors which have been around for a good many years. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, these doctors are preparing to retire.  And 

where do we get some new doctors?  The Minister of Health 

needs to allow us to question her Estimates to find out what she 

has in plan for rural hospitals, for rural doctors, for our rural 

medical practice. 

 

We have a number of nursing homes.  These nursing homes 

need to have doctors which come in to visit them.  If we don't 

have the doctors in rural Saskatchewan, will our nursing homes 

be able to continue operation or will we have to move all of our 

senior citizens out of their communities and into the larger 

centres?  None of us want to have our families further away 

than necessary, Mr. Speaker.  And we need to continue to 

provide the funding for the nursing homes to keep our seniors 

in their area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance earlier suggested that, as 

we talk of taxes -- the liquor tax along the border -- that would 

be a better place to discuss it than in the motion, the Bill that 

was presented and read for the third time today.  Well the 

budget process would be the place to talk about that, Mr. 

Speaker.  But we have no budget.  We have a financial 

statement in which we cannot even question the ministers. 

 

We all know what the situation is along the border when it 

comes to goods coming across.  Our tax system is such that it 

encourages people to shop south of the border.  And I don't 

believe we can really blame those people that are shopping 

south of the border because they have a limited number of 

dollars.  They have to stretch them as far as they can.  And that 

is one of the methods they are using to do so. 

 

They use our system in Saskatchewan; our social welfare 

system, our medical system, and yet they pay their taxes in 

another jurisdiction.  If we could change the tax structures 

along the border it would make a big difference.  And that is 

one of the things that the E&H (education and health)tax 

synchronization with the GST (goods and services tax) was 

going to do. 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

The members opposite don't seem to believe that having the 

E&H tax collected at the border would make any difference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there was an additional 7 per cent tax paid at 

the border as shoppers came across, it would make our local 

businesses more competitive because the shoppers that go 

south would not be able to avoid our provincial sales tax by 

buying south of the border. 

 

And I keep referring to south of the border, Mr. Speaker, but 

not all of our shopping is done south of the border.  We shop in 

Manitoba and we shop in Alberta.  Those jurisdictions, it's 

possible to also avoid paying our E&H (education and health) 

tax. 

 

In Manitoba, if you shop there and if you have the goods 

shipped to you in Saskatchewan you may avoid paying both the 

Manitoba provincial sales tax and the Saskatchewan provincial 

sales tax.  We all know that if you shop in Alberta there is no 

provincial sales tax.  And we know that if you shop in 

Lloydminster there is no provincial sales tax. 

 

The tax on liquor in this province is prohibitive in the sense of 

people buying here versus buying south of the border.  We 

don't have a lot of tax difference between Manitoba and 

Alberta on our liquor, but we have a very significant tax 

difference south of the border with the taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we could get the answers from the Minister of 

Finance or the minister in charge of the Liquor Board as to 

what kind of dollars we are actually losing from purchases 

south of the border, we would know whether or not it was 

feasible to change the tax structures along the border to make 

our businesses more competitive. 

 

If you go across the border to Sherwood, to North Portal, to 

Crosby -- south of the border further west, you can buy 

American beer, Mr. Speaker, for a significantly less price than 

what you pay for it in Saskatchewan.  You come back across 

the border, you pay all the duties, all the taxes, and you can still 

get it across for about half of what you would have to pay at 

your local hotel.  Our local hotels cannot compete with that 

kind of price competition, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Finance needs to take a look at that tax structure. 

 

Another tax problem that we have along the border, Mr. 

Speaker, is with gasoline.  Now this one changes from time to 

time.  Sometimes it's more competitive than others.  But there 

are many times, Mr. Speaker, when tank trucks will roll out of 

the refinery in Regina, drive across the border, dump it into 

another truck, and that truck turns around and comes right back 

into Canada; back into Saskatchewan and fills up tanks for 

farmers along the border at a significant saving to those 

farmers.  It's Canadian gas being used by Canadian farmers at a 

lot cheaper rate because it comes back through the U.S. 

 

And it's not just gasoline, Mr. Speaker.  I know people that 

have bought cement -- cement in Minot, North Dakota, cement 

that was loaded onto a truck in Winnipeg, hauled across the 

border, transferred to another semi, and brought back into 

Canada at a very significant savings. 

And all of this tax avoidance is hurting our economy.  It's 

hurting Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to ask the Minister of Finance, 

and those ministers responsible for those departments, what 

amount of tax we're losing and what amount . . . what their 

plans are to change that so that we no longer have that tax 

avoidance. 

 

Simply jacking up that tax along the border though, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the whole answer.  All that will do is encourage 

the people who wish to go across the border and bring it back 

illegal to do more so. 

 

We have a very open border -- very open, Mr. Speaker.  We 

have many miles between our border crossing points and it's 

very easy to cross.  In fact, in our area, we have a crossing 

point that we call the east Elmore crossing and customs sits 

there once a month and catches a few people once in a while.  

And everybody knows it's there, but we simply do not have the 

capacity to continuously monitor that. 

 

We need to provide a tax structure, Mr. Speaker, that will take 

into account the price differences north and south along the 

border, to make our businesses more competitive, to allow 

them to compete with the people across the line.  On the retail 

end, in most cases our businesses, if they want to, Mr. Speaker, 

can compete. 

 

I was talking to a clothing retailer in Redvers one day about it 

and he said he has no problem at all with people shopping in 

Minot because he can compete with them, with the merchants 

in Minot.  It's a matter of marketing, it's a matter of buying, it's 

a matter of going out there and getting his customers in the 

door.  And this man is able to do so.  He runs a very successful 

business.  He has no fear of the competition from across the 

border.  But when we tax our businesses to such an extent that 

they cannot compete, Mr. Speaker, we are harming our own 

industry. 

 

The tax on tobacco is the same problem as that on alcohol and 

gasoline.  We need to take a look at that.  We need to adjust 

that tax in some manner to allow our businesses to be more 

competitive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to question the minister for 

Parks and Recreation on the recreation grants that the previous 

government had in place.  There are a number of these grants 

out that are still due, that people are on a three-year program to 

collect money on.  And is there any money in the budgets to 

pay for this?  Is there any funding in place to continue to make 

those payments to those facilities?  There are a number of 

people out there who, over the last year or two, took these 

grants that would be paid out in three portions.  And we need to 

find out, Mr. Speaker, whether or not those will continue.  We 

need to ask the minister responsible whether or not that money 

is in the Estimates, in their financial statement. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very good program in this province 

called SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 

Centres)and SARCAN.  I'm sure the  



398 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Minister for Community Services is well aware of this 

program.  This organization is a recycling depot using people 

who are handicapped.  This is a very good opportunity for 

these people to participate in the work-force and to get out and 

be amongst the rest of the community.  And it gives the rest of 

the community the opportunity to meet and to get to know 

these people. 

 

We have a SARCAN depot in Redvers, Mr. Speaker, and they 

do a very good job.  But, Mr. Speaker, the SARCAN program 

is running into some financial difficulties.  And we need to be 

able to ask the minister whether or not there is any funding in 

their financial statement to help continue this program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to ask the Minister of Finance 

or the Minister of Energy and Mines what are their plans for 

mining, for the oil and gas industry in this province.  We need 

to know whether or not there is going to be any oil and gas or 

mining industry in this province.  Exploration in northern 

Saskatchewan or any part of Saskatchewan in the coming year 

-- true exploration, Mr. Speaker -- will range in the 15 to $20 

million area.  That compares with Chile, Mr. Speaker, where 

there is going to be $500 million spent in the coming year for 

exploration, and 90 per cent of that will be spent by Canadian 

companies. 

 

If that money was to be spent in Canada, a portion of that 

would be spent in Saskatchewan and that has the potential to 

generate a good number of jobs, Mr. Speaker, for northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And northern Saskatchewan, as the members from that area, 

the members from Athabasca and the member from 

Cumberland are very well aware, is an area of high 

unemployment, Mr. Speaker.  And if we could generate the 

industry in that area along with all the infrastructure needed to 

support mining, the exploration in that area would create a 

good number of jobs. 

 

The member from Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker, brought up the 

issue of the oil and gas industry, and we need to be able to talk 

and ask the Minister of Energy what his plans are -- whether he 

plans to tax the oil and gas industry as it was taxed in the '70s, 

whether he plans to continue the programs put in by the 

previous government. 

 

And those were very good plans that were brought in by the 

previous government, very good policies, Mr. Speaker.  We 

generated a large amount of new drilling, a large amount of 

new oil production, a large amount of new gas production. 

 

In south-eastern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this past year we 

have generated record amounts of oil shipped out of that area.  

I believe the last figures that I heard were somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of fifteen and a half thousand cubic metres a 

day through Producers Pipeline system.  Mr. Speaker, that's a 

lot of oil, and that compares to probably 10,000 metres in 1980.  

That's an increase of 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker, by the previous 

government's policies. 

 

And we need to be able to talk to the Minister of Mines and 

Energy to ask him questions as to whether or not the 

type of policy that generated that kind of income, that kind of 

employment, that kind of wealth for the landowners, will 

continue. 

 

The oil and gas industry, Mr. Speaker, is not just generated 

overnight.  In hog production you can buy yourself some hogs 

and go into production in short order, have some production -- 

a couple of litters in a year, and be back out of production 

again if that was your desire.  You wouldn't sell very many 

hogs perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but you could sell a few.  But in the 

oil industry you cannot proceed that fast.  You need to be able 

to plan long-range for this, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not 

a hog producer so I may be somewhat in error on that.  My 

knowledge of hogs, Mr. Speaker, comes on my plate in the 

morning. 

 

But I do know a little bit about the oil and gas industry, Mr. 

Speaker.  And we do need some long-range plans in that 

industry.  We cannot allow the members opposite, the Minister 

of Finance or the Minister of Energy and Mines to tax those 

industries out of existence.  Those create a large amount of 

wealth as I'm sure they're very well aware.  I'm sure they wish 

to continue that wealth coming into the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we would like to co-operate with the members 

opposite in the budgetary process.  We would like to be able to 

debate a budget, to ask questions on Estimates, but not to be 

obstructionists, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need to be able to ask questions of the Minister of Rural 

Development.  Such questions as: are grain bins still being 

measured by Crop Insurance, and if so, where is the money 

coming from?  The Minister of Rural Development has said 

that there would be no longer any grain measurements but if 

that is indeed . . . if grain measurement is indeed continuing, 

then where is the money for this? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need to be able to ask questions to the 

Minister of Labour as to why he feels that union contracts only 

for government work would be better.  And I'd like to read you 

a few quotes, Mr. Speaker, if I might.  This is from the Star-

Phoenix.  And I'm quoting from Mr. Jim Chase, the president 

of the Saskatchewan Construction Association. 

 

 Chase said the projects reveal the opposite. 

 

 "The Co-op project (this is the Co-op upgrader, Mr. Speaker) 

was over-budget and they found a lack of quality in the 

work," he said.  "Some of it had to be redone, and they had a 

lot of problems for most of a year." 

 

As comparison: 

 

 As for Shand, Chase said it had been a "tea party" compared 

to the generating stations built on a union-only basis at 

Boundary Dam and Coronach under the former NDP 

government. 

 

 "They were just horror stories in terms of productivity and 

continual illegal walkouts and so on," he said. 

  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

We need to be able to talk to the Minister of Finance about his 

plans to hire only union contractors, and whether or not that is 

going to be economical to the Government of Saskatchewan.  

Mr. Bill Stewart, executive director of the Merit Contractors 

Association, said the following: 

 

 "One has to wonder what the policy objectives are here," he 

said.  "What is broken, and what needs to be fixed?" 

 

 It's well documented that (labour) competition in the industry 

works.  It has resulted in lower costs for purchasers of 

construction, which includes the government. 

 

Another quote, Mr. Speaker.  Tom Baxter, president of Graham 

Construction & Engineering -- and Graham Construction, Mr. 

Speaker, is one of the contractors that is working on the 

Rafferty-Alameda project. 

 

 (Mr.) Baxter said the taxpayer will ultimately suffer if the 

government adopts a union-only policy for government 

projects. 

 

 In bidding on union-only jobs, Baxter said, a contractor must 

consider lower productivity of union-only labor and charge 

more. 

 

 "In general, if we pay the same wages, your labor cost is 

about 30 per cent more on a major project to do it all union 

for the type of work we do." 

 

I think that's an indication, Mr. Speaker, of some of the 

problems that we can run into if we hire only union contractors.  

And we need to know, is the minister taking that into account 

in his Estimates?  Is he taking into account the time factor 

involved, the cost associated with that?  Is he taking into 

account, as Mr. Baxter says, the unproductivity of the labour 

unions? 

 

An issue that seems to be quite a concern across this province, 

Mr. Speaker, is tax relief for property taxes from school boards.  

We need to talk to the minister to ask questions of the Minister 

of Rural Affairs and the Minister of Education as to if they 

have considered any tax relief on property from school board 

taxes.  We all know that taxes based on property taxes for 

schools are based on their assessed value.  A farmer can have a 

large amount of land which has a fairly good assessment, and 

he'll pay a major portion of the taxes within a school district. 

 

On the other hand, you may have a lawyer or any other 

professional which may generate a large amount of income 

from a small asset base.  Now I'm sure the members opposite 

that have a few lawyers over there know what I'm talking about 

by generating a large amount of cash flow out of a small asset 

base.  Well we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, are not 

afflicted with any lawyers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Lawyers and other professionals seem to 

be able to generate a good amount of income from a small asset 

base on which they pay very little 

property tax.  And this puts the burden of the school system on 

the large property holder in rural Saskatchewan and that tax 

base falls mainly on the farmers. 

 

We would like to be able to ask the Minister of Education or 

the Minister of Rural Development whether or not they have 

considered taking any measures to alleviate that problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to close now with saying the actions of the 

Minister of Finance on this motion as well as the Minister of 

Justice, obviously a hypocritical title, who has brought forward 

similar legislation before this House, is reprehensible and is 

absurd. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be voting to oppose this unconstitutional 

Act and demand on behalf of the people of Souris-Cannington 

and the people of Saskatchewan, that the Minister of Finance 

follow accepted practice and that the minister present and 

debate a budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to participate in 

the debate on this motion as well.  I think this motion will go 

down in history.  It's unprecedented in our province.  It's a 

motion that effectively is part of the reason why I am here 

today. It strips me of the right of freedom of speech.  Mr. 

Speaker, what is happening in Saskatchewan is that this motion 

has been allowed . . . I'm surprised it has been allowed to hit 

the Assembly floor. 

 

Was it right for this government to introduce this motion?  Was 

it reasonable?  Was it ethical?  Was it moral?  I say not, Mr. 

Speaker.  Perhaps their motives are honourable.  They have 

introduced a motion requesting appropriation approval.  This in 

itself is fine, Mr. Speaker.  The common concern that my 

colleagues and I share is their approach to this request.  The 

NDP are not following the rules.  Rather, Mr. Speaker, they 

want to break the rules. 

 

They are not representing this House with . . . presenting this 

House with a budget.  Never in the history of Saskatchewan 

has a full year gone by without a budget being passed in the 

legislature.  The minister from Regina Dewdney states that he 

has not had time to prepare a budget.  But, Mr. Speaker, he has 

had time to present a budget document.  Mr. Speaker, I've 

taken the time to study this so-called budget document.  And 

funny thing, Mr. Speaker, this document certainly contains all 

of the elements that a full-blown budget would contain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, essentially this document is . . . or builds on the 

budget that was presented in the spring.  As a matter of fact, 

this motion we are debating today states, and I quote: 

 

 . . . the Minister of Finance shall table a . . . financial report . . 

. which shall be based upon and shows changes to the 

Estimates first introduced in the Legislative Assembly on 

April 22, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for all intents and purposes, this document is 

indeed a budget.  It is a budget that the NDP want to pass 

without question. 

  



400 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not concerned about the budget debate 

primarily.  We're willing to forgo the six-day budget debate.  

That's not important.  We're willing to approve interim supply.  

But what we're not willing to forgo is the opportunity to 

question the ministers opposite on their department spending. 

 

The NDP should allow us the opportunity to ask questions of 

their Minister of Finance, as well as all of the other ministers 

responsible for their various departments. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, we don't want to ask 

the Minister of Finance a great deal of questions.  And again, 

no offence intended, but the Minister of Finance will not be 

able to answer what we consider very specific questions that 

only the ministers of the various departments themselves 

should be able to answer. 

 

We want to ask these ministers very, very specific questions on 

what is happening in their departments.  For example, we 

would like to know what is happening to the $300,000 that 

should have been remaining in the Saskatchewan Works 

budget, a budget that the Minister of Social Services said has 

been depleted. 

 

(2145) 

 

How can the Minister of Finance answer that type of a question 

that is so specific, only the Minister of Social Services should 

be the one that answers a question of that nature.  The Minister 

of Finance I don't think could answer that type of specific 

question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think what the NDP is trying to accomplish is 

maybe a couple of different things.  They want to hide behind 

the Finance minister's ignorance on all the department goings 

on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP want to pass their document without 

giving the opposition members the age-old tradition of 

questioning it.  This is clearly stated in their motion, and I 

quote: 

 

 And that the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan, and the usual procedures for 

tabling, referral and consideration of Estimates for the 

presentation of a budget and the budget debate shall not apply 

. . . 

 

Seeking approval for interim supply is right, Mr. Speaker, but 

breaking the rules and procedures of this House is wrong.  A 

government bullying a motion through the House like this, 

abusing their majority, is reprehensible. 

 

The opposition has always been granted the right to scrutinize 

government spending.  The Financial Administration Act 

requires the Minister of Finance to submit the Estimates for the 

legislative approval for appropriation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the government's motive for introducing 

this motion?  They claim they didn't have time to prepare a 

budget. But here it is; we have it here -- a budget.  What really 

is their motive then?  They want to pass this motion because 

we are all in the middle of the 

Christmas season?  I'm sure they all want to go home and 

prepare for Christmas with their families.  I'm sure they would; 

I know that I would. 

 

Is that the reason they're pushing this motion through the 

House, so that they can have more time for Christmas 

shopping?  Or is the real motive for this fear?  Does the NDP 

government fear what their ministers will reveal through 

Estimates?  Is the NDP government afraid to subject their 

ministers to close scrutiny? 

 

Which is it?  Was there not enough time?  Is it Christmas 

shopping or is it that the ministers are not ready to answer 

detailed questions? 

 

Mr. Speaker, this opposition is not being, I believe, 

unreasonable at all.  We're asking the members opposite to sit 

through . . . we're not asking the members to sit through 

Christmas.  We do not want to sit through Christmas, but we're 

prepared to if we have to, Mr. Speaker.  We are prepared to sit 

through Christmas if that's what it takes to force this 

government to adhere to the rules of the legislature.  Change 

the name on the budget document, present it to the House, and 

we will forego the six-day debate and will immediately go into 

Estimates. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ask the NDP government to save their place in 

history books for later.  I don't think that they want to be 

known as the first government in Saskatchewan to suspend all 

rules and procedures of the Assembly in an attempt to attain 

supply without accountability. 

 

Do the members opposite want to be known as the government 

that refused to place a budget before the Assembly, the 

government that effectively suspended the province's 

constitution, the government that refused to table Estimates in 

order to avoid scrutiny on mass firings and political hirings? 

 

This government will go down in the history books as the 

government who used the Assembly to target individual 

citizens; the government that placed this Assembly in direct 

personal conflict with individual human beings.  This 

government is so caught up on its Tory bashing that it has lost 

sight of reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, reality is that the NDP has formed government, 

we accept that.  You people are responsible in government to 

provide a budget.  The reality is that the NDP government has 

become so caught up in its new-found power that they are 

willing to push through any legislation that suits their needs.  

Right now they need to pass a budget that they've clearly 

disguised as a financial report by breaking the rules.  They 

need to do this to protect their new ministers.  I think so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel for the ministers opposite.  It must be a 

humiliating experience to be forced into silence because your 

colleagues do not trust you to answer the questions in this 

House.  Mr. Speaker, I also feel for the NDP back-benchers, 

perhaps more so than I do for the ministers.  They, Mr. 

Speaker, are being led down the garden path and I think they 

know why. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I'm a new member in this legislature as well.  But 

I think I should have the right to be able to question  



December 19, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

the various ministers on their departments.  I don't want my 

rights to be taken away before I have a chance to exercise 

them.  I want the opportunity to ask the ministers opposite what 

they are doing with my constituents' tax dollars. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the constituents in Kindersley have given 

me this opportunity and I'd like to be able to exercise it.  My 

constituents voted for myself.  They wanted me to look after 

their best interests. 

 

There are a number of concerns in agriculture, for example, 

that I'd like to ask the Minister of Agriculture about in the 

supply Bill.  But the NDP government simply won't let me, Mr. 

Speaker.  I believe that the questions are relevant.  They're all 

of a very specific nature, and they all should only be directed to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  In our constituency, we have an 

ongoing and serious problem with soil erosion. 

 

How does this new Minister of Agriculture plan on dealing 

with this problem which is very serious?  What is the cost of 

this?  How it could be addressed is the question.  One of the 

possible solutions is a move to a more conservation-related 

style of agriculture, things like zero tillage. 

 

For the benefit of the members opposite, I'd like to explain 

what zero tillage is.  It is a farm management practice which 

leaves as much trash cover, which is the residue from the 

previous crop on the land, to keep the land from blowing.  It 

has the potential to sharply reduce soil erosion, but it has a cost 

associated with it. 

 

And I'd like to discuss that cost with the Minister of 

Agriculture.  The two largest cost components in zero tillage 

are the cost of machinery and the cost of the burn-off chemical.  

There was a good, solid group of producers in this province 

that tried to solve the high cost of the chemical.  The group was 

called Focus on Inputs.  In Estimates, I think we have some 

very valid questions to the ag minister.  Would have been . . . 

Has he given any consideration to helping this group start up 

again and produce a generic chemical? 

 

The people at Focus on Inputs -- and I was very proud to be a 

member of Focus on Inputs -- tell me that they could sharply 

reduce the cost of this chemical.  It has the potential for a very 

widespread use, for soil conservation.  Generic glyphosate 

would have, I believe, would gain very fast acceptance and 

usage, would sharply reduce soil erosion. 

 

Excessive cultivation of farm land has led to this problem and I 

think this could possibly help. 

 

Other new technology that are coming along that the Minister 

of Agriculture should be aware of -- that he should be aware of 

-- are a few of these that I'll mention.  In the last couple of 

weeks ago in the edition of Grainews, a publication that's put 

out by the United Grain Growers, I noticed a new product that 

was being introduced into this country from Australia that 

could sharply reduce the cost of chemical application in 

Saskatchewan.  Ministers of Agriculture should be aware of 

this product. 

I'd like to ask him about his Estimates of spending for new 

technologies.  This is one of those new type of technologies.  It 

essentially consists of a unit that would enable a farmer's 

spraying unit to have the capability to distinguish between a 

green plant and the bare ground.  So it would help the spraying 

unit to essentially seek out the weeds compared to the bare 

ground in a chemical fallow operation.  All of those type of 

measures, I think, have significant benefits to agriculture and 

should be explored at great length. 

 

Some of the other areas that I think should be given a great deal 

of consideration are some concerns that I have as well with 

Crop Insurance.  We see in the next few weeks Crop Insurance 

is going to be . . . January 1, about, Crop Insurance is going to 

be looking for a significant premium from people to be brought 

in.  There will be because of the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program, January 1 is when the premium is 

due.  We are looking at that.  In a lot of farming operations it 

will be anywhere from 10 to $20,000 premium that will be due 

on January 1, with no real way of paying for it.  No one seems 

to be able to come up with any way of doing anything like that. 

 

I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture has taken into any 

accounts of what percentage of that premium he expects to be 

coming in, as well as what percentage of the premium doesn't 

he expect to be coming in.  All of those things have significant 

ramifications for the amount of revenue that this government 

will be arriving at in the early new year. 

 

Also, I think that there's some concerns with other soil 

conservation related things that I'd like to mention.  I received a 

letter here from a crop club, and a rural development group out 

in my constituency that I'd like to enter into the record here 

today, Mr. Speaker.  It was directed to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  The concern came from one of my constituents. 

 

 Honourable Berny Wiens 

 

 Dear Mr. Wiens:  At our November 14th District 17 ADD 

Board meeting we spent some time discussing publications 

which provide agricultural information to agricultural 

producers. 

 

 Board members felt strongly that publications play an 

important (part) role in the technology transfer and we're 

concerned that budget cuts may result in limiting the 

production of written information. 

 

 Our board, by way of this letter, would strongly encourage 

that production of these publications receive top priority 

when budgeting for various projects, to ensure that research 

and agricultural extension information finds its' way to the 

farm level. 

 

It's signed by one of my constituents, and it's also signed by 

other members of that board.  One of those members that I 

think would be of great interest to the members opposite, Mr. 

Lorne Johnston from Eston.  And they might remember who 

Lorne Johnston from Eston is.  He was the NDP's candidate in 

the recent election, in Kindersley, the man that opposed me for 

the NDP Party.  And I find it 

  



402 Saskatchewan Hansard December 19, 1991 

interesting that he feels that the budgeting process should be 

looked at very closely right now -- not just an estimate of 

what's going on right now, but a full budgetary process so these 

type of concerns can be dealt with. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture responded to this letter, and I 

appreciate his response to a constituent of mine, and I'd just 

like to read it into the record as well. 

 

 Thank you for your recent letter encouraging our department 

to continue making agriculture publications a top priority. 

 

 I respect your group's position that these publications are an 

effective means of transferring research and technology to the 

farm level. 

 

 Please be assured that the Saskatchewan Department of 

Agriculture and Food will consider your request carefully 

during future budget planning sessions.  (And it was signed) 

Yours sincerely, Bernhard Wiens, Minister of Agriculture 

and Food. 

 

And I think that there's a great deal of concern out there right 

now, that with no budget being presented, that these type of 

concerns won't be addressed. 

 

Out in our area, as I was saying earlier, soil conservation is of 

great concern.  And that's why I continue to be bringing it up 

here.  I'm a member of the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation 

Association and very proud of it.  I think, I'm not sure, but it's 

my understanding in talking with some of the folks with the 

Saskatchewan Soil Conservation that I am the only member of 

the Assembly that is a member of that group.  And I'm very 

proud of that. 

 

It essentially is a group that looks into soil conservation 

concerns all across Saskatchewan and indeed Canada.  They 

have representatives from all over various regions within the 

provinces.  And I think they do a lot of good work on soil 

conservation.  And they've asked me to be asking the minister 

constantly about those type of concerns. 

 

And some of the things that I think really help with soil 

conservation are new crop varieties that are more drought 

tolerant, things like straight cutting of crops, and the aeration of 

grain, getting the crops off the land as quick as possible.  All of 

those types of concerns, I think, have a great deal of relevance 

in Saskatchewan today. 

 

We also have some other . . . a great number of other concerns 

relative to various ministries within the government right now 

-- the hospital situation for example in various towns around 

my constituency.  Currently they're building a new hospital in 

Eatonia.  It was started under the previous administration and 

it's of a great deal of concern to me and my constituents.  They 

are just going to be finishing it.  I think they're going to be 

opening it here in the next few weeks. 

 

I'm sure that members would be interested in knowing a little 

bit about the hospital.  It's basically an integrated facility.  

There's 12 beds; eight of them are going to be dedicated to 

level 3 and 4 long-term type care.  Those 

people contacted me.  The board members contacted me a little 

while ago to raise some of the concerns to the Minister of 

Health about their facility.  They have some concerns in regard 

to staffing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until 10 o'clock tomorrow morning. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


