




















































Hansard: December 09, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 135 

 December 9, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to members of 

this Assembly, 31 grade 12 students from Robert Usher 

Collegiate.  They're accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Fred 

Steininger. 

 

I'm going to find this meeting interesting.  During the election 

campaign I, the Conservative candidate, and the Liberal 

candidate from Regina Churchill Downs, met with this class 

and we had a debate which lasted a couple of hours actually, 

with this group.  So it'll be interesting today to meet with them 

to see how the reality compared with the campaign.  I'll look 

forward to it. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to take this opportunity to 

introduce to you and this Assembly the former MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) from The Battlefords, David 

Miner and his wife Mona, in the . . . wherever that is. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly a constituent and a friend, Mr. 

Jack Doobenen, who is a long-term public employee himself; 

and a former constituent, Mr. Bob Stobbins.  These gentlemen 

are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They just dropped by to see if 

their MLA was here and working.  And they haven't discovered 

that yet, if he's working, but they're going to be going on a tour 

right after.  And the member from Wildwood and myself will 

join them for coffee. 

 

And we hope you enjoy your visit to Regina and have a safe 

trip back.  And I would ask all members to welcome you to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Policy on the Uranium Industry 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

my question is for the Minister of Energy and Mines.  It 

pertains to the industry which his government and party have 

long been an enemy of -- the uranium industry. 

 

Mr. Minister, your NDP (New Democratic Party) colleagues in 

Ottawa recently sponsored and voted on a private members' 

Bill C-204, which, if it had passed, would have closed down 

the uranium sector in our province, thus throwing thousands of 

people out of work and eliminating a huge source of tax 

revenue.  I would like 

to ask the minister if it's his government's intention to introduce 

similar legislation in this province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The answer to 

that question is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, it is clear that you have no plan for this industry and 

that your party recently, at your party's recent convention, 

again demonstrated that the will of your delegates is to shut 

down the uranium sector. 

 

Will the minister clearly state what his government's plans are 

for this vital sector so that thousands of direct and indirect 

employees working and investing their futures in this industry 

can plan their lives? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I'd 

like to correct the member opposite that at our convention this 

fall in Regina we did not decide on uranium mining, be it to 

close it or do any . . . There was no resolution passed on 

uranium mining.  The motion that was passed at the convention 

had to do with the reactor, so it had nothing to do with uranium 

mining. 

 

Further, in answer to the member's question, is that this 

government and this department is currently in the process of 

reviewing the policies that have been in place, both in the oil 

sector, the gas sector, the uranium sector and all sectors.  And 

when that policy has been reviewed we will come up with a 

concrete policy to develop the mines and the resources in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  When will 

the minister provide Saskatchewan with the information as to 

what his government's plans are for this industry? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I can't give you 

a definite time line but it will be soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

Minister of Energy and Mines.  Mr. Speaker, the minister 

knows that many of the towns and cities, including the city of 

Regina, are now making plans for attracting a possible nuclear 

power station to this province as a result of signing the energy 

agreement between Saskatchewan and the federal government. 

 

Will the minister tell the House the current status of this 

agreement, and will he tell this House exactly what his 

government's plans are to replace the potential CANDU 3 

reactor with, both in terms of alternate energy sources and as a 

replacement for the tens of thousands of jobs lost in this 

opportunity with the agreement. 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate  



136 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

to the House and to the member who asked the question that 

the memorandum of understanding between Atomic Energy of 

Canada and SaskPower is clearly under review.  In the 

agreement there is a six-month clause that the former premier 

will be well aware in which time the government, SaskPower, 

has an ability and an option to review the understanding. 

 

Clearly what we want to do here is take time to make sure that 

the economic spin-off if the project were to go ahead or if it is 

cancelled, that we look at all the options available to us, 

including renegotiating a deal that would be in the best interest 

of the people of the province. 

 

Obviously we want to take the time to make sure that the 

decision that we make is clearly in the best interest of the 

taxpayers, unlike many of the understandings and agreements 

that were taking place over the last nine years that cost us 

billions of dollars and were scratched out on the backside of a 

cigarette package. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question for the 

Minister of Energy and Mines, or the Environment, whichever 

one wishes to answer. 

 

We know that there are four uranium companies in 

Saskatchewan -- Minatco, Cameco, Amok, and Cigar Lake -- 

which are currently in a state of limbo, not knowing whether 

they will be permitted to spend literally billions of dollars in 

new developments in the North.  Will one of these two 

ministers, whoever is most up to date on this situation, please 

advise this House what these companies will be permitted to do 

in relationship to their planned investments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the member 

opposite probably is aware and the opposition's probably 

aware, that there is a federal-provincial panel in place right 

now which is studying the environmental impacts of uranium 

mining and also disposal of the tailings and so on.  And until 

that panel reports, the uranium companies are well aware of 

this, that they have to wait with any further development until 

there is a report and their approval has been received from the 

federal government and also from the provincial government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Location of Saskatchewan Pension Plan Office 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 

Community Services.  In my community, Mr. Speaker, many 

people are very, very concerned.  I've had calls from the mayor 

of Kindersley, members of the business community, and even 

employees of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  They're living 

with a great deal of anxiety because of the government's 

approach to rural communities and its deal with the unions to 

centralize government operations in Regina once more.  Even 

the member for Redberry agrees that in his response to the 

Speech from the Throne, jobs are needed in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My question to the minister is:  will the minister assure the 

people of Kindersley that the office of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan will remain in Kindersley, yes or no? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, the government has always 

pursued the principle that government services should be closer 

to people, and we will continue to look at those services.  We 

have no quarrel with government services being where the 

people have access to them. 

 

As far as Fair Share, we are looking at all the moves that the 

former government made and we are going to look at whether 

those moves make sense, and we'll evaluate them accordingly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- As the minister is well aware, the move of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan had absolutely nothing to do with 

Fair Share.  It was an announcement that was made prior to 

Fair Share.  My question again to the minister is:  will she 

assure the people of Kindersley that the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan will remain in Kindersley? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, we have no quarrel with the 

moves that were already made.  What we were talking about is 

where the moves have been a part of Fair Share, we're going to 

evaluate those and take whatever action is in the best interest of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As far as the moves that were made in former years, those 

moves will continue to be in the communities that they were 

placed in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Once again, is that a commitment to the people of 

Kindersley?  The Pension Plan will remain in Kindersley, yes 

or no? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, we do not intend to move 

the Pension Plan out of Kindersley. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to hear that the member 

will assure the people of Kindersley that the Pension Plan will 

remain there.  My new question, Mr. Speaker: is the minister 

also prepared to make those similar assurances to the 

communities of Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Kamsack and 

Melville -- that government offices will remain in those 

communities and will not be taken from them?  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, those corporations that were 

moved previous to 1991 will remain in the communities that 

they were placed by the former government. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Water Supply and Irrigation Projects 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance.  Through the past 90 years, the 

PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and the 

province of Saskatchewan have worked hard to build an 

infrastructure in irrigation in the south-west.  They have some 

money left over from an agreement that was reached -- I think 

it's about three and a half million dollars -- an agreement was 

reached with Sask Water in order to build a project along the 

Battle Creek.  Are you reviewing that or are the farmers and 

ranchers going to have to wait for another two or three years 

before they see construction begin on that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, all the government 

projects, of course, are under review.  I'm not sure of the exact 

stage that project is at.  I believe it is far from final stages of 

planning in any case and will be reviewed and looked at on a 

economics point of view as every other program will be.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  The farmers 

and the ranchers down there have used water from the drainage 

system of the Cypress Hills for years and, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Elphinstone realizes that and the new member 

from Shaunavon realizes that.  They've been studying the 

Frenchman River to . . . They've got studies that high on the 

Frenchman River, and Battle Creek is of significance to these 

people.  In fact I had a phone call from a gentleman down 

there, asking whether in fact they were going to proceed with 

this construction. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this project, as the 

member opposite has pointed out, has being reviewed and 

looked at and studied for nine years or longer.  I've had one 

month in office.  I have not yet got definite plans to go ahead 

with that project at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Another supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, 

Mr. Minister, we did look at it for a considerable time, and it 

had approval from the PFRA and Sask Water Corporation to 

move ahead. 

 

My question to you is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The state of Montana. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And from the state of Montana.  My question 

to you is: are you going to proceed with it and when? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat, we are 

reviewing that.  We don't want another Rafferty-Alameda.  We 

will review it carefully before we do any construction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Those people 

that are down there don't want a further delay.  They don't want 

further review.  They don't want any more.  In fact they 

reached an agreement with the people of Saskatchewan under 

direct contract.  If, Mr. Speaker, if the people that are 

government here today do not enact this by the spring, they're 

likely to lose the federal funding.  Don't you think it's necessary 

that you move that project forward so that the financing can be 

in place to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I just repeat, we are 

looking at that project as we're looking at all other projects at 

this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  So you're 

looking at projects.  Are you looking at the one in Melfort too? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Which one? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Seriously, the one that puts water into the city 

of Melfort?  The quality and the quantity of water in the city of 

Melfort have been a serious problem for years. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- For nine years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And we have . . . Mr. Speaker, it was also, in 

view of the observations that have been made, more than just 

nine years. 

 

Is the minister going to tell this Assembly that they're going to 

proceed with the agreement that was reached with the city of 

Melfort, and the aldermen and the city councillors from the city 

of Melfort, from Beatty and Kinistino?  Is he going to proceed 

with that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there are ongoing 

discussions with the city of Melfort and the surrounding 

communities and Sask Water and that is ongoing discussions 

on that as we have taken over.  And again we've only been in 

office for one month and I hardly think we could have changes 

of policy in that short a time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary.  Is the minister 

going to say that to the towns of Beatty and Kinistino, and to 

Melfort and perhaps to Star City and Wakaw?  The same kinds 

of things:  you're going to study and review?  How long are you 

going to do that with an agreement that has already been 

reached with the city of Melfort? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the 

citizens of Melfort and district have enough patience to know 

that a new minister does not make a decision on a project on 

the first month that he's in office and I think they are very 

concerned that we do not waste taxpayers' dollars, and that we 

proceed in an orderly fashion, and that we'll make our decisions 

in due course without being rushed at this time. 

  



138 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  That project 

has been reviewed far enough.  It was signed, and an agreement 

was signed -- the same as the one with the Battle Creek.  An 

agreement was reached with the water users associations and 

with the provincial government.  When are you going to move 

forward?  You said you were going to review.  How long?  I 

want to know when. 

 

You got to buy the pumps, you got to buy the material, you got 

to do all of that, and if you're not going to do it, you're going to 

run into . . . Two or three years from now, you're not going to 

have any project done.  You need to begin today.  And I want 

to know from you when you're going to start it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I might remind the 

members opposite that an awful lot of agreements were signed 

and the only thing missing was the money to carry through 

with them.  And so I think . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

want to, as a preamble, say to the people of this Assembly that 

the money was in place from the PFRA to build the one in 

Battle Creek.  Now I want to know if you're going to allow that 

$3 million to float down the river just like it always has into the 

United States, just like it traditionally has out of there, and 

when are you going to build that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat what I said 

previously.  We are going to review these.  We are making 

decisions.  We are not going to be rushed into making 

immediate decisions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Is there then, 

from the responses that you've made, an agreement now being 

renegotiated with the federal government to implement a 

different kind of a program in the south-west on Battle Creek? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there are currently 

environmental studies going on in that area.  There are 

federal-provincial agreements being made.  Progress is being 

made.  These all, as you probably are well aware, take some 

time and decisions will be made in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well at least I got a 

half an answer on that one, and I'm going to try on Melfort 

again, Mr. Speaker.  Is the minister going to acknowledge that 

an agreement was reached with the Sask Water . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That's the second or third time that the 

member from Moose Jaw Palliser has interfered, 

and it's the last warning I'm giving you -- the first and last. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

minister responsible for Sask Water.  Is he going to give some 

assurance to the people of Melfort who have worked diligently 

through the member from Melfort when she was mayor, 

through the council that was there when she was the mayor, 

would you give some indication not only to her but also to the 

people that are residents there that they're going to have some 

decent water -- water that isn't going to be harmful to their 

health -- in relation to the development of that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, in keeping with our 

new government's policy, those people will be consulted and 

checked with before we make decisions.  They will be part of 

the decision-making process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary.  I'd like to just 

say to the member he should just ask the member from Melfort 

whether they have in fact not been raising money to finance 

that program out of the city of Melfort.  And they have the 

belief that they're getting the water. 

 

They have a water quality problem that is very serious to health 

and they have a quantity problem.  Now it's, I believe, your 

responsibility to tell those people that they're not going to get a 

project or they are.  And they need to know how soon they can 

get it done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we will tell the 

people and we will tell them the truth, and we will tell them as 

soon as we make decisions.  And we will consult with them in 

making those decisions and we will carry forward with their . . 

. look after their problems as well as we can considering the 

economic mess that we were left with to work with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Is the minister 

prepared to allow a combination of private financing, public 

financing, and urban financing in that development of that 

project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, considering the 

economic mess, as I pointed out we inherited, I think any 

method of financing that we can possibly look at will be looked 

at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, new question.  Would you also 

allow an opportunity for other communities that have been 

asking for water, like Rosetown and Kindersley.  Would you 

allow the same kind of dynamic to be used in terms of 

financing that are going to be used in Melfort?  And would you 

use that as a project that you could use as an example for that 

financing? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again anything would 

be considered.  I don't think I have the wherewithal to debate in 

exact detail of different financial projects throughout the 

province.  But we will consider any  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

method and any way we can to provide services to people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Providing services as you indicated to the city 

of Melfort is extremely important to those people there.  You're 

going to do it in a sense for Rosetown and Kindersley but what 

about one that has already been planned?  One that has already 

been engineered?  When are you going to start on that one? 

 

If they don't buy pumps this winter and put the facilities in 

place, they're going to have water in '93 or '94.  We'll be 

re-elected as government by that time and that . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- When will you provide them the go-ahead for 

that project? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat that this 

project is under review and under consultation and it will 

continue in due course. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 

and Certain Consequential and Other Amendments of 

Other Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill respecting the Tabling of Documents and Certain 

Consequential and Other Amendments to Other Acts resulting 

from the enactment of this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 

question put by the member . . . I want to table now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question put by members, item 

no. 7, I hereby table. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer to questions put by members, item no. 

8, is hereby tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask this 

question be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that this 

question be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 

question put by members, item no. 11, is hereby tabled. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the answer to questions put by members, item no. 

12, is hereby tabled. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would ask that this question be 

converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the question put to the 

Assembly, item no. 14 is hereby tabled. 

 

I would ask that item no. 15 be converted into motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Before the minister rises on question no. 16, I wish to refer all 

hon. members to rule 38(1) Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan which states that: 

 

 Written questions may be placed on the Order Paper . . . 

(only so long as they seek information) . . . relating to public 

affairs . . . 

 

Similarly, Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, 6th 

Edition, paragraph 428, states as follows: 

 

 A question . . . must not: 

 

 (dd)  deal with matters not officially connected with 

Government or Parliament, or which are of a private 

nature. 

 

Therefore I rule because section . . . or paragraph . . . section 4 

does not pertain to any administrative jurisdiction that the 

government is responsible for, I rule part 4 out of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer put by 

member, item no. 17, is hereby tabled.  And that's it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  



140 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is again my pleasure 

to enter in and continue my debate regarding the speech 

presented by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor regarding 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past number of days we've heard a 

number of members in this Assembly espouse and talk about 

their own constituencies or talk about the direction that 

hopefully we're going to be heading in this province.  But it 

seems to me, as I've indicated Friday last, that certainly the 

speech that was presented at the Speech from the Throne leaves 

a lot to be desired regarding a plan or a program for our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've heard many members make comments and 

give some suggestions.  I've heard comments about the fact that 

maybe . . . and seen policy come forward presented by, or in 

the media such as The Western Producer regarding the fact 

that maybe the land bank is something that should be looked at 

again. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I think of the land bank and I look at what 

has happened to many people in our community, in our 

surrounding area, I wonder indeed if many members really 

realize some of the problems that the land bank created.  Is that 

the plan that was being laid out by the members, by the 

government, regarding agriculture and where we're headed? 

 

Possibly, Mr. Speaker, what we could have had instead of a 

land bank, a program put in place that would have provided a 

bank for land, if you will, maybe to fill the vacuum or the void 

that was left by the Farm Credit Corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of years ago a program could have been 

put in place that would have given or lent money to beginning 

or established or young farmers that would have given the 

dollars at an interest rate over a long term that would have 

given them a better opportunity to establish and build a farming 

operation.  So I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that in light of the 

comments regarding land bank, instead of talking of the old 

programs, maybe we should start looking ahead and building 

for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, we take a look at the . . . taking a look at 

the Speech from the Throne, and there are many people in the 

communities that I represent and I'm certainly sure around the 

province that are wondering exactly where commitments are 

towards projects in their communities made by the former 

government as regarding health care facilities or regarding 

educational facilities.  What is the government's commitment to 

these communities at this time? 

 

The throne speech certainly didn't lay out any kind of a plan 

that would ensure people across this province and people in 

rural Saskatchewan that much-needed facilities such as 

hospitals or care homes or even upgrading of  educational 

facilities were going to be part of the new government's 

agenda.  And so I would ask the 

government to lay out their plan, lay out the program -- where 

are we going?  Certainly I didn't see any of that laid out before 

us in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

I believe many communities and many people want to have 

some assurances that the work and the diligence that they have 

provided in planning for their community structures will indeed 

continue and they would see a completion and the development 

of these plans and also the commitment to building the 

hospitals or health facilities that are needed. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, even as we've heard again today in this 

question period, and we probably will hear for a period to come 

yet, that the new government to continually reminds us . . . or 

continues to reminds us of the fact that this province is lacking 

in its . . . we're facing economic woes and certainly are lacking 

in any kind of finances to move ahead with many projects. 

 

But I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if we just took a 

few moments to think about it, harmonization of the education 

and health tax with the federal sales . . . or the GST (goods and 

services tax) certainly would have derived much-needed 

revenue for the province. 

 

And what did we see in the throne speech?  Yes, Mr. Speaker, 

we did see that the government made true on their commitment 

to rescind that tax.  And now, Mr. Speaker, what do we have 

laid out before us?  We have laid out a scenario by the Minister 

of Finance that is so bleak that bond agencies and lenders 

across this country and in other parts, and certainly in New 

York, have dropped our credit rating to -- what is it? -- a triple 

B-plus, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And considering those circumstances I can see why members 

opposite are just not making a lot of promises at this time.  And 

yet prior to the election, what do we hear?  What do we hear?  

Many promises -- promises laid out for the people of 

Saskatchewan of how much better the province will be once 

the NDP are elected to power.  And where are we today? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated the other day, I'm pleased to have 

been appointed the opposition member responsible for the 

families.  And I'm proud today, Mr. Speaker, to have 

represented the government that was the first government in 

Canada to designate a specific ministry dedicated to family 

issues. 

 

I'm also proud of the job of the former minister, the member 

from Regina Wascana, Mr. Beattie Martin, and his staff for the 

job they did to rectify the many difficulties faced by families 

today. 

 

And as I indicated the other day, Mr. Speaker, I intend to 

continue to stand up on family issues and on moral issues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, the commitment from the member 

from Estevan and his colleagues when we were in government 

was to stand up for families and for moral values.  And our 

commitment will continue.  Mr. Speaker, our commitment to 

the family will never change.  And I 



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

welcome the responsibility to ensure that the members opposite 

continue to look at the importance of the needs of families. 

 

I shudder to think of what fate lies before the Family 

Foundation though, in light of the fact that the program has 

been put under the control of the Minister, I believe, of 

Education, instead of having its own minister such as we had. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I challenge the member from Riversdale, if he 

really does have concern for Saskatchewan families and their 

welfare, that he not only restore the minister of families to its 

own department, but have the courage to enhance even if it 

wasn't an idea put forward by the New Democrats or by the 

present government. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, to take an idea, a positive idea 

presented by another party and to continue to work with that 

program, shows us that a government or any person, regardless 

of who they are, can continue to build and that we can work 

together through co-operation to build and enhance our 

communities. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, when we look at where we're going to 

be heading in the next few years, we look at development.  And 

I believe a number of the members on the government side of 

the House talked about economic diversification.  And I 

believe one of the members talked about value-added 

processing.  And certainly over the number of years in which 

your loyal opposition was that government prior to the last 

election, we worked strenuously to develop our rural 

communities, to develop and enhance our economy, to build 

around the economics and our rural communities.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the tools that we introduced -- and I believe it's 

a very good and positive tool -- was the community bond 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the new minister has also indicated that 

he considers, and his government considers this program, 

which was devised by the Conservative administration, as an 

important tool of economic development once minor changes 

are made.  He also indicates that: we think there should be a 

change there, and I will be taking a recommendation to caucus 

that co-ops have a role to play in community bonds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at our community, when we look at 

our province, certainly I believe there are many people around 

this province . . . they have already indicated through their 

willingness to become involved in community bond programs 

that they are willing to put their money where their mouth is.  

Mr. Speaker, they were willing to put the financial backing 

they have into programs and into a commitment to help 

strengthen and to build on their rural communities.  And as I 

look through the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I trust that even 

the government will recognize the importance and the role that 

community bond corporations can play in developing and 

building our province.  Certainly it was a real commitment 

made by the former government, the former premier. 

 

Whether the NDP choose to recognize it or not, there was 

significant progress made in the past 10 years.  And I can 

look at my own constituency, and I look at the community 

bond programs that have been moving forward, presented and 

enhanced by the current government. 

 

(1445) 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think each and every one of us would 

also admit that what we really like to see as well is not just 

programs that have to be developed because of government 

programs that are in place, but certainly programs that have 

been initiated privately. 

 

And I know a number of private programs and small 

manufacturing has taken a place around this province.  And I 

want to commend the people of the province for their 

commitment to their community, to their province. 

 

This province, Mr. Speaker, has been building for 10 years, and 

my colleagues and I don't intend to stand idly by and watch the 

NDP work at possibly even tearing down programs that have 

been built up.  And certainly I'm sure that members opposite 

will recognize good, positive programs and will indeed build 

around them. 

 

During my first term in this legislature, I observed with great 

dismay the continuous criticism we saw from the now new 

government when they were in opposition.  I trust that even as 

we enter into this new term in office that my colleagues and I 

will not only direct criticism and bring the government to task, 

but will also offer . . . and we will work at offering some good, 

positive alternatives to help build our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think when we look at this past election, and it's 

interesting . . . I find it amazing that the NDP campaign 

manager, when in, I believe it was, in North Battleford, thought 

it amusing that their party could win an election without a 

program or without a platform. 

 

And I think what we've seen through this Speech from the 

Throne certainly reiterates and brings home to us the fact that 

the people of Saskatchewan have waited for eight or ten years 

for a program or a plan from the new government and they're 

still waiting.  The Speech from the Throne has left us with the 

question: what is the plan?  What's the program?  Where are we 

going? 

 

Well I think the people of the province of Saskatchewan have 

waited long enough and its time to lay out a plan.  It's time to 

let us know where we're going.  It's time to let people know 

across this province what they can expect from the new 

government if they can expect anything. 

 

I have to question whether the NDP feel they can glide through 

four years of government without even laying out even a broad 

plan if you will, without getting . . . if not getting specifics so 

people in Saskatchewan know where they're at. 

 

I wonder about . . . I have to question the credibility of election 

promises made by the government prior to the election, like 

open the books, increase funding to health and education, 

decrease taxes and the elimination of the deficit, when they've 

already broken many promises.  How is it possible to make 

promises based on nothing, no  



142 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

plan?  How is it possible for the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway to promise increased funding to education when the 

NDP don't know where the money will come from?  And we 

heard that again in question period today -- we just don't have 

any money. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly when we formed the government 

of this province we did put money into education.  Education 

and health spending increased dramatically.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

we are going to hold the members opposite accountable for all 

the promises they've made. 

 

How is it possible for the member from Riversdale to promise 

decreases in taxes and increases in health funding and the 

elimination of the deficit when in fact what is his plan?  What 

are his ideas?  How is it possible?  What are the people of 

Saskatchewan going to say?  I believe the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking for a plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did we see a plan?  It seemed that the plan that 

was laid out during the election was a plan to promise people 

anything they wanted to hear.  Mr. Speaker, I can assure you 

that as the Conservative candidate in the Moosomin 

constituency, I didn't go around promising people a lot of the 

things that they wanted to hear.  I told them the truth. 

 

I told them that, yes, we were in a difficult time.  Yes, we had a 

deficit.  Yes, there wasn't any money for the programs.  But I 

also, and people also admitted, that when we . . .  Mr. Speaker, 

I also found that people admitted that we were there to help 

them when interest rates were going through the roof.  We 

were there to protect them.  Even home owners.  Not just 

farmers and small-business men, but home owners. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've heard a lot about the deficit and 

where it is and I believe the comment was just made: yes, but 

did you tell them the truth about the deficit?  Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Finance can certainly inflate the figures.  And when 

you don't harmonize the sales tax, Mr. Speaker, look at the 

number of dollars that are lost.  And I would suggest to the 

people of Saskatchewan, I would suggest to the people of 

Saskatchewan that they better be careful, and that they better be 

watching very closely because the dollars to meet the promises 

are going to have to come from somewhere.  They may not 

come through harmonization, but they'll certainly come from . . 

. (inaudible) . . . in another form. 

 

Just because the new government has been elected, it doesn't 

mean the problems of hunger will disappear.  Mr. Speaker, we 

again will be monitoring the approach of the new government 

towards this problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of Saskatchewan are asking 

governments to just present the straight goods. And I believe 

the member from Estevan and the Conservative Party certainly 

did that in the past election. We let people know where we 

were; and we let people know we needed the finances; and we 

let people know how we were going to achieve the finances, 

not only to continue to build and strengthen Saskatchewan, not 

only just our large urban centres, but rural Saskatchewan, but 

also to continue to build for the future for our young men and 

women and for the boys and girls who will be the future 

generations.  I believe people of Saskatchewan need to know 

where we are.  They need to know where we will be going and 

where we're going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member responsible for the families, I 

certainly will continue to bring the government to task and 

make sure that programs and initiatives brought forward by the 

former government will be enhanced and built upon and that 

families will continue to be a major program and a major part 

of this government as it was of the former government. 

 

I'll also continue to be reminding the Minister of Social 

Services of her responsibility to the people around this 

province.  And certainly we're going to . . . I'm sure the people 

of Saskatchewan are going to expect more than they heard 

from the minister regarding the incident at the Beardy Indian 

Reserve.  Mr. Speaker, I believe we must be responsible and 

take our jobs very conscientiously. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are so many more things that I could get 

into, and I'm sure that my colleagues and I will be getting into 

and speaking on over the next number of days -- or should I say 

weeks? -- certainly the next term of government, that we will 

bring to the attention of this House the responsibility of the 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to end my comments by bringing 

forward a quote, and I bring this quote especially in light of the 

discontinuation of the works project through the Social 

Services -- a quote that I think really says a lot for us, and a 

quote given by Abraham Lincoln, and he said this: 

 

 You cannot bring about prosperity by discouraging thrift.  

You cannot strengthen the weak by weakening the strong.  

You cannot help the wage earner by pulling down the wage 

payer.  You cannot further the brotherhood of man by 

encouraging class hatred.  You cannot help the poor by 

destroying the rich.  You cannot keep out of trouble by 

spending more than you earn.  You cannot build character 

and courage by taking away a man's initiative and 

independence. You cannot help men permanently by doing 

for them what they could and should do for themselves. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we go through this quote and as we 

listen to Abraham Lincoln, certainly he has a lot of positive 

comments made in that quote that we can all take to task and 

we can all apply as we work on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing, I would like to pose an amendment to 

the motion, seconded by the member from Estevan, that the 

following words be added to the motion: 

 

 But regrets that the government has undermined Her 

Honour's Legislative Assembly and has shown disregard for 

the fundamental principles of democracy by attempting to 

derogate from the constitutional role of Her Honour's 

Legislative Assembly and further regrets the complete 

indifference of the government to the needs of the 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

people as proven by the government's failure to deliver a 

solid economic plan to the people of Saskatchewan that 

would create employment, promote diversification, improve 

health care and education, and most deeply regrets that the 

government has denied assistance to the rural families of 

Saskatchewan at this time of crisis. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Estevan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you rule on a 

point of order.  Is it permissible for a member who has spoken 

once on the throne speech to be a mover or a seconder of this 

motion? 

 

The Speaker: -- The member's point from Prince Albert 

Carlton is well taken.  The member from Estevan has already 

spoken in this debate and therefore cannot second a motion.  

The member may enter the debate, but he cannot second a 

motion.  So I -- unless there's another seconder -- I have to rule 

the amendment out of order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I will second the order. 

 

The Speaker: -- The amendment has been moved by the 

member from Moosomin and seconded by the member from 

Arm River, that the debate will continue. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this 

opportunity to address the amendment to the motion of the 

Speech from the Throne, and join my colleagues, Mr. Speaker, 

as I did in my initial comments, of saying to the public and 

asking the general public: where is the strategy, and where are 

the promises, and where is the money, and where, Mr. Speaker, 

is the diversification and the balanced budget? 

 

I recall, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure that many of the 

Saskatchewan public have heard during the recent election 

campaign, the NDP promise, and the member from Riversdale 

promise, the now Premier, to cut taxes, spend more money for 

farmers and health and education, balance the budget, create 

new jobs, eliminate the food bank and poverty, all at the same 

time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we heard that over and over again as part of his plan, that 

he could cut taxes, which he says he's going to do; spend more 

for farmers; increase spending for health and education, which 

we have well documented; balance the budget, which he said 

he would do; create new jobs and diversify the economy; 

eliminate food banks and eliminate poverty. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I respectfully submit to the public and to 

this Legislative Assembly, the reason that we see no plan today 

is that obviously during the campaign the Leader of the 

Opposition promised people something that he could not, and 

no individual could deliver. 

 

I remind the members opposite that this is what we added up 

during the campaign debate and speeches that we heard that we 

thought would be in a Speech from the 

Throne if in fact the NDP won. 

 

They were going to bring back the old dental plan: that was 

$16 million;  going to bring back the old drug plan: that would 

be $83 million;  hike the health care budget by 5 per cent: that's 

$80 million;  reduce the student/teacher ratio by 14 million;  

hike the province's share of school operating grants to 60 per 

cent: that's $110 million;  put in a school breakfast and lunch 

program: 68 million;  increase the highway budget: $60 

million;  create an environmental institute for 40 million;  

relieve residential property taxes: 173 million;  implement pay 

equity in the public sector for 60 million. 

 

(1500) 

 

Eliminate poverty completely: 481 million;  child care for 

Indian and Metis groups: 25 million;  more counselling and 

therapy services: 660,000;  subsidized day care for middle 

income earners: 7 million;  bring back the northern food 

transportation subsidy for 250,000;  increase disabled 

allowance by 150 per month for 14 million;  stop deducting the 

Canada Pension benefits from welfare cheques: $46 million;  

fund special aids for the disabled: 290,000;  lift the cap on 

utility rates for welfare: 9 million. 

 

When you add it all up, Mr. Speaker -- this is just off the top 

during the campaign -- you get $2,760,472,000. 

 

Additional promises, as they were going to cut taxes, spend 

more, balance the budget, create new jobs, eliminate the food 

bank, and eliminate the poor.  And help for farmers, and help 

for everybody else and just eliminate all the problems. 

 

Now this did not include existing programs like health and 

education that are already there, or agriculture programs or 

water programs, or commitments to towns and villages I've 

been talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I mention this, and the amendment to the motion 

is simply that we heard the rhetoric, which had some 

semblance of an idea of what we were going to see happen for 

people in this province, and yet when we see the Speech from 

the Throne, it's not there.  There's nothing there. 

 

They condemned the government of the time saying, well I 

don't think that you've got the money or taxes are too high; 

you're getting too much money.  Or you're not going to be able 

to do this, you're not going to be able to do that, therefore 

they're going to fix it all.  And when they have the first 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker, as you heard, the Speech from the 

Throne, it was the shortest, hollowest, emptiest Speech from 

the Throne in the history of Saskatchewan.  In all of the 

Legislative Assemblies that we've had here in the province it 

was the most empty. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, let's just look so far.  Just so far 

the new government has been in power for about ten days, two 

weeks; certainly since the session started we've had a week and 

a day.  And let's just look at the report card to date. 

  



144 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

There's no cash for farmers.  And the Minister of Agriculture 

and the Premier admit that they have no plan for agriculture 

and no plan for cash to help farmers.  Now I'm going to 

introduce plans right now in the next few minutes of what 

could be done.  But there's nothing in this Legislative 

Assembly from the government to help farmers. 

 

They had money for a trip to go to Ottawa, take a bunch of 

people on airplanes, spend some money for three days, 2 or 

$300,000.  And they come back and say, aren't we really doing 

something?  And there's no money during a crisis. 

 

And many people here must have got elected on the farm crisis.  

Said, boy the NDP are going to do something.  They're going to 

cut taxes, balance the budget, more money for farmers, more 

diversification, more for communities, eliminate poverty.  Then 

we start up.  No cash for farmers.  There's no tax breaks for 

farmers, there's no harmonization benefits for farmers when 

they're buying their trucks or their cars, their machinery, their 

quonsets; none of that. 

 

The Premier has said the country's worth about $4 an acre.  He 

says if I don't get the help that I want here then I won't go for 

the country and the constitution. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, isn't that something, that the brand new 

NDP Premier of Saskatchewan is standing up in front of the 

rest of the world and said, well if we just get an extra 4 or $500 

million from the federal government, and our share would be in 

the neighbourhood of 2 or $300 million, about $4 an acre, then 

I'll stick up for the country.  I'll stick up for Canada as a result 

of $4 an acre.  And if I don't get my $4 an acre then I'm just not 

going to go along with the rest of the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only wasn't there a plan -- and that's why the 

motion was raised here -- but all the promises of all the things 

that they were going to do that they could do, cut taxes, spend 

more, balanced budget, create jobs, eliminate poverty . . . But 

now he's turning around and said no, I've got to sort of 

blackmail the country.  I'm going to have to go to the rest of 

Canada and say, unless you play ball with me and I get my $4 

an acre, I'm not going to go to the constitutional meetings; I 

won't support the Prime Minister or the other premiers or the 

first ministers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that the essence of the Speech from the Throne 

and the first few weeks of government?  Is that what it's all 

about? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they haven't stopped the foreclosures in 

Saskatchewan in agriculture.  The minister knows that.  The 

Minister of Agriculture knows that there's farmers in trouble all 

over the province, and they wait and they wait and they wait 

and they wait.  Is that the plan, Mr. Speaker?  Why don't they 

tell us.  They can wait until spring, and maybe most of them 

will have had the real big sword from some financial institution 

-- just wait and wait and wait.  Is that the plan?  Is that why 

people voted for the NDP, to see them sit on their hands? 

 

I say to all the new members in this new legislature, don't be 

fooled by this old boys' club here of 10 or 11 people in 

cabinet that say this is the plan; now we'll tell you what really 

goes on in here.  We'll just wait.  We'll blame the previous 

government for all of the problems.  But there's nothing that we 

can do.  And we'll let the farmers suffer; we'll let the poor 

suffer; we'll let the people on the reserves suffer; the towns and 

villages won't get what they're after. We'll blame the previous 

government. 

 

Well folks, it isn't good enough.  You didn't get elected because 

of that.  Are you going to go home and tell your friends and 

your families at Christmas time, that's why you were elected -- 

when people are hurting in a crisis and nothing in the Speech 

from the Throne.  And they can stand here in their seats, a little 

group of 10 over there and tell you all what to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm telling you, this is the most hollow Speech 

from the Throne this Legislative Assembly has ever 

experienced at a time of crisis.  Since the 1930s we haven't 

seen anything like it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, and I give you credit, Mr. 

Speaker, you allowed members in the opposition to raise a 

debate, crisis in agriculture.  And we asked to debate that 

because everybody in the province, including the Premier, 

acknowledge there's a crisis in agriculture.  And we said, can 

we debate the alternatives to help them. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, wasn't it something to watch.  Wasn't it 

something to watch the first few days in the legislature. The 

NDP are on their feet, all elected new members representing 

rural ridings, and they wouldn't even stand and debate 

agriculture, or their plan, or their hopes.  The people out there 

are going to say the NDP and the new Premier are the grinch 

that stole Christmas in rural Saskatchewan.  There is nothing 

here for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- In fact they don't have the courage to stand, Mr. 

Speaker, and even debate it.  And one after one after one after 

one would have stood there  and said no, no, no.  And they did.  

They wouldn't acknowledge the crisis.  And the Premier 

opposite said, well that's too small of opposition.  They can't 

make this matter.  It doesn't count. 

 

It doesn't count when people are hurting and you've got a large 

majority, so you can stand arrogantly and say because you have 

ten members or eight members or nine members or one farmer, 

they don't count? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 60,000 farmers and families out there 

that are suffering, and you know it and I know it.  And we've 

worked really hard to help them.  And the first chance of a new 

administration, they should be ashamed of themselves, Mr. 

Speaker, because there's nothing in the Speech from the Throne 

and they wouldn't even acknowledge that it was worth 

debating. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they even ducked the vote.  Now how's that for 

the first opportunity of a new Minister of Agriculture, new 

Minister of Rural Affairs . . .  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just want to draw the member's 

attention that he is not to refer to members, whether they were 

in the House previously or in the House now.  That is not an 

accepted practice here. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, maybe I could word that another 

way.  Thank you for your ruling.  The other way, Mr. Speaker, 

is that if we go down and look at Hansard and we go through 

the names and the ridings of those that participated in a vote, 

it'll become clear who did and who didn't.  And there are some 

members who I would encourage the public to look for their 

names in that vote, and it's in Hansard.  Some they'll see, some 

they won't, and it's clearly the record.  But that's there, Mr. 

Speaker, that's there. 

 

And I just want to remind all those new members who think 

this is really a courageous act, this Speech from the Throne, 

one, you wouldn't debate it.  And comes time to even vote on 

whether you'd argue about it, you look at the list for yourself 

then.  You find if you had the courage of your conviction to 

stand there and stick up for your plan, stick up for agriculture, 

stick up for the things that you're going to do for rural people. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, while they don't have a Speech from 

the Throne, they go out and they fire 200-and-some rural 

people -- fire them.  And they make a big joke of it.  He says, 

we don't have to inspect the grain in the bins.  Half of it's 

inspected; half of it isn't.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I just make this 

point very clearly to the Minister of Agriculture, the Premier, 

and others.  Do you expect the public in this province . . . when 

you have an automobile accident do you phone SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) and say, I think it was 

about $5,000 damage; send me the cheque but you don't have 

to look at the car?  Is that what they expect, Mr. Speaker?  

We're dealing with billions and billions of dollars going to 

farmers, and they're not going to take the time to inspect what's 

there?  Do you have hail insurance that go across the province . 

. . and you phone up the crop insurance and you say, hey boys, 

I had a big crop failure here.  A hail storm went through.  I got 

100 per cent and I think it's worth about 12,000.  Send me the 

cheque.  And you don't have to bother coming out and looking 

because it's okay because the new NDP administration says it's 

okay.  We don't have to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point is if crop insurance doesn't have 

integrity, farmers won't trust the system.  And they won't trust 

the new NDP administration, and they won't trust others.  How 

in the world, Mr. Speaker, are you going to put out billions of 

dollars and have half the farmers' bins measured, half of them 

not and people have claims?  Crop Insurance has never paid out 

a claim without inspection -- never! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And now, Mr. Speaker, this member opposite 

says, well there's GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and 

NISA (net income stabilization account).  And they'll all have 

claims, Mr. Speaker.  They'll all have claims, and you know 

they should be inspected.  And these people, Mr. Speaker, their 

first action was . . . well I 

guess those 200-and-some people, they probably didn't vote for 

the NDP.  We could have a . . . (inaudible) . . . excuse, Mr. 

Speaker, that maybe there's no patronage in this operation, but 

we'll go down and look at these.  For efficiency reasons we'll 

just pretend we don't need them all.  And they just waxed them 

right out.  They cut them right out, Mr. Speaker  

_- rural jobs.  Crop Insurance needs to know what's going on to 

assess the claims. 

 

And these people said, well . . . and I can imagine.  And the 

minister if he gets a chance to speak, I'm sure he'll say, well in 

cabinet I know we don't talk partisan politics, and it had 

nothing to do with the NDP and nothing to do with who -- you 

know -- appointed these people.  And I'm sure that 

conversation never took place, Mr. Minister -- never, ever 

would take place among the NDP. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they're gone.  They're not here.  They're 

gone.  And we know the reason why.  And it's dangerous not 

only for partisan reasons and for this Legislative Assembly and 

not just because of rural people, but, Mr. Speaker, the integrity 

of the GRIP, NISA, Crop Insurance -- just Crop Insurance 

alone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reputation of the province and the years and 

years of all administrations, Liberals, CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation), NDP, Tories, have put together in 

building the integrity -- of whether it's Crop Insurance or 

Power or SGI or others -- is at risk because of sheer politics 

and the most hollow Speech from the Throne that you could 

imagine. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have stopped further decentralization, and 

they don't even debate it here in the legislature.  We got out of 

them in question period today that they're going to stick up for 

the decentralization we did.  And now, Mr. Speaker, and I 

certainly hope that if they thought Crop Insurance was all right 

in Melville, well then Department of Rural Affairs could be all 

right in the rural and the Department of Agriculture somewhere 

where there's agriculture.  And I hope, sincerely hope they 

consider that, whether it's in northern Saskatchewan, southern 

Saskatchewan, or all over the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But it's cancelled and we've got quotes after quotes of the 

Premier's running around saying, well I'd never cancel that and 

if the Tories say that, it's a lie.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we're going 

to hold him to it.  He said he's not going to cancel it.  Fair 

enough.  Tisdale -- fair enough, you're not going to cancel it; 

you show us where it is.  But they cancelled it, Mr. Speaker, 

without anything in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

And we look, Mr. Speaker.  They've stopped community 

development bonds -- can you imagine? -- people's capitalism; 

if you ever found it any place in the world, and we initiated in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Local people worked together 

in a co-operative fashion, raised money, Mr. Speaker.  They 

build their community and the province guarantees it.  We don't 

have to borrow money.  They put it up, Mr. Speaker, and they 

stop it, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Right now, Mr. Speaker, there's about a $5 million project in 

the city of Moose Jaw with parks and tourism tied to 

community development bonds and the NDP have stopped it -- 

won't endorse it.  You've got an NDP MLA.  



146 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

You've got another NDP MLA.  As far as I know they have 

NDP mayor in Moose Jaw.  I don't know how they're going to 

be happy with the cessation of a $5 million tourism project.  

And everybody knows that golf courses are demanded all over 

North America, but they stop it. 

 

And nothing in the Speech from the Throne that says here's my 

diversification, here's my building, here's the kinds of things 

that I would do. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, then just at the spur of a moment a minister 

shows up; the Minister of Education says, but we found money.  

Well we found money.  There's no money for agriculture.  

There's no money for diversification.  There's no money for 

this, no money for that.  But all of a sudden the day after 

they're elected they can go make a speech and say, but there's 

money for a third school board.  We'll be able to tax rural 

communities. 

 

I can hardly wait for the Minister of Education to go to the next 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

meeting, the next SARM meeting, and say well I just thought 

I'd inform you folks that there's going to be a brand 

_new third school board financed by farmers on property tax 

here.  A third school board -- we're struggling to keep two 

there, Mr. Speaker.  But they said that they're going to have 

more money for education, more money for health care.  

They're going to have more money for this and more money for 

that.  They're going to cut taxes to rural people.  They're going 

to do all of those fancy things.  But politically what do they do?  

They announce they have money for a third school board and 

they haven't told the SARM.  They haven't gone to the meeting 

and said well, Mr. SARM director, here's what you're going to 

get. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in this hollow Speech from the Throne we 

also see complete patronage taking place as the throne speech 

was given, and today we're right up to here in it all over; day 

after day after day in the media, in the newspapers and other 

places -- firing of people who were Progressive Conservative, 

firing of people who were Liberal, firing of people who didn't 

have the right ticket. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said they'd never do that.  They said cut 

taxes, spend more money, balance the budget, create new jobs, 

eliminate the food bank and poverty and no patronage.  No 

patronage -- they're above that, they wouldn't do that.  Well 

you haven't seen such patronage in your life, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Is that the reason all these people were elected?  Eh?  So they 

could sit there and watch the big 10 here, the big 10 play the 

strings.  Like give me the credentials of Jack Messer, whether 

they're academic or political or other things, business, 

compared to previous cabinet ministers of any political 

persuasion.  What are his credentials? 

 

If you look at any of the criticism that the NDP level against 

any position, they said:  but, but, but, but they were PC or they 

were cabinet ministers.  As soon as they get into power, former 

NDP cabinet ministers are what?  Are doing the very thing that 

they said they wouldn't do -- no patronage, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1515) 

Mr. Speaker, it's also interesting to note, and I'm sure the new 

members realize this, within days of the brand new NDP 

administration coming in, the law firm in Saskatoon -- and the 

name of the firm, Mr. Speaker, and the reason I use the 

member's name, is Romanow Mitchell Ching, is the name of 

the firm -- changed its name.  There's nobody left in the firm.  

They're all working in government.  They're gone. 

 

It's Taylor Incorporated or something else, because there are so 

many of them in the government now right up to here.  They 

had to change the name of the firm because if you went there 

and asked for one of them by name, you couldn't find them 

because they're now in government -- right up to here. 

 

What are their credentials?  What are their credentials?  Not 

patronage.  Is there anything in diversification, what they're 

going to do for farmers, how they're going to reduce poverty, 

how they're going to make better government?  No.  You see 

firings, firings, firings, firings, firings.  And the firm is gone, 

under that name. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they've criticized us or other 

administrations for saying well, you have some patronage.  But 

I have never heard where the Premier's law firm now has to 

change its name because there's nobody left.  They're all in 

government, the whole operation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're about to introduce, or have introduced, 

retroactive legislation that change contracts.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, people all over Canada and the free world and the 

British parliamentary system detest retroactive legislation.  

Who does it come from?  The very people that nationalize 

potash mines, take over property, and they're going to introduce 

retroactive legislation that says, well that's not in the Speech 

from the Throne, not part of our diversification plan, but we'll 

get you guys.  We'll get you.  We'll just say what you were 

doing in the past doesn't count any more, and by law we'll 

make it retroactive and we'll change it. 

 

So you sign a contract.  If you're a nurse, if you're a teacher, if 

you're a farmer, if you're a deputy minister, if you're managing 

a corporation and you sign a legal contract, doesn't matter in 

Saskatchewan.  How's that for your reputation in New York?  

Or in Ottawa?  Or in Japan?  Or in Great Britain?  Or in France 

or any place else? 

 

Well there's one jurisdiction that will apply retroactive 

legislation all of the time, Mr. Speaker, and it's in the province 

of Saskatchewan under a socialist administration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that's one of the reasons 

that an awful lot of people in this province and across the 

country and in North America and others are saying no to 

socialism.  Because they know, you give a group, a small 

group, that kind of power, that's not just patronage.  But they 

will exercise power, because you know what their attitude is?  

Oh, this is too small a group to be important.  The rights of the 

individual are not as 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

important as the rights of the group.  All of that sort of thing 

just sort of pervades the thoughts.  Mr. Speaker, you didn't see 

any of that in the Speech from the Throne.  You didn't see that.  

But that's going on in the first few days of this administration. 

 

There's a witch-hunt.  You set up, Mr. Speaker, set up a 

witch-hunt to look and examine all the activities in Crown 

corporations and management behind closed doors.  And then 

when they're finished with the witch-hunt they said they'll 

bring it back here and they'll talk about it in public. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, imagine, we're worried about patronage, 

worried about people who might be NDP sympathizers 

reviewing and then they get to vote in secret?  We don't get to 

vote on that, if they're going to review it.  Two, they don't let 

the media in.  And this is the same organization that says 

retroactivity is okay; small groups don't matter in democracy.  

And they compromise this Legislative Assembly so as much as 

possible you can hook them into this review. 

 

In the first few days, Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of thing that 

we see in this legislature.  Anything for farmers?  No.  

Anything for northern Saskatchewan?  No.  Anything for 

Indian people?  No.  Anything for women, anything for the 

poor, anything that they've promised?  Not a thing, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, then they go on and say, well I'll tell you what we 

will do.  And the plan is on top of all, they say, well I'll tell you 

what we will do really fast, Mr. Speaker.  They say this:  

everybody that has anything to do with government in the 

province of Saskatchewan has to join a union.  How's that?  

Everybody that does any business with this government has to 

join a union. 

 

So the word goes out and people all over the province are 

getting calls.  Do you belong to a union?  Is your company, 

your trucking firm, your highway, your construction people? 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you know what they've done?  Before they've 

even got into the Speech from the Throne, they've closed trade 

offices world-wide and they've decided that they're going to 

have unions do everything in the province of Saskatchewan to 

compete. 

 

Now talk about putting a wall around Saskatchewan.  The NDP 

government in Ontario has offices in the Pacific Rim, the NDP 

government in British Columbia has offices in the Pacific Rim, 

and they even have partisan people in them, Mr. Speaker, NDP 

supporters.  The NDP in B.C. and the NDP in Ontario don't 

even say you all have to be union to participate.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, not the NDP in Saskatchewan.  Hey, this is the old 

school.  This is the same outfit that the NDP Premier says, I'm 

not a socialist, he says.  The member from Riversdale says, I'm 

not a socialist.  Well, Mr. Speaker, if the last few things I've 

just mentioned aren't socialist, I don't know what they are.  

Holy smokes! 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You have to be union to join the 

operation.  You have to be union to do business with the 

government.  You close international trade offices that bring in 

investment, anti-American, anti-Pacific Rim, anti 

_Great Britain.  European economic communities have 300 

million people, a complete market; these guys close the office.  

And it's not in the Speech from the Throne.  There's no plan 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no bonds.  There's no budget.  There's no 

budget.  There's no idea, Mr. Speaker.  There's no budget.  Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Finance is going to be coming in here 

and says, well I want some money.  Well we're going to look 

for his plan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The new Minister of Finance goes to New York and he says, 

well I didn't take $200 million.  I won't do equity.  I won't have 

people invest.  And the New Yorker says, holy smokes, your 

triple-B credit rating is going to look pretty good compared to 

what it's going to be by the time the NDP are finished, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Within days, Mr. Speaker, within days of them 

taking office, the credit rating starts going down.  And what are 

the New York bankers say?  What do the New York bankers 

say?  They say they're going to have retroactive legislation.  

They're looking at nationalization.  They closed foreign trade 

offices.  They won't bring in the kind of revenue that's 

necessary, and they go to New York without a plan.  And what 

the New York bankers says, go home boys; your credit rating is 

going down because you won't participate.  You won't have a 

$265 million deficit.  They said, no ours is 800 or $900 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can't go to New York or Toronto or to Tokyo 

and say, I'm going to cut taxes, spend more, balance the budget, 

create new jobs, eliminate the food bank, and have no 

patronage, and then come in and do what they did and expect to 

have a professional credit rating.  They were laughed out of 

New York, Mr. Speaker, like they were laughed out in the late 

'70s and the early '80s.  Mr. Speaker, they have lost the 

potential for massive uranium development, and they know it.  

No good investor, whether they're French, German, Korean, 

Japanese, American, are going to run the risk of investing in 

uranium in Saskatchewan with the NDP here.  You know that 

and they know that.  So they've cut off a major source of 

revenue -- billions of dollars -- and they say they want some 

money, and they've cut off major sources of revenue. 

 

Because who would trust them, Mr. Speaker?  The oil industry 

doesn't trust them.  The gas industry doesn't trust them.  The 

uranium industry doesn't trust them.  Their party caucus, Mr. 

Speaker, have said they don't want any part of it.  The leader 

says, well he'll have control.  And the NDP leader and the new 

Premier doesn't have any control of the NDP caucus or the 

NDP Party.  They said, I don't want any uranium; he tried to 

stop it.  It's in the media, it's in the public, it's in New York, it's 

in Tokyo, it's all over -- Saskatchewan is anti-uranium with the 

new NDP administration. 

 

That's the case, Mr. Speaker, and nothing in the Speech from 

the Throne to talk about the diversification that is 

  



148 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

lost.  The member from Athabasca knows, members from all 

over Saskatchewan should know, you're forfeiting billions of 

dollars, and no other source of money.  What are you going to 

do, Mr. Speaker; what do you expect? 

 

And without a Speech from the Throne and now without a 

budget, we don't know if they're going to raise sales tax, raise 

income tax, a payroll tax, succession duties, the death tax, new 

flat tax.  What is it, Mr. Speaker?  They've got to tell the New 

York bankers something.  What are they going to tell them?  

The credit rating, Mr. Speaker, is going down.  And there's 

nothing in the Speech from the Throne and no financial 

statement, not even a statement to tell us and tell the public 

what they're about to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they've stopped one of the major programs that 

encouraged people on welfare to go to work.  The critic has 

raised that, that 11,000 people who left the welfare roll into the 

work force, training, education.  Gordon Currie initiated much 

of that -- great teacher and sports-minded individual in the city 

of Regina.  Mr. Speaker, that's a program that is very 

important, and I'm going to talk about that in a minute because 

I'm going to put forward several things that I believe should be 

in a Speech from the Throne. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the Throne there was 

nothing about the plebiscite questions -- nothing at all.  And the 

public spoke.  It's the best petition you can have here in the 

legislature, the best petition.  The people spoke.  They said 

clearly that they want balanced budget legislation, Mr. Speaker, 

and we haven't even heard a word from these people.  They 

don't want abortions funded publicly, Mr. Speaker.  And they 

want to vote on the constitution, and they said so, not 

unanimously, but a large majority across the province -- the 

first time they've had a chance to do that, Mr. Speaker.  And 

they expect this Legislative Assembly and that government, 

because they have the majority, to honour their wishes, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well I mention those points because the excuses we heard 

today in question period, Mr. Speaker, and the excuses that 

we've heard in the last four or five days don't cover up for the 

fact that they misled the public, and they don't have a plan and 

the Speech from the Throne is hollow.  And behind the scenes 

we see all of these things:  firing people, retroactive legislation, 

closing offices and, Mr. Speaker, the credit rating of the 

province going right through the floor as a result of no plan for 

New York bankers, no plan for anybody else. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, in my remarks I want to put 

forward a handful of suggestions that I sincerely believe could 

be in a Speech from the Throne, and I'm certainly encouraged 

by the motion that the member from Moosomin put forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this session the only positive suggestions to be 

presented to the Assembly have come from this opposition.  

We've heard nothing in the Speech from the Throne.  Therefore 

if we are to discuss a positive agenda in this House, somebody 

has to put forward some plans, some ideas, and some 

suggestions regarding things like the private motions we put in 

place and the emergency 

debate on farm aid and farm income. 

 

The emergency resolution, Mr. Speaker, was not a trivial 

matter.  Although both the government and the Leader of the 

Liberal Party dismissed it, it was not trivial.  There is an 

agricultural crisis.  In fact most everybody acknowledges that 

there was a crisis and there is a crisis.  And we put forth a 

motion, an emergency resolution regarding farm income and 

things that we could do, and it was dismissed out of hand by 

the NDP and the Liberals, Mr. Speaker.  In fact the Leader of 

the Government called it . . . the Premier, the minister of 

Riversdale called it a small message -- a small message -- from 

a small caucus.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we may be relatively small 

in number, but the message we're delivering was for a very 

large number of farmers, 60,000 farm families in towns and 

villages across Saskatchewan.  And that's no small matter.  And 

that shouldn't be backhanded out of this legislature because 

members are afraid to debate it.  Why would they be afraid to 

debate it?  And why would the 10 not allow the rest of them to 

debate?  There's a crisis.  You go to their communities . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No plan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- No plan, exactly.  You go to their communities, 

what's the agriculture plan coming from the NDP?  Well we 

had a trip to Ottawa and we're back.  And then what? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the arrogant fashion that that cabinet and the 

Premier took in dismissing the message was frankly quite 

shocking, that they would stand in their place and not allow a 

debate; that the Leader of the Liberal Party felt debating this 

throne speech, which is vacant of any positive proposal for 

addressing the farm crisis, is a sad reflection indeed. 

 

I mean I wouldn't encourage anybody to vote with the NDP in 

saying there's no farm crisis.  I ask all members of this 

legislature:  if you don't think there's a farm crisis, then you 

stand up and say there's no crisis; we don't need any money 

here. 

 

(1530) 

 

Maybe the president of the Wheat Pool is right, Mr. Speaker.  

He has no expectation of any financial assistance from the 

provincial government at all.  He's just thrown up his hands and 

says, I don't have any expectations of the government with 

respect to agriculture.  He doesn't expect anything, Mr. 

Speaker, because he knows these people have no plan and they 

wouldn't debate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it's important.  It's important that we 

have all members of this legislature and their executives and 

the party -- whether it's the NDP Party or the Liberal Party or 

the Conservative Party -- stand in their place and say, there is 

an agricultural crisis and farmers need assistance and they need 

co-operation from governments. 

 

And again I point out, it's odd, I find it odd that the NDP and 

the Liberals would say there's no need, not even for debate, and 

there's nothing Saskatchewan can do.  Well 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

I'll tell you, there was a lot Saskatchewan did in the last nine 

years , a lot we did, Mr. Speaker -- billions and billions and 

billions and billions of dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So far, Mr. Speaker, the record is about 13 

billion, 300 million to zip, to zero.  And they're standing in 

their place, Mr. Speaker, and say no, there's no crisis.  The 

NDP and the Liberals stand here and say there's no crisis and 

they won't debate it.  And they haven't got a dime -- not a 

penny.  Mr. Speaker, they don't have one red cent to offer to 

the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to review the record, for the record, what the 

emergency assistance proposal entails, and then ask again for 

the government to reconsider its intransigence in this matter, or 

at least explain why it will not accept a proposal for any other 

reason that it's just not an NDP idea. 

 

The member for Riversdale has said if farm families do not 

receive immediate cash assistance, 20 per cent of them are in 

danger of being lost this winter.  Mr. Speaker, the Premier says 

if the farm families don't get cash immediately, 20 per cent of 

them are going down this winter.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there was 

a commitment by the previous administration and the federal 

government for $800 million.  Half that money is coming now. 

 

And the NDP leader said, if they don't get more before 

Christmas, all of that and more than 20 per cent of them are 

going to be lost by this winter.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that is his 

contention, not one invented by the opposition.  That's what the 

NDP leader says, the Premier of Saskatchewan -- 20 per cent of 

our farmers at risk this winter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We also know that the federal government is willing to pay out 

only a portion of the $800 million.  The member for Riversdale 

has made it clear that this is not enough to avert a disaster this 

winter.  Now, Mr. Speaker, given all of that and given the 

escapable arguments of the Leader of the NDP, the issue 

becomes one of getting as much money into the hands of 

farmers as quickly as possible.  Rural families need it. 

 

And there's a very, very simple way for us to do that.  And the 

government can do it with the precious little money.  To put the 

remaining 3 or $400 million into rural Saskatchewan before the 

end of the month would cost the government 3 or $4 million in 

interest payments at most. 

 

Now imagine, 3 or $400 million could go out there right now.  

You just phone the federal government and you'd say, we'll 

pick up the interest tab on that.  I know you're going to pay it 

all, but let's get the whole load out there right now -- 3 or $4 

million.  That's what it would cost, they say, initially for a third 

school board that they promised. 

 

Now go to the SARM executive meeting or go some place else 

at agriculture and say, well we've made a priority.  We're going 

to come up with a third school board as opposed to helping 

farmers and ranchers and fishermen and people who are poor 

all over rural Saskatchewan 

beyond their . . . not their fault.  They say, I can't come up with 

3 or $4 million to put 3 or 400 million in the hands of these 

rural people prior to Christmas -- for Christmas, Mr. Speaker, a 

time of caring and sharing and giving and responsibility; 

reaching out beyond your partisan needs or your political 

needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale has refused to even 

debate it.  He says 20 per cent of them are going down this 

winter unless they get money now.  And he's got access to a 

budget of $5 billion -- $5 billion, Mr. Speaker -- and 3 or 4 

million would put hundreds of millions into the hands of 

farmers.  And he refuses to talk about it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we put forward that and he could have said so in a 

Speech from the Throne.  He could have backed it up.  He 

would have unanimous consent of this House, at least as far as 

I can speak for the members in this opposition.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, he didn't do that.  He refuses to even discuss it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we look at those in this House and 

outside who are expecting something to take place, we see no 

support from the Liberal Party for this, no support from the 

NDP Party.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we find is the president 

of the Liberal Party said there's no need for farm assistance.  

Did you know that, Mr. Speaker?  And the executive members 

out there in the NDP, I don't know them all, but I would 

suggest, are they saying that too?  No need?  Just because we're 

in power now, there's no need to help. 

 

Well it's fine to fund a great big plane trip.  All go down to 

Ottawa, travel around for two or three days and speak, have 

your plane fare paid and your lodging paid and whatever else 

paid, Mr. Speaker; come back home empty-handed and then 

say, oh but there's no crisis, there's no need to debate it and no 

need for money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, either the NDP leader is not being forthright in 

his assessment of the dangers and he was just talking prior to 

an election, or he was just blowing some steam in Ottawa, or 

he doesn't care.  What is it, Mr. Speaker?  Does he care? 

 

He says 20 per cent of the farm families are going down this 

winter and there's not a dime from the provincial government 

to help them, and 3 or $4 million would put 3 or 400 million 

out there.  And he says he doesn't have any money.  Either, Mr. 

Speaker, he exaggerated the problem -- and I don't think he did 

-- or he doesn't care.  The grinch that stole Christmas for 

thousands and thousands of rural children, farm families, 

people all over Saskatchewan, who believed that this 

government would care.  And not a red cent.  At the Christmas 

of 1991, not a dime from the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's so reminiscent of 1981.  Ten years ago today, 

Mr. Speaker, this afternoon, interest rates were 22 per cent in 

this province -- 22 per cent 10 years ago this afternoon.  And 

not a dime of help, not one red penny to protect the farmers and 

ranchers.  And they said please, Mr. Provincial Government, do 

something.  And you know what Mr. Blakeney did, and the 

member from Riversdale who was deputy premier? They said, 

oh it's 

  



150 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

very serious but you'll have to work it out yourself because the 

federal government's got to fix it.  Do the best you can.  That's 

what they said.  It's so reminiscent -- talk and talk and talk. 

 

And then when they were losing their farms, you know what 

they did, Mr. Speaker?  They said, I'll take your land.  We'll put 

your land into the land bank and then we'll tell you who can 

farm it.  And that was the worst piece of patronage in the 

history of Saskatchewan politics -- the worst in North America.  

People were in trouble.  People hurting, losing their land, and 

22 per cent interest rates, and that administration, the NDP 

said, no help; go to the feds, and if you do get into trouble, 

come to me and I'll take your land. 

 

Retroactive legislation, nationalize, squeeze them out, let the 

government run it and then have a few partisans in there 

saying, you can have that quarter and you can have this quarter 

and you can have those three quarters and you can have this.  

And they came from 40 or 50 miles from the land to farm it if 

they were NDP.  And we all know that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, either they're heartless or they do have a strategy 

that isn't in the Speech from the Throne.  The strategy isn't in 

the Speech from the Throne and they won't tell the public what 

it is.  This little hollow document, Mr. Speaker, has nothing to 

do with what they're really doing, which is nothing for farmers 

and a whole bunch of patronage and a whole bunch of 

retroactivity, whole bunch of nationalization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is that what they told the public they were going 

to do?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I say the farmers and ranchers of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are worth 3 or $4 million to get 

help before Christmas.  We are very serious about this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- We're going to endorse that motion because that 

motion is responsible. It's going to be paid back by the federal 

government.  It gets money out there for the children, moms, 

dads, parents that are worried for Christmas of 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they can be hardball with the bankers.  They can 

take on these people, take some others and they can force 

unions and others, but at least they could think of the people. 

 

Another idea we placed before this House is contained in 

motion no. 5, Mr. Speaker, under the sponsorship of the 

member for Arm River.  That motion urges the government to 

amend the necessary laws to give farmers the right of first 

refusal to lease or lease to own their land if it is foreclosed by 

financial institutions. 

 

And we recognized that in the campaign, Mr. Speaker, and 

recognized it before.  Give them the first right of refusal; give 

them a chance to own the property, because they're being 

pushed aside. 

 

What happens right now is when a farmer is foreclosed on by a 

financial institution, and for the record, the NDP is 

still seizing assets, Mr. Speaker.  Foreclosure happens. The 

farmer has the right of first refusal to buy that land. 

 

Very often the financial institutions choose to lease the land out 

rather than sell it outright.  And in that way the farmer's first 

refusal rights are lost.  Mr. Speaker, at least they can protect the 

farmer under these circumstances. 

 

So we have high hopes that the government would listen to this 

suggestion and accept it without the partisan bickering and 

bloodshed that seems to accompany everything that they do 

today. 

 

Three, Mr. Speaker.  Motion no. 3 seeks public input of 

importance to Saskatchewan families.  Motion no. 1, my 

motion, seeks the continuation of an energy agreement that 

would provide 50 million worth of knowledge, research, 

learning, and education.  Diversify the economy.  Research 

money for training, health, education. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the knowledge industry and the research industry 

has always been a very important part of Saskatchewan.  

Nothing in the Speech from the Throne here.   Not a thing.  No 

plan. 

 

Motions 9, 13, and 15 seek action on the people's democratic 

decisions in regard to the plebiscite questions.  Why couldn't 

they after an election, when it's clearly accepted by the people, 

address that right up front, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We're not going to forget that.  We're going to hold it to them.  

We're going to hold this government to family values, to the 

plebiscites, to the people who said yes, I want to see balanced 

budgets; and yes, I want to protect life; and yes, I want a vote 

in the constitution; and I'm not going to stand up there and just 

trade $4 an acre for Canada. 

 

They know, Mr. Speaker, they need to tie these people's hands. 

The folks didn't just run to the NDP because they liked all these 

old programs I've just been through.  You know it and I know 

it, Mr. Speaker.  You know it and I know it. 

 

Motion 19 seeks to extend a short-line railway network and 

provide the co-ops with some real support.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

that's a good idea.  They could have suggested that and moved 

on it.  By contrast, the motions of the government members are 

modelled on the throne speech in that they contain nothing of 

substance.  They have no proposals of anything that solves 

anything in the throne speech.  We see no suggestions, no plan, 

no target.  In fact they've thrown up their hands and say, we 

just don't know what to do.  Except, Mr. Speaker, behind the 

scenes, we know the NDP well. 

 

And I say to all the back-benchers and the new ones that are in 

here, you'll learn the NDP well too once you're in here.  You'll 

watch.  You'll learn.  You'll watch.  You'll watch and you'll 

stay in your place.  And you'll stay in your place and say, well, 

well, well, is this what it's all about? -- the patronage and the 

pay-offs and the retroactivity and the nationalization. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

Mr. Speaker, the 55 people across the way may have a big 

caucus that generates some big egos, but they've got to accept 

responsibility.  And we can only pray that they do not repeat 

the disasters of the previous experience and the previous 

administration.  But they're well on their way.  They're well on 

their way. 

 

And as some members know that have been here for some 

time, they lost because of the very tricks they're pulling off -- 

the arrogance, the retroactivity, the patronage, and no plan.  I'll 

take your farm.  I'll take your building.  We'll run it under the 

Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations.  Listening to 

members in the debate leaves you with the impression that they 

are looking backwards longing for the days of T.C. Douglas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, isn't it interesting that when the new members get 

up to speak, they don't talk about the Blakeney administration 

and the exciting diversification and all the good things that the 

member from Riversdale did.  They go back to the 1940s after 

the war, and they'll talk about the former premier, T.C. 

Douglas.  And that's it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the reason they're here is to say, well this is 

it.  We'll make it like the 1940s.  We'll make it like the 1950s.  

Mr. Speaker, we're going into the 21st century.  What's the plan 

now in the Speech from the Throne for the 21st century?  

Where's the vision?  Where's the direction?  Where's the help 

for farmers? 

 

Tommy Douglas would've stood in this legislature and said, it's 

time we helped the farmers at Christmas in 1991.  He would've 

said that.  You should be ashamed of yourself, the whole bunch 

of you.  Tommy Douglas would not have let farmers hurt like 

this after promise after promise that you would help them.  You 

haven't done anything.  You've succumbed to 10 leaders over 

there saying, we won't do anything.  There's no money.  There's 

no help. 

 

And then you have the -- what is it? -- you have the audacity to 

stand in your place and talk about Tommy Douglas helping 

people in a recession, in a depression.  What are you doing?  

Mr. Speaker, he would've stood here.  He would've said, I 

wouldn't have gone with party ranks.  I'd have stood in my 

place and said, farmers need help.  Farmers need help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas was a realist.  And he said, 

when farmers need help, you better be there.  And he would've 

said, the CCF is one thing, but the NDP is something else 

altogether.  He said that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas came to one of my fund-raisers 

in Calgary when he was on the board of directors of Husky Oil.  

And he talked about diversification and he talked about the 

future and he talked about oil and he talked about all of the 

things.  He said he wouldn't have even under . . . He'd 

understood the praise, but he wouldn't understand what most of 

these members were talking about -- that in the 1990s and the 

21st century that we're going to relive the '40s.  These folks are 

back in Pearl Harbor fixed that way. 

 

(1545) 

Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas, if he was alive today, with the 

greatest respect, would have stuck up for rural people, stuck up 

for farmers.  He said, I'll find some money; I'll do what I have 

to to make it work.  Well I'm going to remind people this 

Christmas, and all over Saskatchewan, that this NDP 

administration on the very memory of Tommy Douglas gave 

them nothing.  Not a dime.  Not a penny.  Not one red cent.  

And you should be ashamed of yourselves. 

 

And the history of T.C. Douglas, who everybody in this 

province has time for, great deal of respect, but you are letting 

him down.  Politically you let him down, professionally. And 

most importantly, at Christmas time when people need help, a 

social administration, a socialist administration, says no.  We're 

too fat cat, we're too arrogant, we're too big.  We have a 

majority.  This small number of people who are talking about 

farmers don't count because they're too small. 

 

Do you think Tommy Douglas would endorse that kind of 

arrogance from the leader?  For any of the back-benchers, 

anybody else says, the individual farmer doesn't matter; it's the 

whole bunch of you.  Boy oh boy oh boy, is this province in for 

some surprises in the next few months and the next few years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only are the 1940s gone, but the kinds of 

solutions that are necessary today are not the kinds that were in 

the '40s, except for compassion and caring and love and 

affection for your neighbours and for people and your 

constituents.  I don't know what all of you are going to say 

when you go home for Christmas, when they say, well what did 

you do?  Oh, sent a bunch of the leaders to Ottawa and they 

had a nice time. 

 

Well what about us?  I can't make my payments.  I'm losing my 

land.  My kids are upset.  My wife is upset.  My folks are 

losing their property.  What are you going to do for me?  

You're supposed to be a CCFer, an NDPer, somebody with 

compassion.  You're much kinder.  You're supposed to be 

kinder than the Conservatives.  And they only give $13 billion.  

What are you going to do? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the former government of the member from 

Riversdale was almost criminally destructive of this province's 

opportunities when he had a chance.  And now when he's got a 

new chance, Mr. Speaker, he will not take on his 

responsibilities seriously. 

 

Even when, Mr. Speaker, we look at the possibility . . . and 

they never would, although I've got some documentation that 

says that they thought about it until they thought politically 

they wouldn't be able to do it.  Even, Mr. Speaker, if they 

would help people in the community raise money and they 

would back it up in the whole sense of bonds, replacing debt 

with equity.  Figure that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Lots of people have debt, and provinces and power 

corporations and others can have debt.  And if the people could 

be investing in it, Mr. Speaker, replace the debt with their 

equity and the return goes to them. 

 

Now many of these members probably haven't heard about 

that.  But, Mr. Speaker, just let me give you a couple 

  



152 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

of examples because it should have been in the Speech from 

the Throne because we have money in Saskatchewan -- 13 to 

$15 billion dollars on deposit any one day.  And we could use 

that money, and we should.  Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, for 

example, is looking at equity as opposed to debt; getting 

shareholders to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP administration always went to New 

York and borrowed money to build something.  And then when 

they had to pay the interest, the interest always went where?  

Back to New York. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation is going to 

build a new power project for $500 million, Mr. Speaker.  Do 

you know what we would do?  SaskPower bonds.  We'd go to 

the people of Saskatchewan and say, would you like to invest 

in SaskPower bonds?  And they said yes, and they always sold 

out, Mr. Speaker.  Always sold out. 

 

So you need $500 million to build a Nipawin project or 

something else.  You go to the people and say, I don't want to 

borrow from New York and let all the interest go there.  

Saskatchewan people on the foundation of what Tommy 

Douglas talked about in participating in a co-operative way, 

we'll invest and buy power bonds.  The province guarantees it, 

and 10 per cent money on $500 million is $50 million a year 

that went back to Saskatchewan communities, not to New York 

bankers. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Even Allan Blakeney did. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Now even Allan . . . good point. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we did that over and over again.  And I'm sure 

some families in this room participated in power bonds, 

telephone bonds, and got a lower rate.  Kept the interest in the 

province of Saskatchewan, which is a good thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker.  All of those things, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we did it in allowing people to participate more and 

more and more and replace the debt with equity, Mr. Speaker. 

And it happened time and time again. 

 

In fact the former premier, Allan Blakeney, Mr. Speaker, 

admitted that he had to buy Saskoil shares -- Saskoil shares, 

Mr. Speaker.  Now they condemned it and said, oh it's not good 

to have equity here, Mr. Speaker.  But I'll tell you, Allan 

Blakeney bought equity in the province in Saskoil.  People all 

over the province bought bonds, TeleBonds, reduced their 

telephone rates.  All of those community development bonds 

that use equity, not debt.  And we are going through a 

recession, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That's the kind of instrument that Tommy Douglas would talk 

about -- use the people in the co-operative fashion to help build 

in the community.  Mr. Speaker, we did that in community 

after community after community and hundreds of millions of 

dollars in Power and TeleBonds that were very popular and 

kept millions of dollars in Saskatchewan when in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, the previous administration -- no, we'll just send it all 

to New York. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that kind of concept was discussed prior to 1982, 

and the new members probably don't know that.  If 

we look back at 1981, Mr. Speaker . . . In fact there was a 

board of directors meeting January 14, 1982.  The current 

Minister of Finance, there was Elwood Cowley, Allan 

Blakeney, Walter Smishek, Ted Bowerman, Don Cody, the 

current Minister of Finance, Eiling Kramer, Mr. Beatty. 

 

The board of directors of the Crown management investments 

corporation said we should do a bond project.  And do you 

know what we should do, Mr. Speaker?  It says here, to 

encourage Saskatchewan residents to invest in a provincial 

industrial developments, to generate a new pool of capital to 

make strategic investments thereby allowing Saskatchewan to 

take advantage of opportunities for large industrial projects.  

We should privatize.  We should let the people invest.  Other 

Saskatchewan political parties will undoubtedly make similar 

proposals in the future, they said. 

 

Imagine -- at a time when you need money and you need 

investment and you need equity.  They called it SHAR 

(Saskatchewan holding and reinvestment) or share, S-H-A-R 

proposal.  And it was passed by the board of directors of the 

cabinet ministers that were there.  SHAR would be initiated by 

issuing a prospectus outlining a list of potential investment 

projects that have current, dramatic interest such as Aspen 

newsprint, Aspen market pulp, a heavy oil upgrader, a fertilizer 

plant like ammonia, direct iron ore reduction, tertiary recovery 

projects, a potash mine, a uranium mine, natural gas 

exploration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when we want the opportunity to build 

and develop, in the Speech from the Throne and without any 

financial paper at all the NDP have said we have no . . . 

(inaudible) . . . with community development bonds.  We won't 

do any of this investment.  We won't even look at equity as 

opposed to debt, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And yet they were the very people that knew that it made sense 

in the long run.  And they go on to say, we could do it with 

IPSCO, Prairie Malt, Agra, Intercon, SED, Cablecom, the 

Cornwall Centre, PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), Nabu 

-- although they said a good possibility, but will not yield early 

dividends.  Well Nabu wouldn't; it was a big loss.  It lost about 

$5 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I raise that point because, Mr. Speaker, at least in 

the Speech from the Throne you could put together a financial 

target, Mr. Speaker, that would allow . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Ask the member whether he would be willing to 

table that document in the House at this time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the member willing to table the document?  

Okay, after he's finished. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'd be glad to table it, Mr. Speaker.  I might just 

prefer to refer to it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we just take a moment and we look at the 

strategy that could have been presented in the Speech from the 

Throne for diversification, having people 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

participate in the province because we have billions of dollars 

on deposit in credit unions and financial institutions. 

 

Look at PAPCO.  It would be wise, Mr. Speaker, if this new 

tribunal would look at PAPCO for more than just partisan 

reasons.  Look back and we find a government-owned pulp 

mill losing $91,000 a day.  The NDP government had put $313 

million into the business and operating and interest expenses 

from 1981 to 1985 for 204 million. 

 

Imagine, Mr. Speaker, they put $300 million into it and then 

they put another $204 million into it.  By the time the early '80s 

came around it was losing $91,000 a day being run by the 

government. 

 

The sale to Weyerhaeuser stopped the massive losses to the 

taxpayer, of $90,000 a day.  And so far, and I can hear anybody 

admit this in the House today, Weyerhaeuser has paid $65 

million to the province of Saskatchewan.  Did anybody ever 

tell you that? 

 

You were losing $90,000 a day. You had hundreds of millions 

of dollars sunk into it.  It wasn't operating profitably.  Mr. 

Speaker, we stopped the loss; they paid $65 million already, 

and we still have the entire principal to come. And you ask any 

farmer, any home owner if that's a nice position to be in.  

You've paid 65 million in interest, Mr. Speaker, and you still 

owe all the principal and interest.  Mr. Speaker, did you hear 

any of the members talk about that? 

 

Capital spending by Weyerhaeuser has exceeded 361 million, 

50 million more than the NDP poured into its losing 

proposition.  In other words, Mr. Speaker, the new company 

has spent more in new capital and economic development than 

the government of the NDP dumped down the hole.  And on 

top of that, Mr. Speaker, we stopped the bleeding -- $90,000 a 

day.  They've given us $65 million in money already and they 

still owe the principal and interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it employees over 1,000 people, not even 

including those employed in the woodlands.  Weyerhaeuser has 

the payroll of 60 million annually -- pays 50 million to 

contractors for wood supplies; a million dollars in stumpage 

and royalty fees; $1.5 million in property taxes to the city of 

Prince Albert; and has sold pulp and paper worth more than a 

quarter of a billion dollars. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, you go from losing the taxpayer $91,000 

every day, each and every day, day after day after day after day 

after day, and you turn it into that kind of success story.  And 

they paid us $65 million and they still owe us principal plus 

interest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I ask the public of Saskatchewan,  did you ever hear the NDP 

talk about Weyerhaeuser in the campaign?  Did they ever tell 

you all the facts, Mr. Speaker?  Did they walk around and say, 

the NDP government lost $91,000 a day; the NDP 

administration had hundreds of millions at loss there.  Did they 

say that?  Did they say Weyerhaeuser's paid $65 million in cash 

so far? 

 

I see the new members, Mr. Speaker, of the NDP taking 

notes.  They haven't heard this.  Well go to Weyerhaeuser and 

ask for the accounting.  Look at the cancelled cheques, Mr. 

Speaker -- the thousand people working there, making new 

paper worth a quarter of a billion in sales, Mr. Speaker.  They 

couldn't do that, Mr. Speaker, because they were too busy 

nationalizing, taking them over. 

 

Mr. Speaker, look at potash.  Look at potash.  Let's look at the 

Arthur Anderson report on the Potash Corporation.  And I'll 

just touch briefly on this because I think it's important that the 

people of Saskatchewan, when they're looking at a Speech 

from the Throne, should know the management of 

corporations. 

 

It will be interesting to see if the Gass tribunal will dismiss the 

work of a professional accountant.  And with only one 

accountant on the tribunal and considering the political nature 

of the tribunal, an attack on someone's professional credentials 

would not be surprising. 

 

But if we do look at the Anderson report, we find that 

investment of the member for Riversdale in nationalizing the 

potash industry -- and that whole debate was lead by the 

Premier today -- cost the province more than $2 billion.  One 

nationalization cost the province $2 billion -- 2 billion, Mr. 

Speaker.  And those are not numbers made up by this small 

opposition or the public or anybody who's particularly partisan.  

This is an independent report by an accountant, professional 

accountant, Mr. Anderson. 

 

So let's hope, Mr. Speaker, that all of the analyses that we're 

looking at, whether it's PAPCO . . . what was happening 

before, compared to today?  What did it cost to nationalize 

something, even in terms of our reputation as a province?  

What would it cost our province now with retroactive 

legislation?  How will investors feel about Saskatchewan? -- 

that we're going to put billions of dollars here knowing, one, 

there's a history of nationalization; two, there's a history of 

retroactive legislation.  We saw that in Europe and in Germany 

in the 1930s and '40s.  Mr. Speaker, that reputation hurts 

Saskatchewan, so the investment won't come in here. 

 

Let's look at Saskoil for a moment.  Before it was sold to the 

people of the province it employed 220 people.  After it was 

taken out of the government sector, it now employs 600 people. 

That's almost threefold, Mr. Speaker -- 300 per cent increase in 

employment, right in downtown Regina with its head office in 

a brand-new building.  It was 2 or $300 million mostly debt 

and it's now over $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, with a very large 

percentage of equity. 

 

Well I just make the point, Mr. Speaker, that in the Speech 

from the Throne in the financial analysis for the province of 

Saskatchewan, we would expect from the NDP not only help, 

but something of substance to say this is how we'll diversify.  

We'll use community money.  We'll have co-operatives.  We'll 

use community development bonds.  We'll let people invest in 

paper and pulp and gas and oil and a combination of things.  

But we didn't see it. 

 

So I would remind the members opposite of a very important 

thing.  The people of this province didn't just 

  



154 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

vote, Mr. Speaker, didn't just vote to get patronage from the 

NDP.  They didn't just vote, Mr. Speaker, to say, well I'm sure 

you can balance the budget and cut taxes and do all of these 

things without some sort of a plan. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's got to be more to the administration than 

what we saw in the Speech from the Throne.  If we look at 

welfare, Mr. Speaker, it's rather stunning that we would lose 

the Saskatchewan Works program.  I don't know why an 

administration like the NDP wouldn't at least have in a plan in 

a Speech from the Throne something with respect to 

employment for welfare people.  But to cancel one that has 

three important parts, the first leg of which is skills 

development; the second is an entire network of counselling 

services; and the third is new careers in Saskatchewan -- works 

that put them together like three legs on a stool, Mr. Speaker -- 

why they would just kick them out and say no, you can just go 

on welfare; we'll use $300,000 just for welfare payments.  No 

more training, no more new careers, no putting you into a 

process.  It's irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they've ignored health -- not a word about how 

they're going to expand the health care budget, make it more 

efficient, make it more effective.  They talk about community 

health care services but nobody knows what that means. 

 

We haven't heard an awful lot except from behind the scenes, 

Mr. Speaker, where they're going to stop hospitals.  And our 

members are hearing it even from NDP ridings, Mr. Speaker.  I 

think they're going to stop my hospital or stop my nursing 

home.  Done like quiet political assassins, away from the eye of 

the media, they go out there and without any noise they say, we 

won't be able to build your hospital, won't be able to do your 

nursing home, we won't be able to do this. 

 

And they've got money, Mr. Speaker, for patronage and they've 

got money, Mr. Speaker, for third school boards, and they've 

got money for other things but not for health care, not for 

hospitals, not for farmers.  Mr. Speaker, they don't have it 

because they don't want it to go to farmers and to health care 

and education.  It was all talk -- all talk. 

 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps the most difficult thing to endure for the 

public is to endorse a secret analysis of Saskatchewan's Public 

Accounts and indeed investments.  Mr. Speaker, the Power 

bonds, the community development bonds, SaskTel bonds, 

Saskoil, PAPCO, Weyerhaeuser, fertilizer plants -- Mr. 

Speaker, we've debated them here, and we're very happy that 

we can finally make fertilizer and make paper for the first time 

and thousands and tens of thousands of people could invest.  

And thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, all those Crown 

corporations are not eligible for the patronage that's going on 

now in the rest of government. 

 

What could be more fair than have all of the public participate 

in resource development?  Why should it just be a handful of 

cabinet members, ministers that run a Crown corporation?  

Why not have the public involved?  Let them be shareholders.  

Like a co-op, Mr. Speaker, let them have some shares. 

The members opposite don't understand that.  They don't 

understand that.  They don't see why wouldn't it be all right.  

As Tommy Douglas sat on the board of directors of Husky Oil 

-- T.C. Douglas stood there, and that's a publicly traded 

company, and Tommy Douglas is on the board of Saskoil.  

Why, Mr. Speaker, can't the NDP?  Because, Mr. Speaker, it's 

because they're so tied up in that union-leader politics they 

can't even allow the people to participate.  Why can't you allow 

your citizens to buy Power bonds and TeleBonds, and 

participate in Saskoil and Sask potash and the uranium industry 

so they can benefit?  Explain that.  What are you afraid of -- 

that the people will actually participate?  I don't know.  I think, 

Mr. Speaker, they're afraid of the fact they won't be able to 

control their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we cannot force the NDP to allow you to 

continue . . . us to continue and the people to continue the work 

they've done in participation and community development 

bonds and diversification, at least we can remind the public 

over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker, that these programs 

and these communities and these strategies and ideas that were 

built up from the time of Tommy Douglas in the province of 

Saskatchewan do not deserve to be killed by this 

administration.  The NDP should give them the time of day and 

some respect because those communities need decentralization, 

they need community development bonds, and certainly, the 

province needs equity as opposed to debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to all those that are being fired, I just want to say, 

to all those who are subject to witch-hunts, whether you're in 

department land or in Crown corporations, or whether you're a 

crop insurance inspector or whoever you might be, Mr. 

Speaker, I say to all of those people, you let the public know, 

you let this opposition know, you let your MLA know, you let 

others know that if you've been treated unfairly, then we will 

make sure that this government is held accountable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The NDP administration, Mr. Speaker, said that 

they were going to cut taxes and balance the budget and do all 

these things for agriculture and have no patronage.  Well every 

day in the newspaper there's another person who gets fired and 

another.  And they all say, well it's because this is an austerity 

program.  And the media doesn't believe that.  That's an excuse 

because they say, well I guess we'll have to have crop 

insurance inspectors afterwards.  And guess who they might 

be? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public knows what they're doing.  Anybody 

who's fired, all I say to them, Mr. Speaker, if they believe that 

they've been treated unfairly, give their names to this 

opposition.  Submit them to the media.  Submit them to this 

legislature and we will hold these people accountable. 

 

That retroactive legislation that says valid contracts -- whether 

Crop Insurance, Social Services, Crown corporations, deputies 

. . . Mr. Speaker, they will not pass that easily in this 

legislature, I'll tell you that.  They will not pass that retroactive 

legislation easily. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

It's unfair.  It's wrong.  It's wrong; it's undemocratic, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

There is another threat from the member opposite, Mr. 

Speaker, another threat.  Mr. Speaker, we were elected to 

scrutinize the king's money, to stand in our place, Mr. Speaker.  

The member from Elphinstone doesn't like what I'm saying, 

Mr. Speaker, but he can get his turn. 

 

This is the king of patronage here, the king of patronage, the 

minister of patronage. 

 

He doesn't like it when I say that, Mr. Speaker, but all the 

people he fires, and people like him fires, they can come to us 

and we'll hold that bunch accountable. 

 

And we'll make sure that the retroactive legislation is really 

debated here.  Because it's wrong, Mr. Speaker, and everybody 

across the country and North America, and Tommy Douglas, 

Mr. Speaker, wouldn't have encouraged it, and he wouldn't 

have endorsed it. 

 

You find all of those that spoke about Tommy Douglas.  You 

find out if he introduced retroactive legislation to take away 

human rights and human dignity.  You have a right to a 

contract, Mr. Speaker, and T.C. Douglas wouldn't do that and 

he wouldn't endorse this bunch doing it.  It's not the right thing 

to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP were elected, but people expected more 

open government, less partisanship, less patronage.  Mr. 

Speaker, we are looking forward to an administration that is 

going to live up to the promises that it made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say, in wrapping this part of my 

comments about the amendment up, that I am concerned about 

the attitude of the administration.  That's clearly evident in my 

brief remarks here today -- my concern about the arrogance of 

the member from Riversdale who says this opposition doesn't 

count because it's too small; the member from Regina Albert 

South who says, doesn't really matter if it's just one person; that 

doesn't really matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly will not be compromised.  We will 

not ignore individuals.  The government has indicated it will 

ignore the people's voice on funding, on budgets, on patronage.  

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ignore the people because of 

plebiscites is not the right thing to do.  They say that's a small 

message from a small population.  How can they possibly 

know what's right because we only represent a few thousands 

and tens of thousands of people. 

 

Well in the plebiscites, Mr. Speaker, it represented hundreds of 

thousands of people -- hundreds of thousands who are 

pro-family, pro-budget balanced and having legislation to do 

so.  And they're not going to ignore that, Mr. Speaker, even 

though they say, well this family doesn't matter or this farmer 

doesn't matter or this individual doesn't matter, Mr. Speaker.  

The power to know what is right is not left just for those that 

have the majority, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I got a comment on a matter of philosophy as it relates to the 

Milgaard case, to make my point.  It seems that the 

argument of a member for Regina Albert South has gained 

some credence, and it is a scary thing that members of the 

government might give any weight at all to such arguments.  

And I notice the Attorney General says that he didn't agree with 

it. 

 

The case in its high sounding, better than grade 9 statement is 

this:  are not the millions more important than one? 

 

Does anybody in this legislature believe that?  Are not the 

millions more important than one?  Where have we heard that 

before?  One grandparent, one mother, one child, one woman, 

one individual -- but aren't the millions more important than 

just one?  And if they're more important than just one, maybe 

they're more important than two -- a husband and wife, two 

children.  Are not the millions more important than one?  

Imagine a statement in this legislature, and we still haven't 

heard whether the Premier will stand there and disregard it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the justice system, the answer is 

a loud, clear, and unequivocal no.  One is very important.  It's 

the whole reason we have this Legislative Assembly, the rights 

of one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The millions can never be safe if the one is not 

safe.  Millions could never be safe, the legislature cannot be 

safe, democracy cannot be safe if one is not safe. 

 

If the police come knocking on your door, you had better pray 

that the system still believes the only protection for all is 

protection for you, the one -- not the system and not the 

millions. 

 

The end of the other train of logic is absolutely frightening and 

we've gone to war over it a couple of times, and may in the 

future -- respecting individual rights and dignity.  Do you think 

Tommy Douglas would have stood in his place as premier of 

the province of Saskatchewan and tolerated that?  And all the 

rest of these members sit on their hands, don't know what to do 

with it.  Well at least stand up and say, not me.  Boy, have they 

got a lot to learn about this outfit. 

 

The end of the other train of logic is frightening, Mr. Speaker, 

because if they get away with that, they get away with, well it's 

okay for retroactive legislation, it's okay to nationalize, it's 

okay to take away rights, as long as it's for the NDP system. 

 

It reminds me of the Saskatchewan family of Crown 

corporations.  They called a great big family of Crown 

corporations a family.  Holy smokes!  Do you believe that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that the Crown corporations are now a family 

because the system is more important than the individual?  

Where's the rights of the individual, the democracy, social 

democracy?  Mr. Speaker, I haven't heard the likes of that in 

this legislature and I didn't hear the likes of it in the history of 

reading about this legislature.  And I'll tell you, the history of 

the CCF would be embarrassed with this. 

  



156 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Are not the millions of whites more important than a few 

10,000 Indians?  Where do you draw the line?  Are not the 

millions of Christians more important than the minority of 

Jews?  Are not the millions of not yet accused of anything 

more important than the innocent man accused of something?  

How about the millions and millions of people who haven't 

been accused of anything?  Children.  What child?  What 

senior?  Is that consistent with the whole philosophy of the 

NDP, that the system is more important than the senior, than 

the grandparent, than the child? 

 

(1615) 

 

In every case the answer of our society must be no, and we 

must never let it pass in this Assembly.  And that such an 

argument is credible to us or worthy of this Assembly is clearly 

not going to be the case.  We stick up for the individual -- the 

rights of the unborn, the rights of the mother, the rights of the 

grandparents, the rights of every individual.  And for the NDP 

to say it's not, Mr. Speaker -- not, Mr. Speaker -- is incredible. 

 

I want to repeat it once more for the benefit of the Minister of 

Justice and the former minister of Justice, the member of 

Riversdale.  The attitude of the member for Regina Albert 

South -- his attitude about millions are more important than one 

-- is not worthy of this Assembly. 

 

And this Christmas season, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let me 

comment on this whole issue from my perspective as a 

Christian.  When Christ was born, He was born as one man.  

When He was falsely accused, His accusers used the argument 

that it was necessary for the stability of the society that this one 

man should be given up.  The decision to crucify Him was a 

decision based on the argument that the millions are more 

important than the one person's innocence. 

 

And when Christ died, He did not die for the social order of the 

system.  He died for each of us as individuals because we, by 

ourselves, are important to Him.  And without the respect for 

that one single, individual soul and person, the millions aren't 

worth a cent. 

 

And even if the millions abandon what is right, what we know 

about the spirit of Christmas is that the memory of that one 

individual will always protect and demand the protection of 

one who is right and one who is innocent.  The lesson of 

Christmas is the importance of the single human being.  And 

it's so important that all of us who are Christians believe the 

good Lord gave His only, His only Son to prove that point. 

 

And this is reflected throughout the Old and the New 

Testaments, whether it's the parable of the prodigal son or the 

lost sheep.  And as such it is the heritage of the Christians and 

the Jews together.  It is so basic to our values that God went 

even further in the concept than we can imagine today.  And 

the principles go back in parable after parable after parable in 

the Bible.  In the cities of Sodom and Gonmorrah God would 

have saved the many guilty but for the lack of one good person.  

The suffering of one innocent person was too great a price to 

pay to exact justice on entire cities of a guilty people. 

Mr. Speaker, what we see in this Legislative Assembly outside 

the Speech from the Throne, which is absolutely hollow, is all 

of the activity and all of the endorsement of some of the worst 

kind of politics you could imagine in any jurisdiction in this 

country.  We see statements that say the system is more 

important than the individual.  We hear about retroactive 

legislation.  We hear about nationalization.  We hear about . . . 

Well there's no money at Christmas to help the poor.  We hear 

about the fact that there just isn't sufficient funds now to do all 

the things that they thought were important, because they had a 

conscience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thousands and thousands and thousands of people 

in this province want to see an administration that is open, 

honest, without patronage, thinks about the individual and then 

the family and then the community and then the administration, 

not the other way around.  Mr. Speaker, the other way around 

is dangerous. 

 

I mentioned the Saskatchewan family of Crown corporations 

and the kind of statements we've heard in here that would make 

any administration, I'm sure, embarrassed. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, the history of John Diefenbaker, the first 

Canadian Prime Minister to be from Saskatchewan . . . and if 

you go back and look at Diefenbaker's Bill of Rights, Mr. 

Speaker, and respected by people all over the province, and 

Saskatchewan people did support it.  And I paraphrase: they 

said this country was founded upon the principles that 

acknowledge the supremacy of God, the dignity of man, and 

the role of the family in a nation of free men and free women.  

Now you take those principles, Mr. Speaker, and it doesn't talk 

about the system being better than one individual.  It talks 

about the individual and the dignity being paramount and the 

respect. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And you have in his tradition, in the 

Conservative tradition, if you buy a membership on the history 

of John Diefenbaker, it'll say on the back of it, a heritage of 

freedom based on individual initiative, honour, integrity, and 

individual moral responsibility.  And it'll say equal rights under 

the law for all without discrimination.  Government as the 

servant not the master and social progress based on the needs 

of people, not as a means to power. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, isn't that a clear difference between the 

NDP socialist administration -- what we see from the Speech 

from the Throne -- and John Diefenbaker's history of individual 

rights and individual freedoms and the supremacy of God, and 

the families that communities built around that concept?  Mr. 

Speaker, we see it in the first few days of this new Assembly. 

 

So I'm disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that I can stand here, take 

the Speech from the Throne -- and I've read it very carefully 

and there's nothing it it.  I can look at Christmas time when one 

of the most severe crisis since the '30s we face and not a dime 

for farmers. Nothing. No help, no hope. 

 

It's Christmas time and I've listed over and over again -- 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

retroactivity, the system is more important than the individual.  

Nationalize this, close the trade offices, on and on and on.  And 

patronage, Mr. Speaker, like we haven't seen in generations in 

Saskatchewan.  Fire, fire, fire, fire, and replace them with 

yours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to make the point that this 

administration, this administration will be watched carefully by 

the opposition.  This administration and all its old tricks, Mr. 

Speaker, will be brought forward to the public of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And to anybody in Saskatchewan I say simply this . . . simply 

say this.  If you have been treated unfairly either because of 

patronage, either because you haven't been helped and you're in 

agriculture, or no diversification or no jobs or they don't 

balance the budget or they don't live up to your promises, you 

bring those concerns to us, Mr. Speaker, and we'll hold the 

NDP accountable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am very glad to endorse the motion put forward 

by the member from Moosomin and I'll certainly be voting for 

it.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm 

pleased and honoured to be here as the representative of the 

people of the Saltcoats constituency. 

 

Before I begin my response in support of the Speech from the 

Throne and against the amendment, I would like to extend my 

congratulations to the Speaker on his successful election as the 

Speaker of this Assembly.  Over the years Saskatchewan has 

established a tradition of fine Speakers and I'm sure that he will 

continue that tradition.  As a member of the Assembly I pledge 

to work with him within the framework of the rules which bind 

this Assembly.  I will support him and I will endeavour to 

co-operate with him while serving the needs and wishes of the 

constituents I represent. 

 

I also congratulate you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also congratulate each and every member of this 

present Assembly and I recognize the faith and trust voters 

have placed in you.  I congratulate the Premier on his selection 

of cabinet ministers.  I know they will serve honourably and 

with distinction in establishing a new direction for this 

government as witnessed in the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Indeed a new and fresh and open era of 

politics in government has begun. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- As a member of a rural riding, Mr. Speaker, 

I agree whole-heartedly with the comments made by my 

colleagues from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and Last 

Mountain-Touchwood who moved and seconded the Speech 

from the Throne.  I compliment and congratulate you both. 

I just want to take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to point out to this 

Assembly some of the legislative history of my constituency, 

Saltcoats.  This history is part of the reason that I proudly carry 

the voice of my constituents into this legislature. 

 

Let me share with the members here the fact that in 1905 when 

Saskatchewan became a province the first Speaker of the 

House was Thomas MacNutt, the member from Saltcoats.  As 

well, Saltcoats was honoured again from 1965 to 1971 by 

having James Snedker serve the legislature as Speaker of the 

House. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pride to represent 

Saltcoats, and it gives me great pride to share the honour of 

those members who served this riding before me.  I'd like to 

recognize the contribution made to this Assembly and to the 

people of Saskatchewan by the man who was the last member 

to serve Saltcoats in a cabinet position.  Many of you know Mr. 

Edgar Kaeding, and many of you have had the pleasure of 

working with him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- As I indicated before, Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have been elected to public office to represent the 

voice of my constituents in an open, honest, accessible, and 

accountable government.  With that commitment in mind, I 

want to inform my constituents that I will have a constituency 

office in Esterhazy.  It will be open early in the new year and I 

do look forward to assisting my constituents in whatever way I 

can. 

 

The thrust by our government with a renewed spirit of trust, 

co-operation, and community indicates to me that together we 

will confront the problems challenging us and together we will 

work to solve them the Saskatchewan way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it to be important to introduce to this 

Assembly my constituency of Saltcoats.  Saltcoats is a 

tremendously important area of the province.  It is a vital piston 

in the engine of our provincial economy.  But before I get into 

this discussion, let me first provide you with the geographic 

description. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saltcoats is a vast constituency that stretches from 

the majestic Qu'Appelle Valley in the south to just north of the 

town of Saltcoats, a distance of some 65 kilometres.  It includes 

the town of MacNutt in the north-east corner, and on the west it 

borders the constituency of Melville.  On the east, it borders 

Manitoba, an approximate distance of 80 kilometres.  The 

Yellowhead highway is a major access to my riding from the 

east and west.  The No. 9 Highway provides access from the 

north and south. 

 

In addition to the communities that I just mentioned, Mr. 

Speaker, the constituency of Saltcoats includes the 

communities of Spy Hill, Tantallon, Gerald, Marchwell, 

Bredenbury, Waldron, Dubuc, Bangor, Atwater, Stockholm, 

Yarbo, Bird's Point, Churchbridge, Langenburg, and my home 

community of Esterhazy. 

 

These communities are separated by fertile farm land and 

several creeks and valleys, making it an ideal mixed   



158 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

farming area, including beef, hog, dairy, and poultry 

production, as well as the production of grain and oilseeds. 

 

It is also a scenic tourist area, Mr. Speaker.  The strength and 

determination of the people in Saltcoats have resulted in the 

development of many attractions and facilities such as 

Gopherville, the Kaposvar historic site, and several regional 

parks. 

 

The people I am talking about are farmers, labourers, 

professionals, small-business people, men and women, seniors 

and youth, all rallying around a cause in their own community. 

 

As a result, we see many recreational and cultural facilities, 

health care facilities, churches, and educational facilities.  Mr. 

Speaker, many of these facilities were nurtured by volunteers 

or by the many organizations that thrive in these communities 

such as youth or student groups, service clubs, church, and 

agricultural organizations. 

 

You can readily see, Mr. Speaker, that Saltcoats is a busy 

community where lots is happening.  The economy of this area 

is not only reliant on agriculture, but also on industry, based on 

potash development by IMC (International Minerals and 

Chemical Corporation) Canada. 

 

Saltcoats is the melting pot of ethnic culture and traditions.  

This is reflected in the many museums and historic points of 

interest that are established across the constituency. 

 

Truly, Mr. Speaker, Saltcoats is a vibrant community that looks 

to us for leadership.  Speaking on behalf of my constituents, I 

know that Saltcoats will be there to do its share to get 

Saskatchewan back on its feet again.  The constituents of 

Saltcoats want someone they can relate to and talk to, and 

someone who will listen to their needs and ideas and put them 

into action, and above all, Mr. Speaker, someone who will 

respect their point of view.  I intend to do that. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition says he has ideas to suggest.  The 

former premier had all kinds of opportunity to bring forth ideas 

and programs and to debate them.  But he chose to shut down 

debate and he chose to shut down the legislature and the people 

responded. 

 

(1630) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- I just want to elaborate on the spirit of the 

hard-working, unselfish, community-minded people of my 

riding and their belief in democratic rights and freedoms. 

 

Let me give you an example, Mr. Speaker.  The situation that 

comes to mind occurred in my home town.  Mrs. Bender, one 

of our senior women who celebrated her 94th birthday on 

October 20, suffered a stroke early the next day, election day.  

After being rushed to the local hospital and being attended to 

medically, her first and 

foremost concern was not for herself and for her physical 

condition, but for her democratic right to vote.  She proceeded 

to ask for someone to bring her a ballot so that she could 

participate in the election.  She was able to exercise her right to 

vote, something that she was not able to do in her early life. 

 

It is with great regret, Mr. Speaker, that I inform the Assembly 

that Mrs. Bender is no longer with us but her legacy lives on.  

Mrs. Bender's attitude, spirit, and determination is very 

indicative of the feelings and character of many constituents in 

my riding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to address the issue of taxation.  As one of 

the hundreds of parents and taxpayers in the Saltcoats 

constituency, I welcome the repeal of the expanded PST 

(provincial sales tax). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Since October 21, I have received many 

compliments on the removal of this stifling tax.  The removal 

of this tax does stimulate the economy by safeguarding jobs 

and puts millions of real dollars back into the pockets of the 

Saskatchewan consumers.  In turn, Mr. Speaker, this money is 

spent in local businesses on food, clothing, books and other 

necessities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me tell you something about the confidence 

that the business community in my riding had in our new 

government even before the election.  During visits and 

discussions with main street business owners, two days before 

the election, they told me of their plans to reprogram their cash 

registers on Saturday to prepare for Tuesday's business. 

 

And when, on October 22, I went around to check on how 

businesses were coping with the change, Mr. Speaker, they 

assured me they had no problems and appreciated the 

immediate action on the part of our government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Not only that, Mr. Speaker, many had 

indicated to me that they had already noticed the increase in 

customer patronage. 

 

The backbone of my constituency is agriculture, Mr. Speaker.  

Therefore I'm happy to see that one of the top priorities, as 

outlined in the Speech from the Throne, is to safeguard the 

family farm.  I also want to commend our Premier and the 

Minister of Agriculture on the role they played in the unique 

Ottawa lobby with farmers from across the province and the 

rest of Canada. 

 

Farmers in my riding are anxious to see improvements 

negotiated with respect to GRIP and NISA, and they have 

provided me with many suggestions to put forward.  Farmers 

also realize, as we in government do, Mr. Speaker, that these 

programs do not provide sufficient enough funding to bridge 

the gap with respect to falling prices on a year to year basis.  

There must be an adequate pay-out in the form of a third line of 

defence by the federal government as was promised almost two 

years ago now, and it must be paid out immediately. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

My constituents are telling me there has to be some form of 

immediate debt relief or many farmers will not be on the land 

come spring seeding. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the situation is very serious indeed and we 

have to make the federal government understand that.  Farm 

families cannot stand the stress any longer. 

 

As a taxpayer of this province, I'm pleased to see the initiatives 

outlined in the Speech from the Throne to address the issue of 

mounting debt in the province, debt that has mounted for the 

last nine and a half years, Mr. Speaker.  The establishment of 

the Financial Management Review Commission will lead to 

better efficiency in government spending as well as improve 

the financial accountability of the government. 

 

This has to be a concern of my constituents over the last 

number of years, but no one in government was willing to 

listen.  The past administration chose to ignore that concern.  

This government, Mr. Speaker, has the common decency and 

respect for the electorate to deal with the issue. 

 

I'm also pleased to see our government taking immediate action 

to reduce the wasteful and uncontrollable spending of the 

previous administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- We simply cannot continue to act as if the 

provincial treasury is a bottomless well of public money.  Our 

plan of bringing the annual deficit under control first and then 

systematically attacking and reducing the overall provincial 

debt load again illustrates, Mr. Speaker, the common sense, 

pragmatic, hands-on approach of this government with which 

constituents are satisfied. 

 

Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, we have great support for these 

initiatives and people are very patient and tolerant of the 

situation we are facing.  They are willing to give these new 

thrusts an opportunity to get off the ground.  This government 

offers the people of this province renewed hope and a new 

vision to lead them into the next century. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the new direction that this government has set in 

terms of democratic reform is to be commended.  Certainly 

new ground must be broken in this area.  I am pleased to see 

the public consultative process being utilized.  This, Mr. 

Speaker, will develop and restore public trust in the political 

and governmental process. 

 

Of key importance to the people of Saskatchewan is the 

commitment we have made in the Speech from the Throne to 

hold by-elections within six months of a vacancy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- It was deplorable that many residents of this 

province were without a voice in this legislature, some for 

almost two years -- almost two years, Mr. Speaker -- without a 

voice.  Not one constituency, not 

two constituencies, but four, Mr. Speaker -- four constituencies 

without a voice.  Where was the support for the farmers in the 

rural communities then, Mr. Speaker?  By introducing 

legislation in this Assembly we will ensure that residents of 

this province will have a voice within a six-month period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- This, Mr. Speaker, shows Saskatchewan 

people that we have been listening to them and now we are 

acting on their wishes. 

 

The move to develop a code of ethics and conflict of interest 

guide-lines for elected officials and public servants is another 

example by our government to respond to the concern of 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The ward system will be an option to which municipal 

governments can once again look forward.  Yes indeed, we are 

setting a clear signal to the people of this province that we are 

an open, honest, and responsible government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as an educator I see the need for our government 

to place education as a priority item.. I know that education 

costs are high and likely will continue to rise, but, Mr. Speaker, 

we in this province cannot afford the cost of ignorance and 

illiteracy. 

 

We need to seriously look at education funding in all respects.  

Some of the areas we have to look at are curriculum 

development and implementation, the delivery of new 

programs, and the student loan program, just to name a few. 

 

I want to mention to my constituents that I will have input into 

these issues because I have been assigned to the legislative 

Standing Committee on Education, Mr. Speaker, and I'm 

honoured to serve in that capacity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have several other areas of concern that I'd like 

to express on behalf of my constituents.  One concern has to do 

with the delivery of the social programs and the integration of 

one program with another.  Included in this area are concerns 

about poverty and hunger and a recent necessity for food 

banks. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned about the unemployment 

level in Saskatchewan, the loss of jobs, the minimum wage 

issue, and the fact that people, particularly youth, have been 

leaving this province in droves.  Mr. Speaker, when this 

happens we not only lose our tax base but also the educational 

investment we have made in these people, not to mention the 

emotional cost to families. 

 

We also need to look closely at housing, and in particular at 

housing for seniors. 

 

And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my concern about 

the state of roads and highways in this province.  I am 

convinced that this government will in time restore our 

highway system to the same high-quality level that existed 

prior to 1982. 

  



160 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- As we rebuild this province with a renewed 

spirit of co-operation and community, improvements will be 

made in these areas, which is in keeping with our positive 

vision for the future. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, Saltcoats constituents are telling 

me that the policy of divisiveness and confrontation that has 

existed in this province over the last nine and one half long 

years has been thrown out the window.  They also tell me, Mr. 

Speaker, that the spirit of trust and co-operation is emerging 

once more to provide a positive vision for the future.  Together 

we must work to build and rebuild our communities for the 

betterment of all the people of this great province of ours. 

 

Once again, Mr. Speaker, it's a special honour and privilege to 

take my place in this Assembly and proudly continue to enter 

debate on behalf of my constituents.  I want to take this 

opportunity to thank my family and all those who worked in 

my campaign, especially the many young people.  Finally of 

course, I must thank the voters of Saltcoats constituency for the 

support and trust that they have placed in me. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to beg leave of the 

Assembly to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and 

through you to all members of this Assembly, Mr. Terry 

Stevens, Mr. Dan Wirl, and Maurice Werezak, who we actually 

met last week as well.  They are very active not only in the 

trade union movement in Saskatoon, but also in various 

community affairs.  And it's a great pleasure to welcome them 

to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

I am pleased to stand here today to offer a few words about the 

throne speech and what it means to our constituents in 

Shellbrook-Torch River.  We are a rural constituency that 

stretches from Canwood to Choiceland and from Waskesiu to 

the North Saskatchewan River. 

I believe I was elected because the people wanted a change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Langford: -- We were tired of political games being 

played with farm problems.  We were tired of high taxes and 

we were tired of a government that would not listen to the 

ordinary people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign I talked to a lot of 

people.  I want to share that with you -- some of the things my 

constituents were telling me that they want from a new 

government.  The number one issue in Shellbrook-Torch River 

is the farm crisis.  Farming is the most important industry in 

our constituency. 

 

Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as a farmer we are worried 

about what we have seen over the past nine and a half years.  

Over the past nine and a half years, we have seen more and 

more people leaving the farms.  They weren't leaving the farms 

because they didn't want to farm; they were leaving because 

they couldn't afford to farm.  In many cases farmers were being 

forced off the land by the banks and by FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation), and even by the provincial government. 

 

I am very pleased that since we were elected we have asked for 

an end to the farm foreclosure.  We have asked for this because 

we want farmers to be able to get back on track. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- During the election I had a lot of farmers 

from Shellbrook through to Smeaton say that they need a right 

government that would listen -- a government that will work in 

their interest, not those of the banks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- I am glad to be a member of a government 

that has invited ordinary farmers to speak their minds on the 

problems that they are facing.  I am pleased that we have 

invited farmers to speak for themselves in Ottawa.  Let me tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, people have been saying at the farm gate that 

we need changes to GRIP.  They say that it does not make any 

sense to have a program that isn't tied to the cost of production. 

 

This is certainly the case in Shellbrook-Torch River.  

Agriculture is different across the province, and if it is 

different, how can we expect a rich program to meet the needs 

of different areas as was the case with GRIP?  We must change 

GRIP so that it does reflect the cost of production that differs 

from area to area.  The GRIP and NISA programs are badly 

flawed.  They involve too much red tape and policing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- And this is both costly and unnecessary.  I 

am pleased to be part of a government that has said to the 

farmers, we believe in you and we trust you. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- The minister for Crop Insurance made a 

good point by saying that we don't need bin police in this 

province.  It is frustrating to farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- The last thing farmers in Canwood or Meath 

Park need is another government official looking into their 

lives.  Mr. Speaker, this program, GRIP and NISA, are not 

meeting the needs of the farmers today. 

 

It might be the right time to look at establishing an agriculture 

program that are more tailored to meeting the needs of the 

different areas that do exist in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Shellbrook-Torch River is known across 

Saskatchewan for its beautiful parks: Emma Lake, Anglin 

Lake, Waskesiu, Candle Lake, Christopher Lake.  It is 

important that we keep these parks alive and open.  One way to 

do this is to make sure that our forests are protected.  We also 

need to make sure that our wildlife is well managed.  Forestry 

is also a major industry in Shellbrook-Torch River.  We are 

home to the tree nursery, Nisbet northern forests, and a large 

number of small saw mills. 

 

People in Christopher Lake and Paddockwood understand the 

importance of our forests in keeping our economy going.  We 

understand that pulp and paper are major industries and provide 

many hundreds of jobs.  But we also know that many of our 

forest deals done by the previous government were done in 

secret.  We know that the province did not get the best deal 

possible for the people in Paddockwood and Christopher Lake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want to know about the privatization deals 

and the forestry contracts that have been signed in the past nine 

and a half years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- That is why I am pleased to support this 

government that has promised to open up the books and to 

make public the secret deals.  My constituents want to make 

sure that we will have many more years of forestry jobs in 

Shellbrook-Torch River.  We want to make sure that the jobs at 

Weyerhaeuser are safe, but we also want to know that the 

government will protect the industry.  We want to make sure 

that forest management, reforestation, and public access are 

protected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents graze their cattle in 

forest areas or are small lumber operators or hunt and fish in 

areas that have been privatized.  Indian people know the 

importance of our land.  The people at Sturgeon Lake, 

Wahpeton, the Little Red (River) Reserve have been concerned 

about the loss of our forests and wildlife. 

 

Many Indian people in my riding, the foresters are their way of 

life.  It is a way of life we are coming to understand and 

appreciate better.  But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the people 

of the Indian reserves are suffering too. 

I am very pleased that the Minister for Social Services has 

given more freedom to the Indian bands in dealing with social 

service "matters".  I hope this will help bring Indians, Metis, 

and white people closer together. 

 

Over the years my constituency has seen a loss of forestry jobs 

and a loss of money from forestry.  Take for example the RM 

(rural municipality) of Buckland.  Take the land that P.A. pulp 

mill is on now, used to be located in this RM.  Several years 

ago the province allowed the land to be annexed by the city of 

P.A.  The result was a loss of revenue and tax and grants. 

 

We can't turn back the clock, however we can work to ensure 

that the RMs are protected from the loss of industry and jobs to 

neighbouring cities.  And we can work towards a better 

meaning of financing our RMs and school boards. 

 

The throne speech has addressed this area.  I am pleased the 

government is going to work on improving municipal 

financing.  It is important to take the tax pressure off the rural 

ratepayers.  Everyone's taxes are going up municipally, but 

imagine if you were losing taxpayers and the cost was still 

rising.  This is the situation many RMs and school boards are 

facing now in Shellbrook-Torch River. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we want for our families the same things that we 

want for everyone else.  We want good schools; we want good 

services.  However, with the loss of population from our rural 

areas, it is not easy for municipalities and school boards to find 

the money.  I am pleased that our government will work to 

change this situation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Small businesses are also feeling the pinch 

of the farm crisis.  Looking at our Main Street you can tell that 

they have been hurt.  People are going out of business and very 

little has been done about it.  The last government decided they 

should increase taxes to help these businesses.  That made no 

sense to anyone but the government.  I have never understood 

how the PST was supposed to help bring in businesses.  If you 

ask a small-business person on Main Street, Shellbrook if the 

taxes help or hurt them, they always say it hurt them. 

 

I am glad our government is putting money back into the 

pockets of the farm families and the working people.  From 

talking to people in the coffee shops back home, I know they 

never did want the PST.  I know that our promises to bring the 

province back in line and to cut this tax was important to them.  

I was very pleased that our government has appealed the PST.  

I will support the original motion and I do not support the 

amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- It now being 5 o'clock this House stands 

adjourned until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


