




















































Hansard: December 21, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 489 

 December 21, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I know I don't need to 

introduce this person to you, but I do believe that this person 

should be introduced to the House.  I would like to welcome in 

the Speaker's gallery, Myrna Rolfes.  And I'm sure that she's 

here to observe the proceedings and to see the diligence and 

competence with which you direct the proceedings this 

afternoon. 

 

So I welcome Mrs. Rolfes. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- Members, I am really flabbergasted this 

afternoon.  I do want to join with the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood and welcome my family here.  It's a distinct pleasure 

because this is our first time I believe in seven years that the 

family have been together at Christmas time.  And I'm not very 

happy about being here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- Having said that, I do want to welcome 

my daughter from Los Angeles and her husband Matthew -- 

Sherry -- who lives in Los Angeles and I don't know how many 

years it's been since they've been here for Christmas but I think 

it's around seven years. 

 

And I'd like to take the privilege of introducing my son who is 

here from Ottawa.  And last but not least again, introduce my 

wife Myrna. 

 

It's a pleasure having them here and I expect the best behaviour 

of all the members in the House this afternoon.  With that I ask 

all members to welcome my family here. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Social Services Cheque Pick-up Program 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Although this is not traditional, I would also like to join in 

welcoming your family here, Mr. Speaker.  And I certainly 

hope that for the question period it puts you in a good mood, 

sir. 
 

I address this in a serious vein, Mr. Speaker, a question to the 

Minister of Social Services, the member from Saskatoon 

Westmount, and I deal with the poorest of the poor in 

Saskatchewan at Christmas. 
 

Madam Minister, given the difficult economic times facing the 

province and the country and the financial strain this puts on 

both the taxpayers of the province and those who need help 

from those taxpayers in the form of welfare assistance, can you 

tell this Assembly what your intentions are with respect to the 

cheque pick-up program.  Is this something that you feel is 

necessary to protect Saskatchewan taxpayers and to ensure that 

those who truly need it are provided assistance?

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I regret to advise the 

Assembly and the hon. member that while I'm acting today for 

the minister who is absent, I'm not familiar with her position or 

the position of the department with respect to the matters that 

you raise. 

 

I can only say that we will certainly be going out of our way to 

ensure that all people who are in a position where they have to 

have access to the programs of the Department of Social 

Services have a merry and comfortable Christmas, and we'll try 

and accommodate them in every way we can. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I direct the question perhaps to 

the Deputy Premier then, who is responsible for the 

machinations of this government.  And I can appreciate, Mr. 

Minister, that you have a difficulty on this but that does not 

detract from the seriousness of the questions that I am asking 

here today because the government has demonstrated 

insensitivity to many of our welfare recipients. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have been given a copy of a letter sent to all 

welfare recipients signed by Madam Minister which states that 

you have cancelled the welfare cheque pick-up which was to 

take place on Monday, December 23.  Instead, Mr. Minister, 

Madam Minister says that you will mail those cheques out on 

Monday the 23.  Now I would think that all of us would 

recognize that in the hustle and bustle and heavy volume of 

mail during the Christmas season, those cheques will not be in 

the mail and in the hands of the recipients before Christmas. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you explain to this Assembly, can you 

explain to those on welfare, why you have stolen any hope for 

joy for these families on Christmas Day? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that the 

member's point is worth looking into and I'll undertake, on 

behalf of the government, to look into the suggestion right 

away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And a new question 

to the Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have been receiving dozens of phone calls in 

my office, letters on that outrageous letter that was sent out by 

the minister.  And ironically I might add, this letter arrived in 

the welfare recipients' homes at the same time that a Christmas 

card came from the Minister of Social Services. 

 

Mr. Minister, this change stated that it would provide ". . . 

more time and opportunity to pursue personal interests during 

the Christmas holidays."  That is a quote from that letter, Mr. 

Minister. 

  



490 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

And I ask you: don't you think the number one personal matter 

that these people have during this time of year is to find money, 

to find food and clothing for the winter months?  What do you 

think they will be doing?  And what do you think that they 

would be doing to take priority over getting this much-needed 

funds for the holiday season?  Or is it your government's 

intention to actually play the role of "The Grinch That Stole 

Christmas"?  Mr. Minister, answer that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's quite ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the 

members of the opposition, the former government of this 

province, would be raising questions concerning a welfare 

reform and the pick up of cheques. 

 

It was the welfare reform and the picking up of cheques that 

were such a harassment to people who were on welfare for 

such a long period of time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The cheque pick-up was seen clearly for 

what it was by welfare recipients, and that was some kind of a 

Draconian kind of check to ensure that they had to come in and 

get their social welfare benefits on hands and knees, and 

present themselves no matter what the inconvenience to them 

personally at the office in order to pick up their cheques. 

 

Now I've said to the member, and I repeat again, that we have a 

great deal of sympathy and understanding for the position of 

welfare recipients.  And we're going to go out of our way to 

ensure that they have a comfortable and a merry Christmas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, a new 

question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, you have just stated that 

you're philosophically opposed to having these welfare 

recipients pick up cheques at the offices. 

 

The minister's letter states that this is only going to be for one 

month that they have to pick it up and after that they'll go back 

to the old program.  How do you square that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm not familiar with the letter that the 

member refers to.  What I said was, the pick-up program was 

designed by this government to deliberately harass welfare 

recipients.  That was the plan at the time and that was indeed 

the effect and welfare recipients know it. 

 

This is the same party that did away with the transportation 

allowance, for example. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- So that recipients who had to go for 

some distance in order to get to the office to pick up their 

cheques had to do it without the transportation allowance that 

had previously been there. 

 

But I'm telling the member, I'm telling the member that we will 

take notice of his question, that we will . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows full well he 

can't make an explanation and then take notice of the question. 

 

I'll take the next question, but before I do so I'll ask the 

members please, I thought we were going to be on good 

behaviour today.  There's just too much interruption. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying, what you're 

philosophical outburst does not square with, what your minister 

is telling the social welfare recipients and I quote.  She says 

after they will be mailed on the 23rd of the month of December 

so that these people will not be able to get their money.  They 

will not be able to get their money before Christmas.  She says 

normal cheque pick-up will be scheduled at the end of January 

for the February.  They're back into the old ways.  Then she 

ends the letter by saying, may I wish you a Merry Christmas.  

Square that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I tried to make it clear to the hon. 

member, Mr. Speaker, that we would look into the matter that 

he raised, and we will do that, Mr. Speaker, in an effort to 

ensure that the recipients of social welfare have the money in 

time for Christmas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker, and we'll go the 

Deputy Premier on this one, the Minister of Finance who is 

responsible for this reprehensible situation, in my opinion. 

 

Mr. Minister, because of your philosophical opposition to the 

pick-up of these cheques, Mr. Minister, could you not have 

mailed those cheques out earlier if this was your intent, so that 

these people would have been assured prompt delivery of their 

money before Christmas; so that indeed they would be able to 

buy the food and buy the clothing that is necessary for them to 

have the merry Christmas that your minister is wishing them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thought I had made it plain to the 

member that I thought he raised a good point and that we 

would be looking into it in an effort to ensure that the people 

who are in receipt of social service benefits will get them in 

time for Christmas.  And I repeat that again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I take it then, Mr. Speaker -- and I direct my 

question to the Minister of Finance -- I take it then that you are 

making a commitment to this House that on Monday, 

December 23, this money will be available for these welfare 

recipients to pick up their money before Christmas?  Is that a 

commitment that you're making right now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- My commitment is to look into the point 

that has been raised by the member, and we will try and ensure 

that the people who receive social welfare benefits receive 

them in good time for Christmas. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That indeed is going to be hollow comfort for 

hollow stomachs, Mr. Minister, for many of 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

these people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I direct the next question to the Minister of 

Finance again, or the Minister of Justice if he chooses to 

answer.  We have a letter here, or not a letter, but a news 

release given by one Leona Tootoosis of the Circle Centre 

native ministry. 

 

She has issued a statement saying that you are refusing to let 

people have their cheques before Christmas.  She says that the 

poor are, quote, "faced with the humiliation and deprivation of 

no Christmas to offer their children."  She adds that "it is a 

strange thing to do . . ." for the Madam Minister of Social 

Services to her constituents and to her neighbours. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, will you do the decent thing: will you try to 

find the Christmas spirit which must be hidden somewhere in 

your heart and allow these individuals to pick up the cheques 

before Christmas?  Can you make that commitment to this 

Legislative Assembly and for the poorest of poor in this 

province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have this sense of having answered the 

same question about four or five times.  I repeat to the member 

that I . . . He raises a point that I think is an important point, 

and we will look into it in an effort to ensure that the people 

who are in receipt of welfare benefits will receive them in time 

for Christmas. 

 

I am not familiar with the particular document that he is 

referring to but that's beside the point, Mr. Minister.  He's made 

his point and we have responded to it in the way that I have 

already done about four or five times. 

 

Farm Foreclosure Moratorium 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, my question is to you, 

the person that has broken your party's election promise at 

election time to introduce a moratorium on farm foreclosures 

within days of winning government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the minister and the Premier know full well that 

throughout the campaign they were telling farmers that a 

moratorium would definitely be imposed.  In fact the NDP put 

out their five-point agriculture plan everywhere they went 

which included as point five a moratorium on farm 

foreclosures. 
 

Mr. Speaker, how can the minister continue to claim that his 

party made no such commitment to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan?  Please answer. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The commitment made during the election 

campaign was that we would engage in a discussion with the 

lending institutions in order to seek short- and long-term 

solutions to the crisis.  We will find a solution to the crisis, and 

we will continue to work very hard to make it a voluntary one 

that's shared with everyone, because it's a very serious question 

in which all of us have a stake. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to 

waffle as he has been for the last three weeks in answering 

questions pertaining to farmers in this House.  The minister 

knows in his heart that you did promise a moratorium.  You 

know in here that you did.  And I know that the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway would agree with me on this point.  We 

all know that in this House of the actions yesterday.  And we 

know very well that every individual in this province of 

Saskatchewan, the media, the government, and the opposition, 

that this moratorium was promised. 

 

Now I ask you, what is the government's plan to help farmers, 

while they try to settle the internal squabbles among 

themselves, whether they're going to impose a moratorium or 

not? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I find it very interesting that the members 

opposite have sat there for nine years, not only watching the 

debt crisis grow but contributing to it through programs like the 

production loan program which began this crisis for many, 

many farmers, establishing no long-term strategy for any kind 

of policy on agriculture.  Their policy was money at election 

time, no plans for any long-term solutions. 

 

You ignored the need for stable, long-term income programs.  

You rejected any actions on debt.  And then in two weeks you 

want us to play that silly game of quick, off-the-cuff kind of 

solutions. 

 

We're committed to working with the people that have a critical 

interest in this industry and who don't want to play political 

games, like you've played for nine years, and don't want to play 

political games now.  We're going to work with them to work 

out solutions and we want you to work with us. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that has been the worst display 

of an answer from the Minister of Agriculture -- a new Minister 

of Agriculture -- that I've ever heard through my 13 years in 

this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the minister has 

read the headlines today: Moratorium worries chamber.  

Because, Mr. Speaker, I have listened to him intently say that 

their promise was to visit with bankers, visit with lending 

institutions, and here a Mr. Rollie Hardy of the Bank of 

Montreal, the chairman of the Saskatchewan committee of 

Canadian Bankers' Association, says the issue of moratoriums 

has not come up. 

 

Will he now come clean in this House and tell us whether he 

has ever discussed a moratorium with any lender in this 

province of Saskatchewan? 

  



492 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I ask the member from 

Wilkie to withdraw that statement that he made in that the 

Minister of Agriculture is misleading the House.  He knows 

that's unparliamentary and I ask him to withdraw the statement.  

I ask the member from Wilkie to withdraw the statement. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, if I offended the Chair, I 

apologize . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- I didn't ask the member to apologize, I asked 

him to withdraw.  And he withdrew the statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- It's okay, I've got a decent memory, 

member opposite. 

 

The reality is, as I stated yesterday to you and to the press, that 

during the discussions that are going on I will not be making 

public statements about what's going on in negotiations, 

because that disrespects the presence of others at the table.  

And we are working co-operatively with them and we 

appreciate their co-operation at the table.  And we do expect to 

be able to work out some long-term and short-term solutions 

working co-operatively.  That was our commitment in the 

election campaign; that's what we're doing. 

 

And the farmers in Saskatchewan know that these kinds of 

sound planning solutions are the kinds of solutions they're 

looking for, not the kind of things you think up in the shower 

when you're getting up and out of bed in the morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister 

of Agriculture.  Perhaps he didn't hear my question, because he 

didn't even come close to answering it.  Because someone's 

misleading the people in Saskatchewan -- either the minister or 

the banker, one or the other. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with your permission I want to read the full 

quote: 

 

 The provincial government so far has only opened 

discussions with financial institutions about how farmers' 

financial problems could be addressed. 

 

 In fact, (now listen carefully, please) Rollie Hardy of the 

Bank of Montreal and the chairman of the Saskatchewan 

committee of the Canadian Bankers Association says the 

issue of moratoriums has not come up. 

 

Now please, this has not come up.  So, Mr. Speaker, will the 

minister stand to his feet and say who is misleading, who is 

misleading the people in the province of Saskatchewan? -- you 

or Mr. Rollie from the Bank of Montreal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would ask the member opposite to 

go home and get his dictionary and look up the word 

moratorium and then interpret the article accordingly, and I 

think it will be very clear to him. 

 

What we committed ourselves to in the election campaign was 

to discuss long-term solutions and short-term solutions with the 

financial institutions.  And we are doing that.  And I appreciate 

the co-operation that the financial institutions are giving us, 

and I wish you would give us an equal co-operation because 

the situation is very serious for our people in Saskatchewan. 

 

And you will find out when you understand the word that 

nobody's misleading anybody. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I am quite sure that the 

minister does not have to ask me what the word moratorium 

means.  What he has to do is ask all the farmers in the province 

of Saskatchewan what the word moratorium means.  Ask them.  

They know what it means.  They know what a broken promise 

means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I hate to interrupt again, but the 

Leader of the Opposition has been interrupting on a number of 

times.  And if he has a question, I think there's ample 

opportunity for him to get on his feet.  But in the meantime 

allow the member from Arm River to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, they not only break their 

promises to all the people of Saskatchewan, they break their 

promises to their own people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I may, out at Davidson, Saskatchewan, there 

was a meeting and this meeting, the minutes was in the 

Davidson paper on December 2, and the speaker was Mr. Jake 

Bendel, who they know quite well. 

 

And if I may, I just want to read a little bit of his quote.  Mr. 

Speaker, this is what it says:  that you promised to impose a 

moratorium.  He said, you promised.  Now that's your own 

worker out there.  That you promised to impose a moratorium.  

Was the Premier misleading this group just to get their vote, or 

will he be honest with them and admit he was wrong to have 

made the promise in the first place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want the members opposite to 

understand that Jake Bendel is the head of the Christian Farm 

Crisis Action Committee and he is not associated with my 

office.  And you should be aware of that. 

 

I want you to recognize that the issue of debt is inextricably 

linked to the question of income.  I want you to remind 

yourself that last spring, in a big hurry to try and meet a spring 

election deadline, you introduced too hurriedly an income 

support program which projects for farmers an ability to carry 

about $50,000 of debt for an average farmer, if you don't take 

depreciation, with a below poverty line income.  That if you 

take depreciation into account, this program supports no debt.  

And you're talking about debt problems? 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 493 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it's very evident that the 

minister and this government wants to break -- wants to break 

-- the promise and is breaking the promise of a farm 

moratorium to all the farmers in Saskatchewan.  But I think it's 

a shame when they send their own people out like Jake Bendel 

to spread the good news for 30 days.  And I want to read this 

other quote that Mr. Jake Bendel stated very clearly: that we 

inform the Premier of our intention to have him place into force 

the moratorium that he promised would be the first action taken 

by the new government. 

 

Now tell us, Mr. Minister, tell us Mr. Minister, did you give 

him the wrong message to send out for those 30 days, or are 

you just breaking the promise to him?  Now tell us please, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to tell you what our commitment 

was.  Our commitment was to, after election, to look 

co-operatively for solutions to the farm debt questions both 

short and long term.  I want you to know that during the time 

you were in office, the United States had legislation in place 

during which they dealt with their farm debt crisis from '83 

onward, and their debt problem is subsiding because of the 

actions they took. 

 

I want you to know that you played footsie with the federal 

government with respect to changes in our kinds of legislation 

that allows this situation to be addressed, so that the debt 

situation continued to climb.  The only thing that you ever 

could lay claim to, and sometimes not very honourably, was 

the idea of going to look for money during election campaigns.  

I want you to know that in the case of last summer when you 

went looking for money, the farmers had already got it by their 

actions in Rosetown -- not by some self-egotistical statement of 

the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I hope when the minister goes 

home for holidays that he can learn to relax and not shake, and 

then when he comes back that he can answer questions. 

 

My last question, Mr. Speaker, my last question to the minister 

is this:  do you not admit that this last three weeks that we've 

been in this House that you have been answering all the 

questions pertaining to agriculture and a moratorium, whether 

it was right for a promise or not, will you not admit that you've 

been answering very shallow and that you have been 

misleading this House and the people in the province of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I ask the member to . . . I ask 

the member to withdraw that statement.  I ask the member to 

withdraw the statement that the Minister of Agriculture was 

misleading the House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that's a hard thing for me an 

honest man to have to withdraw the truth. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the member one more time 

to withdraw the statement that the Minister of Agriculture was 

misleading the House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, it would be an easy way for 

me to go home for Christmas, but I will withdraw the statement 

-- I will withdraw the statement. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I will answer one more time consistently, 

that we made the commitment to work on behalf of farmers.  

And farmers believe we're doing that, and we are doing it.  And 

there will be a solution.  And we believe it will be a voluntary 

and co-operative solution. 

 

I want you to know that in the period of time leading up to 

now, there's now 1.3 million acres in the hands of financial 

institutions.  I want you to know that additionally, in terms of 

the income which so critically affects that, when you 

negotiated your program last spring with the federal 

government, not only did it give inadequate support to farmers, 

it committed this province to a 3 to 400 per cent increase in 

cost for stabilization programs, while the federal government 

contributed only an additional 10 per cent, while we're 

suffering the worst financial situation in agriculture in a 

lifetime. 

 

I find it absolutely ludicrous that you could be making those 

kinds of comments when you look at your history and your 

record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture.  

Mr. Minister, your candidate in Thunder Creek, one Ron 

Bishoff, was recorded in the minutes of the credit union 

meeting in Marquis as saying, the first act of an NDP 

government would be to bring in a moratorium and that credit 

unions would be excluded from that moratorium. 

 

You are clearly on record, sir, that the bankers association say 

that you have not discussed moratorium with them.  Have you, 

sir, met with the credit unions and said that they will be 

excluded from any moratorium action which you bring in, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't know if the members opposite have 

never been involved in the negotiations.  It may appear from 

the results of the negotiations on federal programs that they 

possibly never were in a serious fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If you think that anybody in his right mind 

would stand here and talk to you about what's going on in 

negotiations when you're quoting third-hand sources of 

information for your political purposes, you obviously don't 

respect the process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES  



494 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 18 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Public Disclosure of Crown Employment 

Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in Crown Employment 

Contracts governing Payments and Benefits on Termination or 

Expiration of those Contracts, to Void Provisions in those 

Contracts respecting those matters and to Extinguish any Right 

of Action and Right to Compensation for any Loss or Damage 

resulting from the Enactment or Application of this Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm 

pleased to resume the debate on Bill 18 as where I left off this 

morning, where I tried to talk the Minister of Justice into 

reconsidering the direction in which his government is going, 

in so far as the abrogation of the individual rights that are going 

to be lost when this Bill becomes law. 

 

I don't know, Mr. Speaker, if I had much success in that but I 

will continue to try to convince him.  And I won't take very 

much time in doing this, Mr. Speaker, perhaps five or six 

minutes, but we must impress upon the government that this 

Bill now be not read a second time. 

 

And I intend to continue to speak up along that vein, Mr. 

Speaker, because the amazing thing is that this entire Bill is 

unnecessary.  It need not have come to this. 

 

The government, Mr. Speaker, has many options, and what I 

want to do is to outline some alternatives.  It's very easy for any 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, to criticize, to condemn, to tear down, 

and to tear apart.  It is more difficult for an opposition to say 

constructively, you should not be doing that because you 

should be doing this. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I intend now to offer some alternatives to 

members opposite for their perusal and hopefully for the 

adoption of these suggestions.  Because first of all, Mr. 

Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is ostensibly to reduce unfair 

severance payments.  And on the surface of that, this side of 

the House has no opposition on that principle.  That is not what 

the issue is at stake.  The issue at stake is the manner in which 

that severance cut is trying to be accomplished, and that is what 

is so damning about this Bill. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when an employer and an employee have a 

disagreement about what is fair compensation, Mr. Speaker, 

what happens?  I ask the Minister of Labour, I ask the Minister 

of Justice, what happens when you have a disagreement 

between an employer and an employee?  Normally the course 

of action is some form of negotiation. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I might add that in the private sector, a 

failure to negotiate in good faith is literally against the law.  

We are expected to negotiate in good faith.  Any private sector 

employer that has tried this or would try 

that would be fired by this government.  You negotiate, Mr. 

Speaker.  You try to come to a reasonable agreement that all 

parties think is fair.  You do not hold a big public effort to try 

to take away the rights and the freedoms of literally thousands 

of people who get caught up in this cross-fire of vengeance 

which the government members opposite are intending to 

accomplish. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, why did this government not try to 

negotiate, even one little effort, Mr. Speaker, to save the last 

resort of this legislation.  No, Mr. Speaker, the government 

literally said no, it was above negotiation.  It said that this 

government has 55 members scattered across this Legislative 

Assembly on both sides of the House, so there is nothing that 

we as an opposition can do to stop them. 

 

So they say let us just steamroller the opposition, and we'll get 

a nice play in the media for bringing in a law that will do away 

with severance.  And in the meantime we'll chuck out the rights 

and the freedoms of the individual.  Because in their eyes, Mr. 

Speaker, the individual is of no consequence whatsoever.  And 

we've heard that expressed from a number of members on 

opposite side.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is a shame. 

 

The opposition will never oppose it.  The opposition will never 

oppose it, in my opinion, is what the government thought 

originally.  The government thought they had made such a 

good move in the public expectation and the public execution 

of George Hill, that the opposition would just simply stand 

aside and let them have their way. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they are wrong.  They are sadly wrong.  In 

my opinion, they should have tried negotiation first.  But, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there are more alternatives that the 

government could have done.  They could have referred the 

whole thing to an independent, outside arbitrator.  They could 

have done that, and it is done quite frankly, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, both by government and private employers.  But this 

government would not even consider it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they could even have introduced a Bill that forced 

binding arbitration.  That was another alternative.  You could 

have come in simply with a Bill of binding arbitration that 

would not have trampled on the rights of any individual, but 

they chose not to do that either, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And why not?  Why no effort in negotiation?  Why isn't this 

Bill about arbitration on severance?  Well, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because if it was just about severance, then people -- 

and I revert back to my comments before dinner -- if it would 

have been a Bill just about severance, then people would still 

have their freedom of conscience that I spent time talking 

about.  They would still have had their freedom of belief, their 

freedom of association, their right to be secure in their person. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the government obviously did not want 

them to have those rights.  The government, in my opinion, 

prefers a climate of fear in the public service, and they want to 

fire public servants, willy-nilly without thought for the 

individuals, their families, and least of all 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 495 

their rights. 

 

That, in my opinion, is the agenda of the government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  Imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

government is doing these things just before Christmas, a 

season of hope, of love, of charity.  And this government is 

literally legalizing hate, defamation, and psychological abuse.  

In my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is one of the most 

profoundly, one of the most profoundly shameful Bills that has 

ever been presented in this Assembly. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other flaws in this Bill, 

somewhat of less dramatic influence and consequences, none 

the less of great concern to the opposition. And for the reasons 

I have outlined, and for reasons that my colleagues will be 

outlining in the next few moments here, it is certainly my intent 

to vote in favour of the amendment that this Bill now not be 

read a second time. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I wish to make a few comments in support of the 

amendment.  The amendment of course is that this Bill not be 

read a second time and referred to the Public Accounts 

Committee.  And I will give my reasons for that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

There are a number of things that I mentioned in my speech 

last night that my colleague from Rosthern has talked about 

again this morning about the danger of this particular piece of 

legislation; the danger that it has for individuals in our society. 

 

But I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what bothers me terribly 

about this thing, as I said last night, is it seems to have so many 

political connotations tied to it rather than good common sense.  

It isn't about economics; it isn't about saving money; it isn't 

about encouraging people to come to our province and work; it 

isn't about treating people fairly.  This thing seems to be 

centred on politics and politics only.  And I'll tell you why, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

In the Bill, one of the clauses says: 

 

 . . . includes any claim in damages or debt for unjust 

dismissal, breach of contract, inducing breach of contract, 

interference with a contract, mental distress, loss of 

reputation, defamation or any other (cause of) action in 

contract, tort of equity arising from or incidental to the 

creation, termination or expiration of a Crown employment 

contract. 

 

Now that pretty well covers the piece, Mr. Speaker, when 

you're talking about simply people that were associated with 

the former government.  And it seems like so many other 

actions that this government takes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, only 

folks that are associated with the former government.  In other 

words, one of the premises that there has to be some sort of 

blood test involved for these things to flow through. 

 

And I'll tell you why this particular amendment is 

pertinent to the Public Accounts Committee.  Because the 

government neglected certain things that are always of interest 

to the Public Accounts Committee.  They neglected certain 

things in this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Public 

Accounts Committee has talked about for many years.  And 

they ignored these things because they would primarily affect 

friend . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The rules of debate in 

the legislature require that only one speaker be on his feet at 

one time.  If others want to enter the debate they should wait 

for their turn to do so, otherwise I would ask them to leave the 

Chamber and carry on their conversation elsewhere. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for your 

assistance. 

 

As I was saying, there are a number of issues, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that have been of interest to Public Accounts and 

shortly we'll go through these particular interests. 

 

But the reason I believe that they have been left out of this 

particular legislation is that they may pertain to certain newly 

acquired friends of the government.  For instance at no place in 

this list that I read out do we include such things as the 

provision of advice, the provision of speech writing, the 

provision for consultation on any sort of level, the provisions 

for polling.  And we all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a 

member of Public Accounts, that the costs incurred in five 

firms of polling sometimes runs into in fact millions of dollars. 

 

And the contracts that are associated with that I notice, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are not in this particular legislation.  The 

design, production, placement of advertising for instance, or 

other instruments of communication and the arrangements that 

go along with them are not in this particular piece of 

legislation. 

 

Those things I think you would agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

have often been the topic of the Public Accounts Committee, 

representing the minister or the Executive Council or any 

Crown agency. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know there are many ways 

that those things can be achieved at a fairly extensive cost to 

the taxpayer; that the people performing those services can be 

paid at an extensive cost to the taxpayer.  But those things, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, are not covered.  And they're not covered 

because all I can see behind this particular piece of legislation 

is politics. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, otherwise the minister would have been 

prepared to accept comments made by my colleagues earlier, 

who pointed out discrepancies such as these as they pertained 

to newly hired people by the government.  But no, we go back 

to the fact that these are all individuals, some of whom, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, superseded the previous government by the 

way, some that have worked for government for decades; but 

the fact that at some point in their public life they expressed an 

opinion as to their own personal preferences, their own ideals 

of how society should be structured.  And it seems, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that only those individuals in our society that do not 

follow a socialist path are the ones that  



496 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

are being targeted. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the latest Supplementary 

Information 1990-91 for Public Accounts, my colleague from 

Morse took the opportunity to start looking through their 

figures that you, sir, would be very familiar with after all your 

years on that committee.  And we go to the Department of 

Justice alone in this province and have identified 401 people 

that are either out of scope or order in council. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said last night, there is no 

sunset clause in this provision in this Bill.  And the question 

was placed last night, how far is the broom going to sweep?  

How far are we going to cut . . . 401 in the Department of 

Justice alone.  You take every department of government, sir, 

and I say to you, you will find thousands and thousands of 

people in the same situation.  And are we to say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that should one of those people express on their own 

time, in their holidays, in the privacy of their home with 

friends, that they are not socialists, that they happen to support 

parties other than the one which governs this province, that this 

legislation and the ability to get rid of those people will not be 

used.  Because I have seen no assurance in the legislation from 

the minister that that be the case. 

 

(1445) 

 

Now I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of Justice 

is an honourable man.  And I am sure probably that the people 

in the Department of Justice all across our province, those 

400-and-plus that are in this position, probably don't have to 

fear the Minister of Justice. 

 

But I can only draw a conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from 

comments and actions of this government that those people 

should fear others in the New Democratic Party; that those 

people should fear the friends of the New Democratic Party.  

They should fear people like Barb Byers and George Rosenau.  

They should fear people like Daryl Bean; people that would 

talk in the way that Mr. Bean has about individuals in our 

society. 

 

And we already have one casualty of those three people -- Mr. 

Perry, a man who's had no political affiliation in his lifetime, a 

man that simply said, I will go to work and I will feed my 

family.  And the actions of the friends of the New Democratic 

Party have now put Mr. Perry -- have now put Mr. Perry -- 

under Bill 18. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why this 

amendment is right and proper; why this Bill should not be 

read a second time; that it should have sober second thought.  

And if the Minister of Justice doesn't feel that the appellate 

court of Saskatchewan under a constitutional reference is the 

proper place to at least have second thought, perhaps the Public 

Accounts Committee of this legislature dealing with some of 

the items that are listed here, items which come before Public 

Accounts on a yearly basis, could be dealt with by that 

committee to ensure that that minister and that government 

clean this particular piece of legislation up so that it isn't the 

onerous piece of work that we see before us in this House 

today. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said last night, the track record of this 

government in its early stages does not appear to be good in 

protecting the rights of citizens in this province.  As I said last 

night, one only has to look at the Gass Commission behind 

closed doors. 

 

One only has to see a Minister of Finance bring in a financial 

statement put together and audited, as he says, by Deloitte 

Touche to know that the chairman of the Gass Commission, on 

any reference during the Gass tribunal hearings, any reference 

to the Crown Management Board, that individual should leave 

the room, according to any principles of conflict of interest that 

you and I understand. 

 

The Minister of Finance brings it in; he says it's prepared, the 

portion on Crown Management Board, is prepared by Deloitte 

Touche.  And given those rules, that person should exit the 

room and then we would be left with three NDP partisans 

doing the deliberations on Crown Management Board. 

 

Now that kind of a record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I come 

as a member of this legislature to study legislation such as Bill 

18, has to give me pause to think, because obviously the rights 

of individuals have been trod upon.  The same Finance minister 

comes before this House and wishes to supersede all the rules 

and precedents of this House to deliver his financial package. 

 

He says it isn't a budget.  It looks like a budget, but it isn't one, 

and I will not have my ministers answer for anything that they 

do in the final quarter.  So I have pause to think, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when I received this piece of legislation late in this 

legislative session -- not number one, not a very difficult piece 

of legislation which all people in society would like to look at, 

but delivered late in the day, after all these other things have 

occurred -- delivered late in the day as we approach Christmas 

Day.  And it makes me wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why no 

sober second thought is possible. 

 

And I come back to my first premise, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It 

must be political.  It must be that this government has an 

agenda to use this massive majority that they have in this 

legislative Chamber to drive this piece of legislation open and 

through just prior to Christmas Eve. 

 

As my colleague from Arm River said, it seems strange that the 

rights that so many people have fought for over the years need 

to be rushed through a couple of days before Christmas. 

 

The constitutional references on important legislation are 

sought all across our land.  And those references go ahead.  

When the current government was in opposition and we 

discussed the Rafferty-Alameda project, these people were for 

process infinitum.  I mean the court system could not do 

enough for the New Democratic Party when we were 

discussing Rafferty-Alameda.  We were going to have a court 

reference to every court in this land, infinitum, and sometimes 

twice and three times. 

 

And member after member after member stood in here and 

said, that is the right way to go, that we should have these 

references because we might be harming the 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 497 

environment, we might be harming the Americans, and we 

might be harming all hosts of people.  So we want court 

references.  The member from Regina Rosemont stood, time 

and time and time and time again in this Assembly, and he saw 

nothing wrong with the court seeking a reference. 

 

Now the Minister of Justice says no, we don't have time.  I 

don't want to negotiate.  I don't want to have third party 

arbitration.  I don't want to have the Public Accounts 

Committee look at it in case somebody might look into our 

polling; somebody might look into who's doing our speech 

writing; somebody might look into who's representing our 

ministers -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, breaking precedents that have 

been set in this land for as long as we've been a province and a 

country. 

 

The union friends of the NDP who got rid of Mr. Perry with 

this legislation and his ability to go to court as an individual 

and get his severance would never, ever stand for the same 

kind of treatment by this Legislative Assembly or any other.  If 

members came in and tried to do that to those particular unions 

represented by those people I'm sure that Mr. Bean would stand 

in self-righteousness on some stump and read the same 

message that he talked about with scabs, only this time he'd 

include politicians in it, I'm sure.  And I'm sure, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that probably some politicians in this country 

probably fit the category of Mr. Bean already. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is only right and proper that this 

legislation have some type of sober second thought attached to 

it.  If it is not the Public Accounts Committee, and if it isn't the 

Court of Appeal, at least let it be this Chamber. 

 

Let that Minister of Justice listen to the amendments that will 

be brought forward by the opposition.  And instead of simply 

saying out of hand in this Chamber in a few hours, we won't 

accept those amendments, at least accept the amendments 

which have had legal opinion attached to them, that have had 

the Legislative Law Clerk look at them, have had some outside 

opinion. At least be able to take those amendments today and 

say: I will give them due consideration.  As the highest law 

officer in this province, I will seek outside opinion beyond my 

friends.  That I will seek an outside opinion that will allow me 

to come in with a reasoned judgement on those amendments, so 

that this legislature in a later session can know that it has done 

the right thing.  And that is why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be 

supporting this particular amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I just want the opportunity to add a few words in 

support of the amendment. 

 

And what I want to raise in this Legislative Assembly is the 

degree of hypocrisy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is being 

exemplified by the government in their Bill with respect to 

unfair and patronage appointments when in fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as I will point out, I have here in my hand the other 

side of that when it comes to talking about being fair. 

What I have before me is the Democratic Reforms for the 

1990's by the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party, January, 

1991.  I'm going to quote from some of that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because I think the public needs to know how the 

New Democrats talk one line and then do exactly the opposite 

when it comes to a piece of legislation like this that is very, 

very unacceptable to the public and to the legal profession and 

to all members of the Assembly when you really look at it.  

And indeed, Mr. Speaker, how they talk a line, whether it's in 

agriculture outside the House or outside when they're running 

for office, and something completely different when they get 

inside. 

 

I want to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the NDP's Reforms for 

the 1990's, I quote from page 26, and I'm just going to read 

what they say should be happening with respect to hiring and 

firing.  This is called "HIRING PRACTICES" by the NDP. 

 

 All Saskatchewan people (and I'm quoting) have the right to 

expect equal opportunity of access to government 

employment -- i.e., that men and women are hired for the 

Saskatchewan public service and appointed to Saskatchewan 

crown corporations, boards and commissions on the basis of 

their professional merit, not on the basis of their politics.  In 

addition, the Saskatchewan public has a right to access to 

information regarding the terms of employment of 

individuals hired by the government. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP in their own reform documents 

in leading up to an election to get people to support them, say 

that all hirings in the public service with respect to Crown 

corporations, boards, and commissions should be on the basis 

of professional merit, not on the basis of their politics.  It goes 

on to say: 

 

 Many of these positions within crown corporations and 

prominent regulatory bodies require the kind of experience 

and expertise simply not found in the backgrounds of 

individuals appointed on the basis of their political ties. 

 

Leaving the impression, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they would 

not do anything political or anything to do with patronage. 

 

 The growing number of high-profile patronage and otherwise 

questionable appointments has increased public cynicism 

(says the NDP just prior to the election). 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'll go on to page 28 and it says the 

following. This is the NDP speaking again, talking to the 

public about how sanctimonious they're going to be with 

respect to their appointments and how they treat public 

servants. 

 

 Young people across the province have learned from similar 

experience that it matters more who 

  



498 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

they know than what their qualifications are to find 

government employment. 

 

Implying that the NDP would never do this.  It wouldn't matter 

that you happen to know an NDPer because it has nothing to do 

with what the new reforms say should be in operations in a new 

government.  It goes on to say, this NDP document prior to an 

election: 

 

 The integrity, impartiality and professionalism of the 

Saskatchewan public service have been damaged by these 

practices at all levels. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've heard people and my colleagues 

here, go through this Bill that is proposed here to take away 

rights, to pull civil servants out, to change the way contracts 

are, to remove all access to legal remedy in one piece of 

legislation. 

 

And prior to the election the NDP have said: 

 

 The integrity, impartiality and professionalism of the 

Saskatchewan public service has been damaged by these 

practices at all levels. 

 

Implying they'd never do anything like that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have never witnessed, and the public of 

Saskatchewan have never witnessed, such diametrically 

opposed pieces of paper as Democratic Reforms for the 1990's 

by the NDP prior to the election, and the Bill that's on the floor 

of the legislature right now. 

 

It's unbelievable that the two pieces could be put together by 

the same people who ran.  A recent employment advertisement 

for an area manager in customer services for the Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation listed sensitivity to political 

realities as part of the job description, and they say that 

shouldn't be part of it now.  You shouldn't be close to partisan 

politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 When a government agency blatantly promotes hiring on the 

basis of patronage and favouritism, it is little wonder that 

there has been a general decline in public understanding and 

appreciation of the principles of public service, as well as 

corresponding decline in the morale of the public service. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the NDP have said in 1991 prior to 

the election is that patronage has no part of the public service.  

Hiring and firing should have no part of the public service.  

This is the way that they would do it, and they put this 

document in all of their ridings.  The cabinet ministers and 

back-benchers held up this document at public meetings.  This 

is what we would do, they say.  And then we see the legislation 

that is here that takes away every single solitary right, and it's 

just based on politics whether you can work for the provincial 

government or not. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I defy any member of the NDP to take the 

two pieces of paper and actually put them 

together and say these are consistent with any individual's heart 

or soul or compassion or sense of justice. 

 

The NDP paper goes on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and says this 

and I quote: 

 

 Patronage costs Saskatchewan taxpayers (a great deal).  

Government is robbed of competence, fairness and 

productivity when the merit principle is abandoned as the 

criterion for accessing public service jobs and obtaining 

advancement. 

 

So says the NDP.  Not surprisingly today the public of 

Saskatchewan is less trusting and less forgiving of people and 

institutions than they were years ago -- 10 years ago.  Public 

attitudes toward institutions of our society -- the public service, 

the legislature, the justice system -- have changed in the 

relationship of the public to government as times become 

volatile. 

 

The implication, Mr. Speaker, is because of patronage, and 

they wouldn't have any patronage.  This is their white paper, 

their guiding principles for how they would operate in 

government.  The volatility makes all the more important the 

role played by stabilizing institutions such as the public service 

and other vital components of our system of parliamentary 

government.  An attempt must be made, the NDP say, to 

address this loss of confidence and public cynicism toward the 

public service and restore the foundation of broadly based trust 

is essential for any public enterprise to succeed. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do you think this Bill is the first 

step by the NDP to restore the foundation of broadly based 

non-partisan trust in the public service in Saskatchewan or in 

Canada?  There wouldn't be an NDPer across the country or 

North America or any place else who would say, this will 

restore non-patronage feelings in the public service. 

 

I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the outset the hypocrisy of 

standing up and getting elected with this piece of paper, of how 

you should do it and turning around and getting elected and 

within days bringing in a piece of legislation that is abhorred 

by every lawyer every place, except those partisans that sit here 

and say, well we're elected now, we can do as we like, we can 

take away rights, we can do the opposite to what we promised 

-- shame, shame, Mr. Speaker, shame, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Let me go on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on page 28, I quote 

from the NDP: 

 

 All appointments to government agencies, boards and 

commissions should be based on merit, not political 

patronage. 

 

Did you hear that?  I'll repeat that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  This is 

the NDP prior to the election.  They said this: 

 

 All appointments to government agencies, boards and 

commissions should be based on merit, not on political 

patronage.  Relevant professional organizations and interest 

groups should be 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 499 

 consulted whenever possible in determining lists of 

candidates. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, are we to assume the former NDP 

candidates, the former NDP cabinet ministers, the former NDP 

campaign managers are not patronage appointments?  Do they 

think they're kidding somebody now when they stand in their 

place and say, this is the way they would do it on the boards 

and commissions, and running Crown corporations.  I mean, 

with great respect, Jack Messer was an NDP cabinet minister 

and he is now in charge of Sask Power Corporation. 

 

But here it says: 

 

 All appointments to government agencies, boards and 

commissions should be based on merit, not on political 

patronage. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people have made mockery of their 

Democratic Reforms for the 1990's.  And all across this 

province and all across Canada, people are going to see through 

that.  That's why people are phoning us and writing us and 

saying, don't support this piece of legislation; it's the wrong 

thing to. 

 

And what's most appalling in fact is the hypocrisy of them 

saying one thing prior to the election.  They would be holier 

than thou, no patronage at all, here are the rules.  And then 

come in here and within days take away every civil servant's 

rights -- human rights, Charter of Rights, legal opportunities 

and rights -- that you've ever seen.  The most blatant piece of 

patronage and removal of rights you've seen in Saskatchewan 

and indeed Canadian history. 

 

The code of ethical conduct, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on page 30, 

this is what the NDP say: 

 

 The people of Saskatchewan have a right to expect honesty 

and fairness from their political representatives and public 

servants in the discharge of their public duties . . . They want 

politics and the public service to be respected and honourable 

professions as intended within our parliamentary system of 

government. 

 

And they go on to say, and leave the impression that this is the 

kind of thing that they would do to make sure there was no 

patronage in the public service.  And then within days, they 

introduce this legislation. 

 

I should get the last paragraph of that Act to read it over and 

over and over again so that the members opposite and 

particularly those that have some legal background can listen to 

the implications that that has for the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you look at this paper, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the NDP's reforms for the 1990s, and you look at the 

Bill itself and you go back through the introduction of the Bill, 

the last part of the Bill, or we just go to the blues.  It's An Act 

to Provide for the Public Disclosure of Crown Employment 

Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in Crown Employment 

Contracts governing Payments and Benefits on Termination or 

Expiration of those Contracts, to Void 

Provisions in those Contracts respecting those matters and to 

Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to Compensation for 

any Loss or Damage resulting from the Enactment or 

Application of this Act. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP have reached new heights in 

political hypocrisy in the Saskatchewan legislature and the 

Saskatchewan public. 

 

The last page of their document which says that they are going 

to be so forthright and non-partisan in the administration of the 

public service says: 

 

 Public confidence could be restored to the systems of 

government tendering and hiring.  Service to the public could 

once again become the primary reason for entering politics in 

government. 

 

 Honesty in government is a high priority of the New 

Democratic Caucus.  A strong will and commitment to ethics 

in the political process is necessary for any government to 

combat the dangerous practices of patronage, favouritism and 

corruption which threaten our parliamentary democracy. 

 

They end their paper, the New Democratic paper on reforms 

and how they would govern by saying that they want to combat 

the dangerous practices of patronage, favouritism, and 

corruption which threaten our parliamentary democracy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this document, which I'm sure all 

members of the New Democratic caucus are familiar with, 

Democratic Reforms, January, 1991, used to campaign on to 

reform: no patronage, fair, honest, don't take away any rights, 

stick up for people, make sure it's an honourable public service.  

Don't have them out there wondering if they have any rights or 

no rights or half-rights, no recourse to the legal community. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a whitewash.  The democratic 

reforms of the NDP mean absolutely nothing, just like their 

farm policy.  We heard today in question period . . . they talk 

about moratoriums on one hand, and they admit that they 

haven't talked to anybody about them that makes any 

difference. 

 

And then they sit in here and the Minister of Agriculture hides 

in the legislature avoiding the media for the third or the fourth 

time because he's afraid to face them because he doesn't tell it 

as it is in the country.  And he doesn't tell us anything in here.  

The hypocrisy of it.  It's absolute hypocrisy. 

 

Here's the white paper reforms on how you treat the public 

service.  All the good things you say you're going to do and 

how self-righteous and honourable you're going to be.  And 

then you bring in a Bill that takes away every solitary right that 

any individual public servant ever had. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's no recourse, there's no recourse at 

all. 

 

The claim for loss or damage includes any claim . . . And it 

  



500 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

just takes away any way that you can get back at defending 

yourself: 

 

 . . . in damages or debt for unjust dismissal, breach of 

contract, inducing breach of contract, interference with a 

contract, mental distress, loss of reputation, defamation or 

any other cause of action in contract, tort or equity arising 

from or incidental to the creation, termination or expiration of 

a Crown employment contract. 

 

There's no rights left.  They've taken away every single solitary 

right of an individual for recourse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at a 

time when they said to the public . . . And I'm sure they showed 

their parents and their children and all their colleagues how 

good they were going to be with this great piece of paper, 

Democratic Reforms for the 1990's that says all the things 

about how a non-partisan government would operate, and then 

introduce by a lawyer, attorney general in the province of 

Saskatchewan, an NDP that said, here's how we'll treat the 

public service.  Here's how we'll shore up the NDP patronage 

appointments. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that I've made my point.  

These two documents are going to travel across Saskatchewan 

and across Canada so you can stand and defend yourselves in 

the face of the hyprocrisy of promising this and then delivering 

this . . . And won't even take the time to consider the 

amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which says, take it to the 

courts.  Allow the people to pursue it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I certainly will stand in my place and 

support the amendment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:14 p.m. until 3:20 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd  

-- 9 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Bradley 

Wiens Lorje 

Simard Lyons 

Tchorzewski Lautermilch 

Lingenfelter Calvert 

Teichrob Hamilton 

Koskie Johnson 

Shillington Trew 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Solomon Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Knezacek 

Mitchell Harper 

 

Penner Renaud 

Cunningham Langford 

Hagel Jess 

-- 34 

The division bells rang from 3:24 p.m. until 4:25 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Bradley 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Tchorzewski Calvert 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Teichrob Johnson 

Koskie Trew 

Shillington Scott 

Anguish McPherson 

Goulet Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Harper 

Mitchell Renaud 

Penner Langford 

Cunningham Jess 

Hagel  

-- 29 

Nays 

Muirhead Martens 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 8 

 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like it recorded that I am 

declining to vote because I'm declaring a pecuniary interest 

pursuant to rule 37. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm informed that we do not record 

abstentions, but Hansard will of course record your 

explanation. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce her officials? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce Dave 

Innes, the deputy minister of Community Services. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, I had a couple of questions on this 

that I'd like answered please.  Who is it that's going to be 

making the appointments then to the municipal board? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Cabinet. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Why does the Executive Council want control of 

these boards?  Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister,  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 501 

why does the Executive Council want control of these boards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, this is no change.  The 

Lieutenant Governor in Council has always made appointments 

to these boards. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, that isn't really, I don't think, the 

proper answer to it.  We wanted to know why they want control 

of the boards.  In the past it was a quasi-judicial type board and 

independent.  Now we're wondering why the Executive 

Council feels that they have to have more direct control than 

they had in the past. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If the question is why does the cabinet 

want to be able to control the size of the board . . . is that the 

question?  What we're intending to do is try to limit 

expenditures here, and the only way we can do that is by 

controlling the number who sit on the board.  We're looking at 

the financial situation.  And hopefully, we can look at reducing 

the budget somewhat by decreasing the number who sit on the 

board. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, no, I don't think that was what I 

had in mind.  It's our understanding that the boards have been 

independent in the past and that we're wondering in the future 

if this Bill passes as you would like it to, our thoughts are that 

if the board members do not agree with the direction that -- or 

pardon me, the Executive Council -- does not agree with the 

direction the board members are taking that you will dismiss 

them.  Is that the rationale? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, that's not the rationale.  The board 

will be independent like it was in the past.  There is a budget 

implication here and we're only looking at the budget 

implication. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well we're not sure that we agree with that 

interpretation of it.  The way it worked before was they were 

independent, and why can't it remain that way? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- They will remain independent.  It is not 

the intention of this government to interfere with the work of 

the board at all. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, what criteria then will you use 

for the cutting down on the number of board members? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Well obviously, as you would know, that 

this government is facing some very severe financial crisis.  

And we intend . . . if the work-load is reduced, we would like 

to have the ability to reduce the number who sit on that board 

as well. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the question though was 

what criteria do you . . . will you determine the number of 

board members? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Obviously the budget is going to set to a 

large extent the criteria that we use.  In consultation with the 

chairman and understanding the number of appeals and the 

amount of work coming from municipal governments, we will 

be able to decide how many people should sit on that board and 

what their work-load will be. 

But it will be through consultation with the chairman as well. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A question 

for Madam Minister:  what is the minimum size you envisage 

for these boards? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The statutory minimum is three.  We 

envision somewhere between four or six.  We are hoping that 

we can save . . . As you know $60,000 per annum is the wage, 

and we're hoping to save at least one, perhaps two. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you're saying then that 

six would be your maximum.  Do you have a maximum in 

mind then, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- As you know there is no maximum.  

There has never been, it has been open-ended.  I would expect 

as work-loads increase or decrease we would have the ability to 

increase or decrease the number who sit on the board. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if you were to decrease 

the board levels down to the minimum of three or four that you 

have in mind, how long would you allow them to remain at that 

level? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- How long of a term would we appoint 

them for, or how long would they be required to sit on the 

board?  I guess it depends on the work-load and on the budget. 

 

As you know we are looking at trying to economize this 

government and make sure that it runs efficiently.  So 

depending on the work-load that comes from year to year and 

depending on the budget we'll decide how many people should 

be sitting on it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, my concern on this 

issue is that as my colleague pointed out . . . the Executive 

Council disagrees with the direction the board is taking.  You 

drop them down to your minimum level of three to four at 

some point and then you fill it back up again.  That is my 

concern.  Can you assure me that will not indeed happen? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, really there would be no 

need for the provincial government to intervene or to get 

involved in the work of the board.  I can't envision any 

situation where the provincial government would choose to 

look at what the board is doing and to make any kind of 

interventionist action.  So this is primarily motivated by the 

need to look at the board and to make sure that the budget 

reflects the work-load of the board and that's all. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, will the representatives 

on the board represent all of the sectors involved? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, that's a good point.  Actually all 

sectors will be represented.  Our course of action will be to 

make sure that every one who sits on that board has 

qualifications that will allow them to perform their job function 

in a competent manner.  So we're going to be looking at some 

very stringent qualifications in regard to 

  



502 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

municipal finance, in regard to municipal law, and in regard to 

such things as assessment -- past experience in assessment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, would you be willing 

to table those qualifications in this House? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We will be, as the Bill is passed, there 

will be qualifications that will be tabled at the point as the 

qualifications are developed. 

 

I would make one more statement that if there are openings on 

that board they will be advertised across Saskatchewan, and 

anybody with qualifications that meet the criteria set out in the 

regulations will be interviewed as a prospective person to sit on 

the board. 

 

So these openings will be . . . if there are openings, they will be 

advertised publicly. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, what kind of a time 

frame are we looking at for the development and tabling of 

those qualifications? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The regulations should be brought in by 

the end of January, considering that we have a holiday right 

now.  But they are being thought about and by the end of 

January those regulations should be in place. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, if by chance on some 

wonderful occurrence this House is no longer sitting at that 

time, will you send a copy of those to me, please? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Yes, I certainly will.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  How many members 

are there currently on the board today? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Six, including the chairman. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- And, Mr. Chairman, how many subcommittee 

members are there? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- If you're talking about the planning 

appeals subcommittee, there is probably what? -- 17 or 20 

sitting on as part-time members on the assessment appeals 

committee.  But there are six full-time board members and a 

long list of Assessment Appeal Board members that probably 

will no longer sit because the qualifications on the board will 

enable the people sitting on the board to have better experience 

and assessment.  And they can do the major part of that work. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Are the new members that you intend to appoint 

to the board, will they be 10-year appointments? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Ten year?  I would not wish to appoint 

them for 10 years.  I think there will be a limited, probably a 

three-year appointment subject to review.  But I can't foresee a 

10-year appointment.  I think that's too long. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Is the minister 

saying then that these regulations will come in 

after she has terminated Larry Birkbeck and Wilma Staff or 

will we get these regulations beforehand? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't understand why you would 

assume why anybody would be terminated in particular. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, what you have said is that 

this board for budgetary reasons is going to be dropped down 

to three members; that the independence that this board had 

with 10-year appointments no longer applies; that Executive 

Council will review these people on an ongoing basis.  And I 

can only judge from past history of what I've seen in this House 

in the last three weeks that you will probably terminate Wilma 

Staff and Larry Birkbeck.  I just want to know if you're going 

to bring those regulations beforehand or afterwards. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Are you assuming that those people aren't 

qualified?  I don't know if they're qualified or not.  Until we see 

their qualifications we can't say whether they'll sit on the board 

or not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not saying they weren't 

qualified at all.  I'm saying they're on the board.  The member 

has said she is dropping the board down to three members and 

then she's going to rebuild it; that these new members will be 

subject to dismissal at any time by Executive Council; that they 

are going to have short-term appointments.  I just want to know 

if the minister is going to do these things in full view of the 

public and that there is going to be ample reason. 

 

I ask simply, is she going to table these new regulations before 

any terminations take place.  That's a very simple answer, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I'm not making any comment on any of 

the qualifications of the people who sit on the board now.  

There are six people on the board.  We intend to develop the 

regulations.  They'll be made public at the end of January. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Once more, Mr. Chairman.  The question was 

very simple.  Will the minister assure the House that the new 

regulations as to hiring and qualifications will be tabled with 

the House before any terminations take place?  Simple 

question, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I have no problem in that. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, did I hear or 

understand you correctly when you indicated that the 

sub-committees were going to be reduced, that you're going to 

have less of them and fewer people there?  Are you going to 

reduce the different sections in them relating to the hospitals 

and to the  schools and to other areas?  Are you going to reduce 

them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Are you talking about the planning 

appeals sub-committee, or are you talking about . . . Every 

sector will be represented on the Municipal Board.  If you're 

talking about hospitals or you're talking about school boards or 

you're talking about municipal government, there will be 

representation from those  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 503 

sectors on the Municipal Board. 

 

If you're talking about the Planning Appeals Board, which I 

suppose could be interpreted as a sub-committee, that 

committee probably, which only sits part time now, will 

probably have no function because the Planning Appeals will 

be taken up with the Municipal Board because the Municipal 

Board will have expertise in assessment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- It's my understanding, Madam Minister, that 

the school trustees association has representation or has had 

representation on some of these planning committees or parts 

of the subcommittees of the Municipal Board.  And I just want 

to know whether they're going to be relieved of their 

responsibilities too. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Apparently if those people don't sit on the 

Municipal Board now, as they're no people with qualifications 

representing school boards on the planning . . . at the Municipal 

Board now.  So I'm not sure; if you feel that should be changed, 

then it could be looked at. 

 

As far as the Assessment Appeal Board, as I said before, we 

feel that people qualified in assessment should be sitting on the 

Municipal Board.  And so that's an area of expertise that we're 

going to be looking at. 

 

I want to correct one impression I may have left.  The 

regulations will be made public.  I guess I'm not familiar if the 

House has to sit when you say tabled in the House.  The list of 

qualifications will be made public for you before any changes 

will be made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, I just 

want a clarification on the questions I had earlier.  You were 

going to send me a copy of the qualifications as well as the 

regulations? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The regulations are the qualifications, 

yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- The qualifications will be spelled out in 

the regulations that you'll be drafting. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the member just made a 

commitment which she now has qualified; the minister has now 

qualified it.  One of the amendments that the Minister of 

Finance said would be looked at seriously was the tabling of 

documents in this House at any time, whether in session or 

intersessionally, and that the Public Accounts Committee 

would be able to deal with that amendment. 

 

What I specifically asked the minister is, before any 

terminations take place, that those rules and regulations be 

tabled in this Assembly.  And I took the tenor from the 

Minister of Finance that he was quite willing to look at that 

procedure, Mr. Chairman, and I think that in the spirit of what 

was said on that particular amendment, that the minister should 

be prepared to table before any terminations take place. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I probably wasn't familiar with the way 

the regulations are developed.  Regulations are made public as 

they are developed.  They're order in council, and they will be 

made public.  And as they are made public there will be 

changes made on the board. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the minister should know 

that tabling of a document with the Assembly means it is 

public.  But I think it is right and proper, as was discussed in 

the amendment, for the benefit of members of this legislature, 

that those documents be tabled with the Assembly and not 

simply released at the whim of the minister in the manner 

which the minister wants to. 

 

That is the whole essence of that particular amendment with 

the Public Accounts Committee, and I heard the Minister of 

Finance, the Deputy Premier, say that it was right and 

reasonable.  And I ask the minister again, before any 

terminations take place, will she table those rules and 

regulations with the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll follow the regular 

procedure with the regulations.  They will be made public and 

we will not make any changes on the board until the 

regulations are made public. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, does that concur with what 

your Minister of Finance and Deputy Premier said in this 

Assembly? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't believe that regulations have 

always been regarded as the . . . in the same procedure as other 

parts of legislation and other public documents.  But I'll have to 

wait and see.  I'm sorry. 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 
 

Clause 1 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that 

this Bill is introduced basically retroactively.  And my 

impression is that this is a one-time Bill, that it was intended 

just to cover this particular year.  Is that correct? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- That's correct.  The last minister of 

Finance brought this amendment in, and we are simply passing 

the amendment from the last government's minister of Finance. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Does that mean 

then that for next year we would go back to the old formula, 

and that there would not be a reduction for next year? 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- First of all, we are intending to set up a 

task force with the local governments to look at the whole idea 

of formula.  I might remind you that the formula has not been 

applied since about 1983.  So that formula has not been in use 

anyway, and we feel that it is time, in response to what SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) has been 

saying for some time, to develop a new formula and we'll be 

sitting down with them, consulting with them,  and bringing in 

a new 

  



504 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

formula. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well maybe I'm off base, Madam Minister, 

but it seems to me that a formula means that you have 

something that you use as a base and then you refer to that in 

percentages to come up with the formula for each individual 

year.  And if that's the case, then going back to 100 per cent of 

the old formula means you go back to the same thing as you 

had before.  And that's all I was asking, is whether or not you're 

going to allow next year's funding to be the same as it always 

was, at 100 per cent. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the last government has 

never used the formula.  To go back to the formula would be 

going back to 1982 when the last NDP government was in.  

And perhaps he isn't aware of that but through various 

ministers of Community Services and Finance they have 

disregarded that formula for nine years. 

 

We intend to set up a new committee to structure a new 

formula that will take into account this financial situation, both 

at the local government and this provincial government, and we 

will be developing that sometime before the next budget is 

brought down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, I address my question to the 

Madam Minister again.  For this year basically you've said that 

we're going to clean up with about a 16 per cent reduction to 

rural municipalities and about a 7 per cent reduction for urban 

municipalities.  And my question is, for next year will we be 

going back to the 1989-1990 fiscal year at 100 per cent? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Are you asking if we will have the same 

levels of funding as we did in 1989-90?  I cannot give you that 

guarantee.  It will depend on the way the budgeting process 

takes place and the financial situation of the province. 

 

I can guarantee you though that we will protect the interests of 

local governments, unlike the last government. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, it appears to me that at least 

we have the comfort of knowing that we can't possibly have a 

reduction from that statement of any more than 16 per cent or 7 

per cent.  We have to obviously have something at least better 

than that for next year.  And we appreciate that. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, in the event that considering that 

we've had tax collections lower this year in some municipalities 

than has happened before, do you have any contingency plan 

for helping those people through the winter months that may 

not have the cash to be able to keep roads open and that sort of 

thing, so that the school buses can continue to run in the 

province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We are aware of the financial straits of 

local governments, both urban and rural, and it has been 

happening for nine years.  And if you look at the past history, 

you will find out that the past government has 

neglected woefully the financial interests of local governments. 

 

I cannot guarantee that we will continue any funding until we 

look at the financial situation of this province.  So I want to 

make that clear.  This is not our budget we're talking about.  

When we're preparing our budget, I'm quite prepared to talk 

about the funding that we will be bringing in in our 1992-93 

budget. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  To Madam 

Minister, that sounds to me like a cop-out.  I'm wondering if 

you could be a little bit more specific when you say that the 

amount of revenue available will depend upon the financial 

picture of the province and what the review is going to show.  

Could you be a little bit more specific on behalf of these boards 

out there? 

 

If our projected deficit of $250 million is proven to be accurate, 

does this mean then that they can expect a 10 per cent increase 

in revenue, a 5 per cent increase or a zero per cent increase? 

 

And your inflated, exaggerated deficit proves to be what they 

come down with -- 888 or the 950 million -- does this mean 

that there's going to be a substantial decrease?  Could you be a 

little bit more specific as to what you're talking about? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, the last member from 

Melfort stood here and said this province was virtually 

bankrupt, and he was right.  And I'm not going to make any 

commitment on next year's budget until we have had a 

financial review of this province and decide how much money 

we have to spend.  Local government realize you cannot spend 

money you don't have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, specifically, if the deficit is 

going to be correct at $250 million, how much money will you 

have to spend? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I don't know how much money we're 

going to have to spend.  And we don't anticipate there's going 

to be $250 million deficit.  We've already said it's $1 billion. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I see the members 

engaging in a discussion of funding levels for some future year, 

and I would remind members that the item before us is an Act 

to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act which deals 

with expenditures for this fiscal year.  I just encourage for you 

to bear that in mind. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In response to your last response, if it is $1 

billion, how much will we have to spend? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- We haven't developed our budget in 

municipal finance yet.  This has nothing to do with this Act that 

is in effect putting into action what the last government said in 

their budget, which was a decrease to municipal governments.  

This is not an action we would have taken had we been here.  

This is your action -- you take the responsibility for it. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, this House stands 

recessed until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 


