





























































Hansard: June 18, 1991


 

 

June 18/91 
EVENING SITTING 

 
ROYAL ASSENT 

 
At 7:02 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took 
her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the following Bills: 
 

Bill No. 84    -- An Act respecting the League of Educational 
Administrators, Directors and Superintendents 

Bill No. 55    -- An Act respecting Programs to Stabilize the Income of 
Agricultural Producers 

Bill No. 56    -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability Act 
Bill No. 82    -- An Act to Implement Certain Provisions Respecting 

Pension Benefits and Annuity Plans for Teachers Agreed to 
in the 1990-91 Provincial Teachers' Collective Agreement 

Bill No. 69    -- An Act respecting Referendums and Plebiscites 
Bill No. 70    -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of 

the Government of Saskatchewan and a right of privacy with 
respect to personal information held by the Government of 
Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 71    -- An Act respecting a right of access to documents of 
local authorities and a right of privacy with respect to 
personal information held by local authorities 

Bill No. 58    -- An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
Bill No. 59    -- An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
Bill No. 76    -- An Act to amend The Coroners Act 
Bill No. 77    -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 78    -- An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 
Bill No. 80    -- An Act respecting the Application in Saskatchewan of 

the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the 
International Sale of Goods 

Bill No. 81    -- An Act to amend references to the Criminal Code in 
Certain Acts and Regulations and respecting Consequential 
Amendments to Certain Acts and Regulations resulting from 
the enactment of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c.C-46 

Bill No. 64    -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act (No. 2) 
Bill No. 65    -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act (No. 

2) 
Bill No. 66    -- An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 
Bill No. 73    -- An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
Bill No. 74    -- An Act respecting the Registration of Leafcutting 

Beekeepers 
 

PROROGATION 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 
It is my duty to discharge you from further attendance at the fourth 



 

 

session of the twenty-first legislature.  In relieving you of further 
attendance, I would like to congratulate you on the work that you have 
successfully completed. 
 
At the opening of this fourth session, my government emphasized a 
commitment to consult with the people of this province, to ask them for 
their ideas, to listen to their suggestions, and to respond to their 
concerns.  As you are aware, these consultations have been highly 
productive and have identified innovative ways to address the many 
challenges before us. 
 
In addition, the consultations have demonstrated the correctness to the 
proposed solutions and buttressed resolve to carry them to completion.  
Consultation, in conjunction with the responsible and efficient management 
of resources, augments the security and stability of our communities and 
the growth and well-being of the province's citizens.  By listening to what 
people are concerned about, my government was able to set priorities 
consistent with what people identified as important.  This House, too, 
responded to the people's priorities by passing legislation to assist 
beleaguered farmers, protect increasingly threatened rural communities, and 
encourage expansion and diversification of the economy. 
 
For agriculture, you passed The Agricultural Safety Net Act which has given 
farmers a financial plan to protect themselves from those outside forces 
which are not to their making and over which they have no control.  You 
have, thereby, helped them for the first time to achieve a level of 
stability which ordinary citizens take for granted. 
 
The dual objectives of economic development and stabilization of rural 
communities were addressed by your approval of The Community Bonds Act, an 
Act which provides the means for communities to raise funds for new 
businesses.  You also approved amendments to The Labour-sponsored Venture 
Capital Corporations Act in order to enhance the availability of funds in 
the market-place.  Both of these Acts lead to the new pools of funds for 
entrepreneurs and opportunities for investors. 
 
Your concern for the responsible and efficient management of resources led 
to the passage of The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 1991, which 
not only ensures further development by creating fair and equitable rules 
to cover the major new technology of horizontal drilling, but also created 
the self-financing Oil and Gas Conservation Board to ensure that the 
resources we are endowed with are wisely used. 
 
This House has also fostered the growth and well-being of citizens by 
ensuring that the environment in all its aspects remain sound now and for 
the future.  Such Acts as The Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act and 
The State of the Environment Report Act help to keep Saskatchewan one of 
the cleanest places to live in Canada. 
 
Widespread consultations also revealed a significant element of demand for 
a less partisan government, the protection of democratic rights, and the 
accountability of elected governments.  This spring the rules of the 
Legislative Assembly were changed and the first Speaker elected, to respond 



 

 

to the first of these concerns. 
 
The government's comprehensive package of legislation, including The 
Referendum and Plebiscite Act, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, and The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection 
of Privacy Act, are reforms introduced to make the government more open and 
allow people to play a more direct role in the government. 
 
The Referendum and Plebiscite Act introduces means by which the public can 
be consulted or make their concerns known by direct democracy, and outlines 
conditions under which such initiatives are binding on the government. 
 
Finally, the two freedom of information Acts provide the public with the 
right to know the activities of government as it touches their personal 
lives, while at the same time safeguarding the information that government 
has on private citizens.  They also make provision for the correction of 
erroneous information. 
 
In taking leave of you, I commend you for the conscientious manner in which 
you have approached your duties, and wish you well for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hepworth: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, 
it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this 
Legislative Assembly be prorogued until it pleases Her Honour to summon the 
same for the dispatch of business.  And the Legislative Assembly is 
accordingly prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 7:10 p.m. 
 


