




















































Hansard: December 12, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 241 

 December 12, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly two very 

special people in my life.  My wife Jo and my daughter Sheila 

are in your west gallery and I'd like to welcome them here to 

the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce another very special person, someone that it has been 

my privilege to serve with on Saskatoon City Hospital Board 

for the past number of years, and I'm referring of course to Mr. 

Frank Hartman.  He's in the east gallery.  I think many people 

in this House will know Frank. He's been very active in the 

labour movement for many years and he's an excellent 

contributor to Saskatoon City Hospital Board. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, there's two people I'd like to 

introduce this afternoon in the west gallery, to the Assembly 

through yourself.  And one is Fred Clipsham, who is the 

president of our constituency organization and a long-time 

community activist and contributor to sustainable development 

and change in the community of Saskatchewan.  So I'd like to 

introduce to you Fred Clipsham. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- And as well I saw a friendly face walk in that 

has a northern look about it.  It's Howard Lucas, who worked 

for many years with the La Ronge Indian band in economic 

development, community economic development and training 

in the North.  And I'd like to welcome you too, Howard. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join my colleague in 

welcoming Howard Lucas to the legislature.  Howard Lucas in 

a constituent of mine.  Howard is now very involved in the 

trade union movement.  And I'm sure that we'll be hearing from 

Howard and his membership in the days and months ahead.  So 

welcome to the legislature, Howard. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would also like to 

introduce a member that perhaps does not need too much of an 

introduction to this Assembly -- he's sitting behind the bar -- 

having been a colleague for many of the legislators in here, Mr. 

Ralph Katzman, the individual who preceded me as the 

representative for the constituency of Rosthern. 

 

 

He had a long, illustrious career.  And I know that very shortly 

after he was first elected, of course, it didn't take him very long 

to become one of the largest political personalities in this 

province.  So I'd like all of the members here to join me in 

welcoming him, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 

member from Rosthern in welcoming Mr. Katzman to the 

Assembly.  Ralph and I had the enjoyable task of sitting in this 

House together for a number of years. 

 

And I remember one tour that we went on, a very productive 

one, I might add -- a libraries committee, a legislative libraries 

committee that worked on a special project, and I think brought 

about some useful changes to the library system. And I think 

the period we're going through in terms of committees of the 

Assembly -- setting them up -- Ralph, I think the work you did 

was well worthwhile. 

 

The other stories I won't tell, because we're sworn to secrecy. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to the 

Assembly and to yourself two of my constituents from 

Weyburn.  They're sitting in the west gallery: Joe Vilcu, a 

farmer from the Midale area, and Arven Snelling, a retired 

employee from Souris Valley Regional Care Centre.  I'd like 

the Assembly to welcome these two members. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, 

and through you to the members of this Assembly, Mr. Gordon 

Nystuen Jr. in the Speaker's gallery.  He has for many years 

been active in the wheat pool movement, and he's a delegate 

from our area to the wheat pool.  So I'd like members of this 

Assembly to welcome him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Financial Management Review Commission 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question today 

is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, the Gass Commission recently 

announced that it would be examining 12 items . . . 12 

transactions, I believe.  Would the Premier at least announce to 

the Assembly today which 12 transactions those might be? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many taxpayers, shareholders and 

people, companies around this province who would like to 

know if they are to be summoned before this particular 

tribunal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon.  



242 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

member for that question.  I tell the hon. member that I do not 

know the decision to which he refers.  I suggest that a direct 

communication by him to Mr. Gass or the officials of the 

inquiry will provide the answer for him.  If he wishes that we 

do it, we'll undertake to do it and provide it to him in the next 

few days.  But there's nothing preventing him making direct 

contact to Mr. Gass or the officials there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Premier, it is very clear, with no conflict of interest 

guide-lines in place for this particular tribunal -- and this 

tribunal is, I remind this House, a creature of the Executive 

Council -- what would happen if the chairman of that particular 

tribunal, who is an employee of the firm Deloitte & Touche, a 

firm which I might add is also the auditor of SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), under 

what the Minister of Finance said the other day where that 

member would excuse himself from the committee -- would 

that not leave, Mr. Premier, three admitted NDP (New 

Democratic Party) partisans then deliberating on whether that 

particular item should be discussed or not, with no scrutiny 

from the media, from members of this House, or the public at 

large?  Do you think that is acceptable, Mr. Premier, given the 

pronouncements that you have made many times in this 

province and in this House earlier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, first of all I do not 

accept any of the fundamental assumptions behind the question 

of the hon. member.  All of the commissioners have taken out 

declarations which indicate that they will not be in conflict of 

interest.  The commissioners are in the process, I'm advised, of 

finalizing guide-lines which, I think, will be before its next 

meeting sometime next week.  And I'm sure those will be made 

public or at least available to the member.  More detailed 

guide-lines are in their preliminary work, getting prepared for 

their studies. 

 

So the argument and the fundamental assumption of the 

member opposite, that there are no conflict interest guide-lines 

or any declarations is erroneous.  Moreover the hon. member 

ought to know better, I say with the greatest of respect.  In 

1982 when his desk mate, the former premier, established the 

Wolfgang Wolff Commission composed very much of the 

same kind of personnel -- people who were involved in the 

chartered accountant private business and auditing government 

business and involved from universities and the like -- that 

problem was apparently dealt with to the satisfaction of the 

hon. members opposite. 

 

I suggest that the people in 1991 are no less honest, no less full 

of integrity, and no less capable of solving the same problems 

as those in 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier -- and I'm glad to see that we are making small 

amounts of progress here -- Mr. Premier, yesterday my 

colleague from Arm River raised some very pertinent questions 

on SPMC, the fact that your political 

friend Garry Beatty has been hired to run that particular agency 

of government and that he has hired a number of political 

operatives to sanitize SPMC. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, how can you stand in this legislature and 

say, in the example that I gave you earlier, that with three 

NDP-admitted partisans on that commission, that tribunal . . . 

obviously SPMC is on your political agenda.  Those people 

will have no choice but to give an unfavourable report from the 

Gass Commission tribunal.  Don't you agree, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. 

member the answer to his question, shortly put, is no, I do not 

agree.  The hon. member is extremely loose in his 

characterization of the members of the Gass Commission and, I 

might say also, extremely loose in the choice of language that 

he uses.  With respect to this SPMC, he says that Mr. Beatty 

and others are there to "sanitize" the SPMC.  Maybe the hon. 

member knows something more about this than I do, but if 

sanitization is what is required by the SPMC, that's indeed 

exactly what Mr. Beatty and the others are going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Premier, it has been very clear from the actions of your 

government in its early days that you have a definite political 

agenda to follow.  This flies in the face of comments that you 

have made around this province and I remind you, Mr. Premier, 

and I will quote from the Star-Phoenix of November 20 where 

you say, the member from Riversdale says, that this 

commission, this tribunal: 

 

 . . . will be . . . non-political and is aimed simply at improving 

financial accountability. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday we had the minister of 

Economic Development and Trade stand in this legislature, 

make disparaging comments about a prominent Saskatchewan 

athlete and I say, Mr. Speaker, directly misled this legislature 

as to some of the facts behind that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll ask the member to withdraw those 

remarks: "directly misled this legislature."  I'll ask the member 

to withdraw those remarks. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I withdraw that comment, Mr. Speaker.  But 

in questioning afterwards, Mr. Speaker, the member said, and I 

quote from the Star-Phoenix of Wednesday, December 11, that 

the government specifically contracted the Gass Financial 

Review Commission to find out this type of thing, an event, 

Mr. Speaker, which I find very shameful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that you have made comments, that 

your minister has made comments that directly counteract that 

as far as the Gass Commission, do you think it is not proper 

now for you, sir, to at least bring in some type of conflict of 

interest guide-lines that would take that commission above the 

suspicion that is in there 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 243 

in the public's mind? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the hon. 

member as my colleague, the Minister of Finance, who is not 

here today has been saying for the last week or ten days, the 

members have taken out a declaration of conflict of interest 

oath; the members are working on detailed guide-lines which 

as I've said in my first question, in question period today, will 

be finalized, I'm told sometime next week. 

 

And therefore the entire hypothesis, the entire foundation upon 

which the member constructs his question is wrongly based in 

the light of those facts.  He bases his entire question on some 

sort of assumption that there are no guide-lines with respect to 

conflict of interest being involved.  And there are. 

 

And I simply say to the member opposite and to his party 

leader that it is open to them to make their suggestions to Mr. 

Gass and their colleagues.  Mr. Gass will be asking for 

submissions from the public, from leaders of political parties, 

from other legislative members of this Assembly.  It's open to 

you, sir, to co-operate, and I would suggest that you do. 

 

Our agenda has not changed.  You're right.  We're on a definite 

political agenda, and that agenda is open, honest, accountable 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, you need a few more examples to drive 

home the point that I am trying to make in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Wheat Pool was involved in the privatization 

of Biggar malt.  Does the Premier see no conflict of interest in 

the president of the Pool investigating his own deal with the 

government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only the Wheat Pool but the employers of all 

members of the Gass Commission engaged in the purchase and 

hire of computer services.  Does the Premier concede that there 

is a conflict of interest in allowing these people to poke about 

the confidential business of WESTBRIDGE; and does not he 

see how this will adversely affect WESTBRIDGE's ability to 

negotiate successful contracts?  I ask you, Mr. Premier, don't 

you see that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member 

opposite shows absolutely no regard and no respect for the 

members of the Gass Commission, and for which I say the hon. 

member stands condemned. 

 

In 1982 when the former premier established the Wolfgang 

Wolff Commission, he had people on that commission like Mr. 

Wolff, CA (chartered accountant) Mr. Heron, who the premier, 

former premier knows, CA; Mr. Karim Nasser, Ph.D., a very 

prominent Conservative; 

Mr. Graham Walker. 

 

Our political party, at that time in opposition, co-operated fully 

with these people and did not attack these people.  The 

members of the other political parties in this province are doing 

the same as is the public at large.  I say to you, sir, that I have 

the confidence and the trust, as the people of this province do, 

in the chairman and the members of that commission.  And 

shame on you for attacking the Wheat Pool and all of these 

people.  Have confidence in them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Premier, if you had not sought to staff the tribunal with 

your political friends in the secrecy of closed doors without 

access to the public, then your statements might have 

credibility. 

 

Mr. Premier, I remind you again what your minister said on 

Wednesday, that government revealed the contract Tuesday, 

calling it the kind of thing the Gass Financial Review 

Commission has been hired to find, only find political dirt on 

the Conservative, former Conservative government, sir.  

Otherwise, Mr. Premier . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the members to please not 

interfere when another member is asking a question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Otherwise, sir, you would not have staffed 

this commission with only your friends.  Otherwise, sir, you 

would have not been behind closed doors.  Otherwise, sir, I ask 

you: why not now, in the face of all of this evidence, do you 

not have the political will to have the Provincial Auditor 

empowered to hold this particular commission in full view of 

the public with co-operation of all members of this Legislative 

Assembly.  Will you do that, sir, today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, there are so many 

tangled and confused statements in what passes as a question 

by the hon. member that it's very difficult to know exactly how 

to begin to answer, and so many wrong and fundamental and 

malicious assumptions which denigrate the members of this 

Assembly that it's also equally difficult to know where to start. 

 

I said to the hon. member before, the purposes of the Gass 

Commission come from the fact that when you, sir, sat on the 

treasury benches, the Provincial Auditor said that 50 cents out 

of every dollar raised by you was spent without accountability, 

and they had no way of knowing where to go. 

 

That prompted us to say in the election campaign that we 

would open up the books, and we followed the model that you 

yourself used in 1982.  We followed this model which was not 

objectionable to the then premier of the day, wasn't 

objectionable to us, and isn't objectionable in 1991. 

 

I say to the hon. member opposite, grow up and start to 

co-operate with the people of the province of 

  



244 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Premier, unfortunately you say one thing and your 

government does another.  We have raised these questions a 

number of times in this legislature, and I remind you, Mr. 

Premier, we have direct and clear conflicts of interests.  We 

have Saskferco having its competitor peering into its business.  

We have Printco with the same situation.  We have the Husky 

upgrader with people . . . possible competitors looking into 

their business; the Wheat Pool investigating itself in Biggar 

malt; potential clients of WESTBRIDGE looking at 

WESTBRIDGE.  And finally we have active supporters of the 

NDP passing judgement on something which you find 

philosophically wrong and that is privatization -- not doing a 

comparison between nationalization and privatization -- 

passing judgement on privatization. 

 

Mr. Premier, and I ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, will you now 

do the right thing in the face of all of that evidence and disband 

this commission? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the hon. 

member the conflict of interest forms have been signed.  The 

detailed guide-lines have been either prepared or will be 

prepared and determined by the commission.  The commission 

is a stellar, first-rate group of men and women who have the 

confidence and ability . . .  

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- They have the confidence and the 

ability of this legislature to do the job.  The model that we 

followed was a model that was used by the former 

administration of the day.  They set up the Wolfgang Wolff 

inquiry under The Public Inquiries Act.  No public hearings 

were held at that time, but public submissions were received in 

the interests of expediency of time.  The report was made 

public.  This report was made public.  Everything is virtually 

identical to the Gass inquiry by way of procedure except one 

big difference.  At that time when we were the opposition, the 

NDP, we actually appeared before the Wolfgang Wolff inquiry 

and made a submission.  I invite you, sir, to ask your leader to 

do the same thing and to co-operate with what the people want 

-- an opening up of the books and a futuristic look as to how to 

improve the operations of government from now on in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Employee Contract 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to address 

this question to the Premier, and it's actually two points.  One, 

Mr. Premier, I'm going to ask you if you would yourself 

apologize to the House on behalf of the minister of Economic 

Development and Trade for misleading the public and the 

House.  And then going on, Mr. Premier, and saying that -- 

after he mislead he House 

and the public -- saying this is the kind of thing the Gass 

Financial Review Commission is hired to do.  This is your 

right-hand man the minister of Economic Development, misled 

the House. 

 

He said that Arden Knoll is being paid 30,000 a year, and that's 

not true.  He said that he's paid just to golf with the former 

premier, and that's not true.  And he said he had nothing else to 

do; in fact, we're paying him to golf in Florida.  And you said 

that, and that's not true. 

 

So I'm going to ask you, Mr. Premier, if you would apologize 

to the House and to the public for the misleading comments 

from the member from Elphinstone. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Premier, wouldn't you agree if this is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  One question at a time, okay? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to clarify remarks I made in the House on 

Wednesday -- or Tuesday.  I want to make it clear to the former 

premier that in my remarks and in the document that I tabled in 

the House, I clearly indicated that what we were dealing with 

here was a case of waste and mismanagement.  That's what we 

are talking about. 

 

In the words in the Assembly, Mr. Member from Estevan, I 

want to say clearly that I said $30,000 a year when I should 

have said $30,000 for 36 months.  That's true.  And I tabled the 

document immediately after in writing that clarified that 

statement.  That issue I think we laid to rest. 

 

I want to tell you one thing, sir, that what we're talking about 

here is a government that wasted taxpayers' money, and that's 

what we're opposed to.  And I tell you that over the next 

months we in the opposition are going to lay out to the public 

examples of where the $14 billion debt come from.  And you 

can try to cover it up and you may not like it, but that's what 

we're going to be doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the reason I'm asking the Premier 

these questions is because I asked him a couple of days ago if 

he would apologize for the comments made by the member 

from Regina Albert South, and he didn't.  I ask him today if 

he'd apologize for his cabinet minister for misleading the public 

because he was absolutely false, absolutely wrong.  And I 

quote: he said that the man's being paid 30,000 a year just to 

golf, and it's not true. And he's been paid to golf and that's what 

he's doing today in Florida.  And that's not true; being paid to 

golf with me, and that's not true.  And he owes that member . . . 

that individual an apology.  And you should apologize for him. 

 

But the more important question that my seat mate has been 

raising is that your minister stands up and says that's the kind 

of thing the Gass Commission is going to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem, and Mr. Premier, why I want you to 

apologize and why I want you to stand on your feet is that I 

want you to defend the Gass Commission and 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 245 

your minister who tied this partisan misleading information to 

the commission. That's the kind of thing they're going to do and 

you sit in your place and won't defend it. 

 

Mr. Premier, stand in your place, apologize to that member, 

apologize to the Assembly for the member from Regina Albert 

South, and say, Mr. Premier, that the Gass Commission will 

not follow the kinds of guide-lines in the example put forward 

by the member from Regina Elphinstone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear 

to the Assembly that I clarified my comments about the method 

in which the $30,000 was being paid.  There's no question 

about that. 

 

But I want to say clearly that contracts that are being signed 

with individuals that waste the taxpayers' money, like a 

contract that I have here with Mr. Sid Dutchak, former cabinet 

minister for $1,000 a day to a maximum of $50,000, we are 

going to uncover and we're going to release to the public 

because we've made that commitment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Premier, 

I've apologized for the fact that I misread a document.  I ask 

you if you will apologize for wasting $14 billion of taxpayers' 

money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, what I want the Premier to do, 

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the government members 

again: please do not interfere when a questioner is on his feet. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My point and my 

question to the Premier is: Mr. Premier, you want this review 

of taxpayers' money to be open and honest and clean and 

above-board.  You want it to be straightforward, open to the 

public. 

 

And you see what's happening, Mr. Premier, is your ministers, 

in their partisan attitude, are tainting it already by saying the 

kind of misleading comments they make are exactly what the 

Gass Commission is going to do.  That's my member's whole 

point.  Why not open it up to the media so it isn't a partisan 

game?  We believe in privatization, we believe in taking 

PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), and getting rid of the 

$150 million debt that the NDP had.  We believe in share . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the member put his 

question please? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, will you now acknowledge that if 

your minister says that this is the kind of partisan game they're 

going to get into, that you need to change the rules of the Gass 

Commission and make it less 

partisan and more open to the public to be perfectly fair to the 

taxpayers of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member 

from Estevan that the terms of reference for the Gass 

Commission are very clear.  We have left the interpretation, if 

needed, on the terms of reference to the Gass Commission.  

They'll come back to us if they need further clarification.  

These are four people of high integrity.  They know how to 

handle the terms of reference and to do their job well. 

 

When the hon. member opposite talks about tainting the Gass 

Commission, I'm sure that they can rise above any comments 

that are made on this side, or for that matter, any comments 

made from your side, sir.  They know what their duty is.  Their 

duty is as set out in the order in council and in the terms of 

reference. 

 

And I say to you, sir, that what you should do is what we did in 

1982: co-operate with the Gass Commission as we did with the 

Wolfgang Wolff Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier for responding 

to my question.  I want to go back to the Premier again.  If a 

member of the public, a well-known athlete who has been 

representing the province, is smeared as a result of your cabinet 

minister, and his reputation hurt as a result of the fact that the 

minister stands and says this is the kind of thing the Gass 

Commission is going to do, then, Mr. Premier, don't you 

believe and don't you agree that that's exactly the kind of 

attitude that the public doesn't want to see? 

 

What about the companies that were mentioned, what about the 

shareholders, the investors, the people?  If one lonely athlete in 

Saskatchewan can be treated that way by that minister, who 

doesn't care, the very individual who was accused of going out 

and buying votes in Elphinstone to win the nomination, Mr. 

Speaker, then, Mr. Speaker, don't you think . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Can we please have order.  This is 

turning into a speech making session.  I ask the members on 

both sides, let's have our questions short and let's have the 

answers short.  I ask the member to please put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Premier, don't you think the first few 

examples of your ministers exercising the Gass Commission as 

an excuse, picking on the public, is dangerous?  Who, Mr. 

Premier, is going to protect the innocent in your witch-hunt? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to take, with 

your permission, as I'm sure you will give me, the equal 

amount of time in answering the question as it took to ask the 

question. 

 

I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the former premier, the 

  



246 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

issue of Mr. Arden Knoll is not at stake here.  What is at issue 

is the fact that the administration of the government opposite, 

when it was sitting on the treasury benches, entered into all 

kinds of expenditures which in our judgement were wasteful 

and wrong. 

 

And I say to the hon. premier that we are not going to stop 

governing -- not going to stop governing whether Gass is 

working or whether or not other activities are awaiting 

outcomes.  We have to take the decisions that we have to take. 

 

For example, when we find out that there's $20,000 a month 

being paid to spruce up the former premier's public relations 

image -- $20,000 a month -- we are going to make that public 

and take the appropriate position.  We are here to govern.  And 

the member may not like it, but the people of this province 

have elected us to do something which you for nine and a half 

years refused to do, and that is open the books.  And that is 

precisely what we're going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The ministers were not able to 

hear the Clerk call one of the ministers.  I don't know who she 

called either.  I ask the members, please come to order.  The 

Clerk did call a minister for an introduction of a Bill.  Would 

the Clerk please repeat. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister 

of Finance, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The 

Mortgage Protection Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to move second 

reading of this Bill, The Northern Municipalities Amendment 

Act, 1991.  Three years ago The Northern Municipalities Act 

was amended to permit municipalities in the North to take an 

active part in municipal economic development corporations. 

 

I understand it was intended that the 1988 amendment would 

put northern municipalities on a similar basis with rural 

municipalities in the South.  As you know, under The Rural 

Municipality Act, RMs (rural municipality) can take part in 

rural development corporations.  However a technical problem 

with the legislation was discovered. Specifically an old section 

of the Act prevents municipalities from participating through 

share 

ownership in these local corporations. 

 

This Bill that is before us today was drafted to resolve that 

problem.  This Bill will provide clear authority for northern 

municipalities to participate through share ownership in 

municipal economic development corporations. 

 

Since the Act was amended in 1988, several northern 

municipal economic development corporations have been 

established in the North.  At this time they are engaged 

primarily in forestry related activities in northern 

Saskatchewan.  And I understand they are pursuing economic 

opportunities in construction, mining, and the use of other 

northern resources. 

 

These economic development corporations in turn will be able 

to carry out industrial or commercial activities.  Because some 

of these economic development corporations in the North are 

fairly well advanced in these industrial and commercial 

activities, this Bill makes this amendment retroactive to 

January 1, 1988.  In this way the original intent of this 

legislation will be restored.  In summary, this Bill will help 

ensure that northern communities have the opportunity to take 

part in economic development in the North. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support this Bill at this 

time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have heard the 

minister's comments and we've reviewed it very carefully.  

Essentially we have no problems with the Bill and would 

encourage it to pass. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the Assembly ready for the question?  Is it 

the pleasure of the Assembly . . . oh, I'm sorry.  I didn't see . . . 

could I ask members to please be seated so that I know if a 

member is standing in his or her place, if they wish to speak. 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to 

speak on behalf of this amendment to The Northern 

Municipalities Act.  Many of the communities in northern 

Saskatchewan have looked at their own institutions and their 

own frameworks in regards to what has been happening 

throughout the province. 

 

When initially the municipalities Act was changed in '88 and 

then other amendments were made in '89, the full powers of 

industrial and commercial activities were provided for the rural 

development corporations in the South, but the North was 

forgotten at that time. 

 

During that time the North was basically there for social and 

economic development but they were not able to partake in the 

share offerings, the buying and selling of shares in the system.  

So this new amendment makes it very clear that the northern 

municipal development corporations will be able to partake in 

the industrial and commercial activities in the North. 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 247 

As a member of Cumberland, I'm strongly supporting this 

particular amendment.  And I think many of the activities, 

whether in mining development or whether in forestry 

development or whether in fishing and wild rice and many 

other economic activities that are taking place, the people that 

are involved in it will be very pleased of this amendment. 

 

So I'm glad to see that this was the first Bill of this legislature.  

And being from northern Saskatchewan, a lot of people during 

the election had asked for this specific amendment because it 

had been dropped in the previous legislature.  So I'm very 

pleased that our government has been able to say the North 

comes first when it comes down to decisions in this legislature.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of 

my remarks I will move second reading of Bill No. 3, An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Bill will in fact officially repeal what was 

known by the former government or as the former 

government's expanded PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

Members will remember during the campaign that many of the 

people in the province raised with us grave concerns about 

what the expanded PST was doing to the province and the 

economy in the province -- many bankruptcies.  We have as of 

today introduced and will be giving second reading to a Bill 

that will in fact repeal officially that portion of the PST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the tax included such items as clothing, footwear, 

non-prescription drugs, restaurant meals, residential electricity, 

natural gas, and books.  As of January 1992 this tax would 

have included almost everything else, including services. 

 

Disclosure of this year's deficit at almost three times the deficit 

announced last March is a further indication of how the former 

government managed the financial affairs of the province. 

 

Another important thing which made this tax so unacceptable 

was the way in which it was imposed on the people of the 

province.  Mr. Speaker, normally increased taxes or new taxes 

are announced in a budget presented to the legislature.  

Legislators or MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

consider the tax measure within the context of the overall 

budget, there's an opportunity for a debate, and then a 

democratic vote takes place here in the Assembly.  The right of 

grievance before taxation is protected. 

 

Unfortunately the government of the day chose to ignore this 

important principle of our system of government.  On February 

20 of this year, the former minister of Finance 

announced the imposition of this tax at a press conference. 

 

In the future, important budgetary measures should be 

announced in a budget in the legislature where the members of 

the Assembly, on behalf of their constituents, can debate and 

ask questions, where the government is required to provide 

answers and explanations as to what the tax will be and what 

the money will be spent on. 

 

(1445) 

 

When the legislation to implement the PST was finally 

introduced in the spring session, its unpopularity was inevitable 

and I think clear.  Over a hundred thousand people signed 

petitions in opposition to the expanded PST.  People said the 

government had no mandate to introduce such a massive tax in 

the dying days of its administration.  They were again denied 

their right to be heard when the former government imposed 

closure and forced the closure of the legislature last summer. 

 

When Saskatchewan people voted on October 21, they said the 

expanded PST should not be implemented.  New Democrats 

listened to the people.  This government is keeping its promise.  

This Bill puts an end to the former government's harmonized 

PST.  But it does more than that.  It signals clearly to the 

Saskatchewan people that from now on they will be heard.  

Their views will be expressed by their elected members here in 

the legislature.  A new era of strengthening democratic 

principles of government is beginning to unfold in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan understand that.  

In these tough times governments must occasionally make 

difficult and unpopular decisions.  In fact, our taxpayers and 

our economy have shown a great deal of resilience in the past 

when governments have called on them to tighten their belts so 

that adequate funding is available for necessary programs and 

services.  But this tax, I say especially to the member from 

Estevan, was unfair, and the people told him that on October 

21. 

 

This tax was particularly harmful to low income people without 

children, such as senior citizens.  They were not eligible for the 

family tax credit.  Over the next five years, resulting in a loss 

of 1.37 billion worth of economic activity over that same 

five-year period, our economy was being severely damaged by 

this tax. 

 

Other sources of revenue would have been greatly diminished 

as businesses were forced to close, economic activity slowed 

down, and people lost their jobs.  We hope and believe that the 

elimination of this tax will help kick-start our economy, that 

more consumer spending is being made available to be spent in 

our businesses, small businesses, throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, taxpayers expect their governments to lead by 

example and to exercise fiscal restraint before asking people to 

pay more taxes.  Mr. Speaker, the previous administration did 

not do this and that is why the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

rejected the PST, and on October 21 rejected the Conservative 

government. 

  



248 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

Returning the education and health tax base to the way it 

existed prior to April 1, 1991 will result in $72 million 

reduction in the Saskatchewan tax burden in 1991-92. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we expect to be able to offset this year's revenue 

loss by increased government efficiency measures such as 

cutting advertising, self-serving government advertising. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after the repeal of the expanded PST was 

announced, this government passed a remission order to 

temporarily legalize the removal of the tax.  The purpose of 

this Bill is to amend The Education and Health Tax Act to 

reinstate the tax exemptions that were removed last April by 

the previous government. 

 

It reinstates the exemptions for such items as adults' clothing; 

footwear under $300; books, magazines, and newspapers; 

children's clothing and footwear; non-prescription drugs; 

residential electricity and natural gas; food and drink, including 

snack food; tobacco products; and other goods.  All of these 

amendments are retroactive to October 21, 1991. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would now move that Bill No. 

3, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be read 

a second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I will 

be making a few brief comments on the particular Bill and then 

moving that the debate be adjourned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I'd like to remind the member that the 

deficit that he refers to is the deficit of his government, not the 

previous one.  The previous government, Mr. Speaker, brought 

in a financial plan that included the synchronization of the 

E&H (education and health) tax along with federal taxes.  That 

was a very integral part of that plan in order to achieve a 

budget figure of $265 million and to meet the deficit reduction 

plans that are absolutely necessary for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I might remind the member from Elphinstone that that 

particular piece of legislation did come before this legislature, 

it was passed by this legislature, and it was certainly debated 

very roundly.  Because I clearly remember, Mr. Speaker, the 

three months in the last legislative sitting where members 

opposite, led by the member for Elphinstone, did everything in 

their power, as they said, to make the province of 

Saskatchewan ungovernable. 

 

And certainly the presenting of petitions, as we saw them, Mr. 

Speaker -- petitions, by the way, which in my own constituency 

I found to be somewhat erroneous in many cases with people's 

names appearing on them that didn't actually sign them -- that 

those members had a great deal of opportunity to debate this 

particular Bill.  And it did pass the legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've got to go back to some very basic 

principles when we're talking about balancing budgets in this 

province.  The $5 million alone that would be saved each year 

by synchronizing our E&H tax with the federal 

taxes, that $5 million is twice the amount of money that would 

be necessary to put over $200 million extra in the pockets of 

farm families in this province before this Christmas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, no matter what rate was set on 

that synchronization process, just the fact of drawing the two 

together to make things simpler for the business community, 

for the farming community, for people that have to do books on 

a weekly basis, would have generated enough money to put all 

of that money back into our economy that farm families would 

then spend on Christmas presents in every town and city and 

village in this province.  And the members choose to ignore 

that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government has clearly said that we do not 

need nearly $200 million in revenue in order to meet the 

expectations of people in this province.  They have clearly said 

to farmers and business people and industry throughout this 

province that we don't believe that we need to be competitive in 

either Canada or the global economy that we operate in today. 

 

Everyone knows that on either side of us people are looking to 

the tax system to make their province or their state more 

competitive in today's world.  Every person out there that could 

have had tax credits flowing through will not have that 

opportunity now. 

 

And I clearly say to the government, how you are going to help 

those business people, how you are going to meet the 

expectations of farm payments, and how you are going to 

generate enough money in this economy by not raising any 

taxes to fulfil the needs and the promises that you have so 

clearly defined, lead to many more questions in this legislature, 

Mr. Speaker.  And with that I move to adjourn the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to rise and move second reading to Bill No. 4, An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as everyone knows, the Saskatchewan New 

Democratic Party firmly opposed the previous government's 

expanded PST initiative.  We oppose this measure for two 

major reasons. First, the crippling effect that the tax was having 

on the provincial economy; and secondly, the manner in which 

the tax was introduced by press release rather than through the 

Legislative Assembly with the appropriate debate. 

 

Today a New Democratic government is introducing legislation 

that will abolish the harmonized PST.  As a result of this 

decision, the Saskatchewan family tax credit is no longer 

necessary.  The family tax credit was introduced to offset the 

additional tax burden experienced by low income families as a 

result of the harmonization of the E&H tax with the federal 

GST 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 249 

(goods and services tax). 

 

The introduction of the family tax credit itself was an 

admission of the hardships Saskatchewan families would face 

with this new expanded tax.  As well, Mr. Speaker, the design 

of the family tax credit was flawed.  It was particularly harmful 

to low income people without children, such as senior citizens, 

for they were not eligible for the family tax credit. 

 

In the final analysis, Mr. Speaker, this was a highly unfair tax 

which was imposed without proper consultation and with no 

legislative authority.  Our government is committed to a fair 

tax system where the level of taxation is based upon ability to 

pay.  The tax system must provide a stable revenue source in a 

manner that is fair to people in all income groups.  The 

expanded PST and the accompanying family tax credit did not 

meet those criteria. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to move that An Act to 

amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The family tax 

credit was an integral part of synchronization of the E&H tax 

with federal taxes.  Mr. Speaker, it was absolutely necessary 

that people on the low income scales in our province not be 

penalized by having a new type of tax in our province which 

obviously had many benefits to various sectors of our society, 

but if this tax credit was not in place would have impacted 

greatly upon those people in the lower social economic strata. 

 

The concept in this province that those that have the ability to 

pay so that those that don't can be supported has always been 

strongly supported by this party.  And that is why if one looked 

at the tax credits available to low income families both through 

their GST and the synchronization of E&H with the federal tax, 

one saw that they in fact were better off then they were before 

where they simply were paying on most articles the E&H tax as 

they are paying today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think it was with a great deal of consternation that a 

number of those people in our society have now gone to the 

store and found that they are paying that tax.  Because I think 

they were slightly mistaken I suppose, Mr. Speaker, by some of 

the advertising that they saw during the last election campaign.  

And a number of them are quite upset when they find that they 

are back paying that tax again when it was finally . . . that 

burden was finally removed from upon their family. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that need to be 

raised on this particular Bill and I would move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading on Bill No. 11, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1991.  As many members will 

know The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act establishes a level 

of provincial assistance to be allocated to both rural and urban 

municipalities.  Accordingly the amendment gives legal effect 

to the decisions reflected in the 1991-92 Hepworth budget.  

The amendment provides for overall reductions in funding 

through the revenue sharing program to urban and rural 

municipalities. 

 

I regret these reductions because we all know the difficult 

situation that municipalities face today.  But I note that they 

were introduced by the previous government.  With the 

difficult fiscal legacy we have been given by the previous 

government it is necessary to proceed with this amendment.  

They have left us no other choice. 

 

Today I ask members to support this Bill.  Accordingly I move 

second reading of Bill No. 11, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 

Amendment Act, 1991. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, as we just had first reading 

yesterday and there may be some rather deep implications here 

that we don't really understand just yet because we haven't had 

our research put together, we would suggest that maybe it 

would be better for all of us if we had a little more time to 

study this matter.  And in view of that, we would move that we 

adjourn this for the time being. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

move second reading of The Assessment Management Agency 

Act, 1991.  As many members will know, the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency is an independent body 

established to conduct property evaluations for municipalities. 

 

In the Hepworth budget proposals introduced last spring, the 

provincial contribution to SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment 

Management Agency) was cut by 10 per cent.  I want to make 

it clear, Mr. Speaker, that this budget reduction for SAMA was 

the initiative of the previous government.  This is not a choice 

our government would have made because our government is 

committed to an effective property management agency. 

 

This Bill affects the funding only for the current fiscal year.  

Funding needs and alternative funding mechanisms for 1992 

and beyond are currently under review by the SAMA board of 

directors. 

 

Our government is committed to the principles on which the 

original funding formula was established, and we look forward 

to discussions with SAMA representatives on how best to 

comply with that agreement in the future.  We hope to have an 

opportunity for meaningful consultation with regard to future 

budget needs and will endeavour to meet the expectations that 

additional funding needs should be shared on a 50/50 basis. 

 

In the current year the province's overall level of funding 

  



250 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

will be about $7 million which represents about 75 per cent of 

SAMA's financing. 

 

While the previous government had a well-deserved reputation 

for down-loading on to local governments, our government, 

Mr. Speaker, will try to avoid funding mechanisms which will 

have this practice. 

 

Given the need for restraint in the current fiscal environment, 

unfortunately it is necessary to proceed with this previously 

planned, budget cut-back.  While it would have been desirable 

to avoid this reduction, the fact that we were left with a deficit 

of almost $1 billion means it is not possible to avoid this 

adjustment now.  I expect it will be possible, however, to find 

ways to partly offset this budget reduction with other 

adjustments that will reduce SAMA's expenditures back to the 

province.  We are currently investigating those possibilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to support this Bill to 

implement the funding allocation previously set forth for 

SAMA.  Accordingly I move second reading for Bill No. 12, 

The Assessment Management Agency Act. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, we are quite happy to hear that 

this government doesn't want to down-load on to rural 

municipalities and other agencies in this province.  But for the 

same reasons we expressed in the last motion, I would move 

that we adjourn. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 

Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

reluctantly move second reading of The Urban Parks Financial 

Arrangements Act, 1991.  This Bill was introduced in the last 

session of the legislature but died on the order paper when the 

session was prematurely ended by the previous government.  

The Bill maintains a level of funding for Wascana Centre 

Authority, Meewasin Valley Authority, and Wakamow Valley 

Authority at the same level as in previous years for 1991-92. 

 

This Bill implements a proposal in the Hepworth budget 

introduced last spring by the previous government.  Funding 

for these three organizations has been frozen by that 

government annually at the 1986-87 level over the past several 

years. 

 

These payments to urban parks are statutory in nature and the 

level of funding defined by this Bill applies to all of their 

participating bodies.  In the context of the current worsened 

fiscal environment now faced by our provincial government, 

urban parks funding will again have to remain at the same level 

for 1991-92.  Although we would like to be announcing 

increases, this is just not possible at this time. 

 

However, this government is committed to Saskatchewan's 

urban parks.  A review of their funding formulas which was 

interrupted last year by the former government's budget 

decision has been reactivated by Community Services.  While 

the accumulated provincial 

deficit admittedly restrains the potential for major 

improvements, we will be taking a close look to see what can 

be done for the 1992-93 budget.  The urban parks need fiscal 

stability and predictability rather than an annual budget time 

surprises from the past several . . . like the past several years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill to amend The 

Meewasin Valley Authority Act, The Wakamow Valley 

Authority Act, and The Wascana Centre Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in 

response to the minister, certainly we are all concerned with the 

financing to many of the other organizations in our province, 

organizations that look to government for financing.  And I'm 

sure that the Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 

Authority, and the Wascana Centre Authority are looking very 

closely and keeping their eyes open to see where the 

government will be going and heading regarding financing and 

funding of their individual programs. 

 

With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, we need to take a bit more 

time as well to review the Bill, so at this time I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 2 --  An Act to 

amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As critic for the 

Department of Health I'd just like to say, Mr. Speaker, and to 

Madam Minister, that I pursued through the Bill and I can't see 

that there's anything wrong with it at all.  It looks like it's just 

an amendment, a housekeeping Bill for now.  I do have a few 

questions that I may want to ask you, Madam Minister, in 

Committee of the Whole, but to speed things up, I'd just like to 

say thank you, Mr. Speaker, and let this go to Committee.  

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 

the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 

day. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 5 -- An Act 

to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I think everyone 

knows, this Bill is one that arose from the previous government 

and the reduction in tax to liquor and hotels and beverage 

rooms went from 10 per cent to 7. 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 251 

The opposition supports the Bill and indeed I would encourage 

the government to pursue a means of supporting our hoteliers, 

particularly when addressing the triple taxation situation that 

many of them now face in our urban areas. 

 

There is, Mr. Speaker, one important aspect of this Bill as 

being presented by the Minister of Finance however though, 

that does need some discussion.  The reduction to 7 per cent 

was a result of the synchronization process which I believe the 

minister is soon wanting to undo. 

 

Therefore in proceeding with this particular reduction in the 

face of cancelling that synchronization, the government is 

incurring additional costs for the taxpayer -- costs, Mr. 

Speaker, which the government did not explain in this 

particular Bill how they were going to handle. 

 

I think it should be noted for the record, Mr. Speaker, and by 

the media, that the government has not announced the cost of 

these measures.  And in committee I will be seeking a few 

more detailed answers in this regard.  Other than that the 

opposition is prepared to allow second reading to proceed 

expeditiously and have the Bill recommended to the 

Committee of the Whole at the pleasure of the House Leader. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6 -- An Act 

to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1515) 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 7 -- An Act to 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to make 

a few observations about this Bill and want to raise a couple 

points.  In a general sense, Mr. Speaker, we're in favour of the 

message and the intent of the Bill, however there are two things 

that we would like to raise as points to consider. 

 

We have asked the legislative clerk, Law Clerk, to deal with an 

amendment for this Bill that would deal with how a term of 

office of a government was almost to the end and then when, 

let's say, it was six months before the end of its mandate or 

seven months before an assumed end of its mandate and at that 

time the seat would become vacant.  Then, Mr. Speaker, you 

would have, one month before an election was called, you 

would have an election in a community or in a constituency 

and that constituency would in effect have two elections within 

two or three months, and that would cause some problems.  So 

we're working on an amendment for this Bill that would 

address that. 

 

The second point that we make in relation to this, that deals in 

some ways with the same kind of concern, is that we have in 

this province whether we like it or not, some very severe 

weather conditions that exist in the winter time.  We have times 

from the middle of December, when there's Christmas and all 

of those things, until the end of March when I really think that 

we would have some difficulty in dealing with the kinds of 

things that exist. 

 

As rigid as this Act is and with no discretion by the Premier to 

call an election, I really see that as a major concern.  I recollect 

having a federal election in February, I believe it was one time 

somewhere in the early '70s, and that caused a good deal of 

concern for people in this province and especially in the North.  

And I would think that you would have an opportunity for 

some measures of discretion on that part. 

 

In the general sense, the attempt to move by-elections along is 

not a concern of ours.  And it's in this light that we are asking 

the Legislative Law Clerk to take a view of presenting an 

amendment to this Assembly that would deal with that. 

 

And I lay this out to the minister responsible in light of the fact 

that we want to move in a co-operative kind of a way, and 

we're not trying to disrupt the Bill from moving forward.  

However in order for us to have time to do that, I would like to 

adjourn debate so that we can have the time for us to consider 

that and have the Law Clerk of the legislature prepare that for 

us. 

 

And so I'm moving that on that basis today and then when we 

get it we will be moving that forward as an amendment.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 8 -- An Act 

respecting the Tabling of Documents and Certain 

Consequential and Other Amendments to Other Acts resulting 

from the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just have a few 

comments to make on this particular Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the 

opposition agrees with the principle of streamlining and 

improving the tabling of documents procedures, both in this 

House and its committees, and therefore we'll likely be 

supporting this particular Bill. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does require some 

improvement and fine tuning.  And there are some specific 

areas where we believe the government has not gone quite far 

enough.  In particular, Mr. Speaker, if we are to be consistent 

of the principle of open and accountable government, then this 

Bill must embrace the fact of openness as to great an extent as 

possible and not  



252 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

simply provide mechanical changes that in the end result in no 

more access for this Assembly than has been past practice. 

 

We are seeking amendments, Mr. Speaker, that will enhance 

the role of the Provincial Auditor in regard to financial 

information that is to be tabled, amendments to provide more 

ready access to documents when the Assembly is not sitting, 

and amendments to improve the ability of committees of the 

Assembly to influence the tabling of documents and others of a 

similar nature. 

 

I will be asking the members across the way, the government 

members, when it comes time to move the Bill to committee, 

Mr. Speaker, that they agree to refer it to the committee on 

Public Accounts, which is the Assembly's primary mechanism 

of ensuring accountability. 

 

I am quite anxious to obtain the advice and assistance of the 

Provincial Auditor in regard to the Bill, specifically those 

sections, Mr. Speaker, that relate to the tabling of financial 

information.  And I believe that the member from Regina 

Victoria has some valuable ideas in regard to the provision of 

information as well that could properly come through an 

examination by the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

I would also remind the government that they do have a 

majority on the committee so there is no reason to fear changes 

might slip through that they find unacceptable and would point 

out that there is ample precedent for such a referral, including a 

recent referral of The Provincial Auditor Act to that committee. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, but particularly it is also to 

allow the Law Clerk to prepare suitable amendments to the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, that we do need to have a little bit more 

time, some appropriate time on this particular Bill.  Therefore I 

would beg leave of the Assembly to adjourn debate on the Bill 

to give the Law Clerk time to prepare those amendments so 

that we can bring them before the Assembly. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 9 -- An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a few 

concerns regarding Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Urban 

Municipality Act.  We feel, Mr. Speaker, that the public's 

freedom of choice should be considered before the second 

reading of this Bill. 

 

Did the communities want a complete ward system 

implemented?  Take the city of Regina, for example.  If the 

choice is brought before the city of Regina, they may well 

choose to implement a ward system once again.  They may 

want to implement a partial ward system along with a partial 

system at large -- maybe four positions based on the 

ward system and a certain number based on the at-large system.  

Whatever the choices of the people, Mr. Speaker, we feel it 

should be just that -- the choice of the people. 

 

Moreover, the minister in charge has stated she would allow 

public input and discussion on this matter.  If this is truly the 

case, Mr. Speaker, it would be irresponsible for the Assembly 

to proceed with second reading before a public consensus has 

been reached.  It would be inappropriate to decide for the 

people what we . . . what the people want to decide for 

themselves, whether they're rural or urban. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these discussions deserve more time than has 

been allowed.  Therefore I beg leave from the Assembly to 

adjourn debate on this Bill to allow time for the consultation 

with the people of Saskatchewan on this matter.  Thank you. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 10 -- An Act to 

amend The Local Government Election Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We've looked at this 

Bill and reviewed it very carefully and we have essentially no 

problems with it, and we'd encourage it to go forward. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I'd like to 

introduce Dianne Anderson, the director of human resources, 

from the Department of Health. 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I was just wondering, just for clarification -- 

this deals with locums that would be going into communities 

like that I have in my constituency like Vanguard, and the 

hospital in Vanguard, and in Cabri.  And dealing with the 

people who get doctors in from other places and then only have 

a short stay, is this going to allow them to appear there longer 

periods of time? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, that's correct.  The Bill, what the 

Bill presently . . . locums tenens can only get a permit for four 

months.  And sometimes there are a series of permits that have 

been issued in order to allow the doctor to stay there longer, 

which isn't really satisfactory because 

  



December 12, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 253 

there's problems with respect to a sense of job security, and the 

community doesn't know what's happening and whether or not 

the doctor will be issued another permit. 

 

What this enables the council of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons to do is to issue permits that may go up to a two-year 

period.  And they will be passing regulations with respect to 

the terms and conditions on which these permits are issued.  It 

will give more doctors an opportunity to work for a longer 

period of time in rural Saskatchewan.  It will happen in other 

places too, but rural Saskatchewan appears to be where the 

problem is.  And it will give them an opportunity to pass their 

Canadian medical exams while they are practising medicine in 

our communities. 

 

And it is hoped that this will assist rural communities in 

obtaining more medical professionals to their communities. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, maybe I should have asked this question prior, but I'll 

ask it now.  I'm sure you won't mind.  I can't see anything 

wrong with this Bill.  It looks like it's a Bill that was before the 

House before, and I just want to ask: you've talked naturally, I 

imagine, to the College of Physicians and Surgeons people.  

You talked to them, and they're naturally agreeable, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I have not personally spoken to them 

about this, but the department has, and it's my understanding 

that the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association, rural hospital administrators, rural 

physicians and locum physicians, fully support this legislation. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So, Madam Minister, you're quite 

comfortable that all those people that you mentioned, that 

they've asked for this and are quite satisfied with this, with 

actually the Bill itself. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It is my understanding, Mr. Chair, that 

this Bill is supported by the medical community. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, yes, I haven't got any further 

questions I want to ask, unless some of my colleagues have 

some more here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have one question as relates to, Mr. 

Chairman, as it relates to the regulations in the by-laws.  As I 

understand it, the college will present the by-laws to the 

minister.  The minister will agree or disagree with them, 

according to . . . and that's the process, the way it works. 

 

Okay.  Then the question that I have in addition to that is that 

will they be allowed more than the two years cumulative, or is 

that the total volume of the years that they will be allowed?  Is 

this what they're proposing in their by-laws? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I don't have a copy of the final by-law.  

What I do have is some background on what the by-law will 

look like.  But they are in the process of 

drafting it.  And you're quite right; it will have to be submitted 

to the minister for approval before it is effective. 

 

Now the proposed by-law specifies that there are a number of 

different permits under this provision: a supervised locum 

permit which may be issued to Canadian interns, and it would 

go for a four-month period.  It would be limited to one per 

locum physician per calendar year, and there must be a 

supervising physician. 

 

There will be another category of unsupervised locum permits 

which would start in July 1, 1992 and which would require 

graduation from an approved school and one year postgraduate 

training.  The permit would be limited to one per locum 

physician per calendar year. 

 

Now there's the conditional locum permit which is a third 

category which requires graduation from an approved school 

and two years postgraduate training.  And it's my 

understanding that this could go up to a period of one . . . up to 

a period of two years.  It would enable the doctor to practise for 

the length of time it takes to attempt and receive results from 

The Medical Council of Canada evaluating exam.  And the 

physician would be required to practise in the same community 

for five years under this particular permit. 

 

And this is what is being proposed by the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons at this time.  So there would be a number of 

different periods of time depending on the type of permit and 

what the needs of the community were, obviously. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could ask -- what are they 

proposing on the interns for the one-year period?  Would that 

be for the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) to allow an 

intern into a hospital -- let's say Swift Current, for example, 

versus Vanguard -- or would they be allowing an intern to 

come into a one-doctor hospital in Lucky Lake or in Beechy or 

in Cabri or that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's intended that these permits apply 

mostly to rural communities like Vanguard, for example, as 

opposed to Swift Current.  And it would allow the person to go 

into the community for up to two years, depending on what the 

college, what decision the college makes, and allow them to 

have an opportunity to pass their exams. 

 

And it is being proposed that there be a commitment on the 

part of the physician to reside in the community for a period of 

five years.  But it's intended to apply, to deal with the situation 

of the shortage of doctors in rural Saskatchewan, which is our 

small communities, the Rockglens the Vanguards of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And hopefully this will make it much easier for doctors who 

are already in the community to recruit younger doctors to 

come and help out.  And there will be categories that are 

supervised and unsupervised with respect to the physician in 

the area. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

the part that I would like to know about is the 

  



254 Saskatchewan Hansard December 12, 1991 

intern and the graduate with the one year.  Are they going to 

follow the same pattern as the one that I would assume that you 

were talking about, the one that is in the third category, where 

he's graduated and has two post-graduate degrees?  Is that the 

group that you're talking about, or are you talking about the 

first two also? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The first two categories I spoke to -- 

that's the one graduating from a medical school approved by 

the council with a minimum of one year post-graduate training, 

would be a four-year permit . . . four-month, rather.  The 

second one would be, that I spoke to, is four months.  The third 

one that I spoke to, in terms of permits, the conditional locum 

permit would be up to two years. 

 

Now I want to say once again that this is what's being 

proposed; it has not been finalized.  And if the member would 

like some input in this, he should get in touch with me and I 

can pass the comments on to the department and the college. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I would probably like to see, Madam 

Minister, some additions to the . . . Well first of all, I'll ask the 

question.  On the second one that you've mentioned can you 

add a four-month extension on to the length of time that that 

individual would be able to practise in that community? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that it's intended 

that those can be only one locum physician per calendar year.  

So it's only the four months, one time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well if I could make the suggestion, Madam 

Minister, that probably that would be the part that would be 

able to be expanded a little.  I have no problem in dealing with 

it as it affects the third group that you mentioned, although I 

think it probably could be lengthened on the first one because 

there aren't too many people in the third category that are likely 

going to go to these rural communities if they already have that 

kind of an opportunity or they've achieved that amount of 

school and then go into a small community. 

 

So I will take your suggestion serious.  And we will, on this 

side of the House, that we will have some input into that.  And 

if you wouldn't mind, through the member from Arm River, 

detailing that to him, and then we could arrange for a time to 

discuss that if you don't mind. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Sure I'd be pleased to pass your concerns 

on to the department in the college and we can get together.  If 

there's any other specific items like that that you want the 

department to take a look at, I'd be pleased to meet with the 

member from Arm River. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Yes, Madam Minister, as we've heard in 

discussion so far this afternoon, certainly rural areas are an area 

that have a greater difficulty in attracting physicians or doctors 

to their community.  And in light of the amendments to The 

Medical Profession Act, I'm just wondering, Madam Minister, 

if this will alleviate or even make it easier for out-of-province 

and non-country resident doctors to come into the province -- 

the fact that they will be able to obtain a locum licence or 

permit longer than the four months. 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's intended that it make the situation 

easier for rural communities and easier for physicians who 

wish to practise out in those rural communities.  That's the 

intent of the Bill, and I believe it'll do that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, this Bill, we've talked about it before.  When we were 

in government this Bill was being brought forth.  Is it exactly 

the same as in its entirety or is there some changes to it?  Is this 

exactly the same in its entirety? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's exactly the same as what was 

proposed earlier. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you. 

 

Clause 4 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 and 6 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to thank the 

minister for answering the questions to my colleagues and we 

thank you for bringing this here Bill forward, especially when 

the past government brought this Bill in.  And we're just trying 

to show you how co-operative we are in letting you have a 

speedy . . . having this Bill go through in a speedy way.  And 

we just hope that all Bills that this government brings in can go 

through the same way. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

The Speaker: -- When shall the Bill be read the third time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay, order.  I'll ask the Clerk to read the item 

again please.  Let's have a little bit of order all right? 

 

Okay.  What's your point of order? 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- It seems to me that the Bill is out of 

committee.  It was passed in committee.  And the next stage 

would be then, I would suggest, that the Bill is going to be 

passed under its title now, or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 

now adjourn. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:45 p.m. 

 

 


