




















































Hansard: December 03, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 

 December 3, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I again want to 

congratulate you on your new position and just say 

congratulations to all members of the legislature on both sides 

of the House. 

 

I want to ask the question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, and it 

has to do about agriculture and the rural crisis.  I notice, Mr. 

Speaker, that we have an awful lot of rural members and new 

rural members in the legislature and I'm sure that they're as 

concerned and aware of the rural crisis as anybody in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As a result of the recent pilgrimage to Ottawa, I would like the 

Premier to advise the Assembly what kind of support and 

financial assistance he expects the Saskatchewan farmer and 

farm families and rural people can get before Christmas.  I 

would like to know if he would table his correspondence and 

his negotiations with the federal government as to what kind of 

co-operation this government, the provincial government, is 

prepared to get into with the federal government.  And can he 

provide any assurances that there will be cash -- actual money 

-- in the hands of people in the province of Saskatchewan as a 

result of the efforts of the provincial government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

share, as I may say at the outset, the words that the Leader of 

the Opposition, former premier, as directed toward you, sir, and 

the members of the House. 

 

Very briefly I would answer the premier, the assurances that 

we have are contained, if these are assurances, in the words by 

the Prime Minister after my meeting with him and then 

subsequently 24 hours later in question period in the House of 

Commons where the Prime Minister indicated that:  when the 

Minister of Finance (referring to his Minister of Finance) 

returned I would meet with him and the Minister of Agriculture 

to see if perhaps some programs could not be structured in a 

way that would be of greater benefit to the farmers.  I'm 

reading a portion of the Hansard, the Prime Minister's response 

in the Commons to a question directed to him. 

 

This is considerable change from the position before going to 

Ottawa where the door was firmly shut.  It is now open and we 

are now waiting for the Prime Minister to meet with the 

Minister of Finance and the appropriate people to give us an 

answer.  And of course as the former premier knows, it's been 

indicated already by the federal people that that amount of 

money which they have announced, at least a portion of it will 

be in the mail by way of applications and in the hands of the 

farmers before the end of the year. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary 

question to the Premier.  With great respect, Mr. Speaker, the 

$800 million that was offered to the Saskatchewan farmer was 

there before the new Premier of Saskatchewan made his trek. 

 

What I asked the hon. member was, could he table any 

correspondence of co-operation and negotiation to provide cash 

before Christmas.  In other words if I could rephrase the 

question, Mr. Speaker, is what if the average farm family 

doesn't receive cash?  What is the plan and the strategy of the 

provincial government to put cash into the farmers' hands? 

 

And I will refer, Mr. Speaker, if I may . . . is that, would the 

hon. member consider co-operating with the federal 

government in getting the rest of the $800 million into the 

hands of farm families prior to Christmas?  His MLAs 

(Members of the Legislative Assembly) are going to be going 

home and they'll want to know the answer to this.  What about 

cash?  What if there's nothing there.  Is he prepared to 

co-operate and would he table any sort of negotiations that 

would say that he is, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I might add with respect 

to the correspondence first, this was not an easily arranged 

meeting.  Mind you, we were only in office for 30 days, only 

32 days now, and the correspondence really was an attempt to 

arrange the appropriate meetings with the appropriate officials. 

 

But the question of correspondence with respect to 

co-operation is, if I may say so with respect to the premier, 

slightly off the mark.  Even the federal people are not urging 

that from us at all.  They're not asking co-operation from the 

provincial government.  They are assuring the farmers and us 

that a portion of that $700 million is going to be paid by the 

end of the year.  They don't ask for co-operation from us. 

 

What we're asking from them is what I think you and 

everybody else should be joining us in asking of them -- more 

cash paid more immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Premier.  We acknowledge and the Speech from the Throne 

acknowledged and I'm sure the hon. member acknowledges and 

all the new members here in the legislature acknowledge, there 

is a farm crisis on in Saskatchewan.  People are losing their 

farms and losing their homes; they're worried about their 

families; they've got financial institutions on them. 

 

My question to the minister again, Mr. Speaker, is: he is now 

the Premier of a government that has to co-operate.  In fact in 

the Speech from the Throne it says, Mr. Speaker, this 

government will co-operate with other governments and 

agriculture organizations to help farmers in a crisis.  And if 

they receive no cash at all the Premier has stood in his place 

and said, well it's a federal government responsibility.  When is 

he going to pick up the 

  



10 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

responsibility? 

 

Will he table any correspondence with the federal Minister of 

Agriculture requesting meetings saying, I will co-operate; 

here's what we would do; here's what I will do.  Would he 

table, Mr. Speaker, what . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

May I say before I answer the question again, with the greatest 

of respect to the former premier, I find it somewhat strange that 

he should be urging and, if I may say so, lecturing us about the 

need to co-operate when I asked him specifically to co-operate 

with us to go to Ottawa to get the cash and he refused to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Unlike the Leader of the Liberal Party 

and unlike the leaders of all the other parties across western 

Canada, with the exception of the Premier of Alberta, they all 

co-operated.  It's a little bit too late about the co-operation. 

 

I say to the premier and I say to the people of this province and 

the members of this Legislative Assembly:  the question of 

getting more farm cash requires the concerted support of all of 

us.  We have the Prime Minister's assurance that he is going to 

look at the question of all the programs, I presume within the 

next several days, in order to provide us with an answer 

thereto. 

 

I take the Prime Minister at his word.  They say the application 

forms are in the mail.  A portion of the 700 million that the 

farmers had will be forthcoming.  Let's now make sure that 

that's delivered.  They've never asked us for co-operation. We 

asked for more money.  And I repeat again to all the members 

of the House, let's keep the eye on the ball.  It's Ottawa's 

responsibility.  Let's get the money to us as quickly as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to the hon. member -- 

and I'd just call to his attention -- he responded about 

co-operation.  Mr. Speaker, we have and I think history will 

record, with co-operation and effort, generated something like 

$13 billion for farmers from the federal government.  My trip, 

Mr. Speaker, resulted in $800 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I ask the hon. member -- his trip has 

resulted in nothing so far -- what if Saskatchewan farmers don't 

receive any money?  What's his response?  What will all the 

members of this legislature's response if the provincial 

government, and through the organization and trips, Mr. 

Speaker, of the Premier, result in nothing?  No cash.  What's 

his plan?  Could he dictate or table to the people of 

Saskatchewan in this legislature what kind of hope that he 

would provide for farm families that are broke, that are facing 

bankers, that are running out of cash.  What does he offer them 

. . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again the 

Speech from the Throne identifies some other programs 

pertaining to agriculture, which we'll debate in the course of the 

Speech from the Throne. 

 

I would say to the former premier one more time that the 

question is predicated on the assumption that farmers will not 

get anything when, as he acknowledges by his first question, 

there'll be at least the Saskatchewan portion of the $700 million 

coming to the farmers, according to Mr. Mulroney and Mr. 

Mazankowski, by the end of the year. 

 

So it's not correct to say that they'll be not getting anything; 

they'll be getting something if they're good to their word.  And 

they'll be getting the 700 million sooner or later.  We think 

that's insufficient, so the strategy is to keep the pressure up on 

getting more than the $700 million. 

 

But I do want to say to the former premier, if I can before I sit 

down, the Prime Minister of this country has a very simple 

choice.  He either has to deal with this crisis in western Canada 

now or he has to deal with the crisis later, but deal with the 

crisis he will, Mr. Speaker, and we're determined to bring it to 

his attention continually. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A supplementary to 

the Premier.  I notice in today's paper, Mr. Premier, that the 

head of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has already given up on 

the provincial government and he says he expects no help from 

the province. 

 

I make that point, Mr. Speaker, because the Hon. Premier, 

minister responsible for the entire delegation to Ottawa, has 

said they need all of the money in Saskatchewan before 

Christmas, and they need more than that, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

what the hon. member said.  They need all of the money and 

they need another $500 million.  And he just got finished 

saying, with great respect, Mr. Speaker, that, well, half of what 

I got will tide them over until after the new year and sometime 

into the spring.  Is that what all the members of the legislature 

expected, Mr. Speaker?  I ask . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could we have the question?  

These questions and answers are getting too long.  This is the 

first question period and I will have to be much firmer with the 

members.  Could I ask the Leader of the Opposition to please 

put his question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My supplementary 

question to the Premier is: does he have any additional hope for 

the farm families across rural Saskatchewan, so when they go 

to the Christmas tree and they go to the Christmas concerts and 

they have their Christmas together, is there anything else the 

province of Saskatchewan can do to give them some hope 

before the end of the year, like he promised in the last three or 

four months, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition was sitting on the 

treasury benches and made the midnight flight 10 days before 

the election to Ottawa in search of federal money, it must be 

reminded to him and to the people of this legislature, he did not 

offer any provincial money in doing so.  He went to Ottawa in 

pursuit of Ottawa money because he knew at that time, as he 

knows now, the responsibility of this is Ottawa's because of the 

international trade wars.  It's a constitutional and moral and 

economic responsibility, and he didn't offer one penny when he 

went to Ottawa or even after that, in pursuit of that $800 

million. 

 

We think that part of the policy was okay.  We simply think 

that the premier came back with insufficient funds.  And when 

you ask what hope do we have, I take the Prime Minister at his 

words.  He told me, he told the leaders of the other political 

parties and the farm leaders, including the president of the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, that he'll sit down with the Minister 

of Finance and the Minister of Agriculture as soon as possible 

to look at the request of the farm lobby, which was to get more 

cash available immediately.  Let's see what he comes up with. 

 

We're optimistic.  He is the Prime Minister of this country.  

Let's see whether or not he can deliver. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary to the 

Premier.  I'm sure the hon. member understands the pain and 

the suffering across rural Saskatchewan; he's been across rural 

Saskatchewan.  All these newly elected people from rural 

ridings know the pain and suffering, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My supplementary question to the hon. member is: he knows as 

I do, with the offer that we made to the federal government, 

that for 2, 3, or $4 million you could co-operate with the 

federal government and put an additional 2 or $300 million into 

the hands of farmers before Christmas, and that is something 

that you could do.  The Finance minister sitting beside you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

supplementary question?  If the member has a supplementary 

question, then I ask him to please put the supplementary 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My supplementary 

question to the Premier is simply this: couldn't he talk to his 

Finance minister and to his colleagues and to the rural caucus 

under this crisis that got him elected in good part?  Couldn't he, 

Mr. Speaker, couldn't he come up with 2 or 3 or $4 million to 

help deliver 2 or 3 or $400 million into the hands of 

Saskatchewan farm families, rather than just throw up his 

hands and say there's nothing else that I can do?  Couldn't he 

do that for Saskatchewan farm families? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would remind the former premier and Leader 

of the Opposition that it wasn't us who threw up our hands.  We 

went to Ottawa and tried.  It was you, sir, who threw up your 

hands and refused to come, not us.  We tried. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I also want to remind the former 

premier that it wasn't us who prorogued the House and from 

June until now over 735 farmers went to the Farm Debt Review 

Board.  You could have done something by keeping the 

legislature in session to helping.  You threw up your hands, sir, 

not us, on that issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I will say to you, the former premier, 

the Leader of the Opposition, your idea that you've advanced is 

nowhere documented in any of the Finance department records 

or even your own department formerly, the Department of 

Agriculture, not administratively, not budgetarily, not in terms 

of negotiations, and not as far as Ottawa is concerned either.  

This was a concocted . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Crop Insurance Adjustment 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

compliment you on your role as a Speaker and I know that all 

of us are in agreement that it's a difficult job, and we want to 

assist you as much as we can.  Therefore, I'm going to ask and 

be brief with the questions that I have. 

 

I have for the minister responsible for Crop Insurance a number 

of questions.  The first one being, I'd like to have you give the 

Assembly here some numbers as to the volume of adjusters that 

you had on hand on the day that you took over your 

responsibility in Crop Insurance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, when I took over 

Crop Insurance, the Crop Insurance Corporation was in the 

process of doing the rather arduous and almost impossible task 

of measuring every bin in the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

they had on not only their crop adjusters, but they had an extra, 

temporary, part-time crew of 271 part-time temporary people 

on staff at that time measuring those bins. 

 

This was a very expensive program.  It was costing at least $5 

million in budget, was going to run at least a million and a half 

dollars over budget.  It was very ill-conceived and very 

expensive. 

 

The farmers were telling us, we don't need these bin police out 

there checking our bins. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, that's only half an answer to 

  



12 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

the question that I gave you.  I asked originally how many you 

had on hand altogether.  You gave me the number of the 

part-time ones; I'd like to know additionally how many you had 

on hand. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe there were 

approximately 230, 240 of adjusters who normally do the bin 

measuring, the crop insurance adjusting that's necessary on 

piece-time work . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If it's necessary, why did you fire them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Those are not fired, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many farmers have you still got to 

measure the bins on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe there are 

approximately 20 per cent or around 13,000 farmers who have 

not been measured.  They are telling us: we don't want to be 

measured; you can trust us.  We will give you a declaration. 

 

And if you're . . . if, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite are 

saying that we should not trust the farmers, that we should 

continue with this expensive program and waste the money, I 

have no arguments . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many of these, of these adjusters, are 

adjusting today, that you still have on hand? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before we continue with this 

questioning, these questions really are on the borderline for 

question period.  They are much more in tune with Estimates 

rather than asking these detailed questions of the minister in 

question period.  That has never been allowed before.  I will 

allow this question, but if another one of that nature detail is 

being asked, I'll rule it out of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think any of 

them are probably measuring today, considering the weather 

outside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the details of the plan of 

crop insurance when we initiated the discussions with the 

federal government, was that we could not put forward a 

detailed plan of how an early GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) payment should be made without a post-harvest 

audit. 

 

Now the federal government have insisted that that be a part of 

the agreement.  I want you to tell the people of Saskatchewan 

how you intend to audit those granaries and bins of the rest of 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the 

federal-provincial agreement called for full measurement 

within three years, not full measurement this year.  And 

Manitoba has not measured any bins.  And Crop Insurance has 

negotiated with the federal government to use an audit and 

declaration system for the remaining bins that we have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- In detailing this, and I'd just like to provide 

some information for you, in that one of the things that came 

about as a result of discussions . . . I just want to make one 

point to you.  If you have one bushel overpayment by the 

taxpayer or by Crop Insurance, can you give me an idea of 

what that would cost to the people of Saskatchewan?  I'll tell 

you. 

 

The Speaker: -- That question obviously is not . . . doesn't lend 

itself to question period.  It's a question for Estimates or a 

question that we put on the order paper, but we cannot expect 

the minister to know those answers in detail and I'll rule the 

question out of order. 

 

Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is $75 

million.  That's what it would cost to the taxpayers of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  One of the rules that we have in 

our rule book is that you may not put forward answers . . . 

questions to which you already know the answer and then give 

the answer.  That is strictly out of order. 

 

Next question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the reason I raise the question -- 

I want the answer, but I want to explain to the Assembly the 

reason for my question, and the question is this:  what is the 

auditor going to do when you have an overpayment of $75 

million in your Crop Insurance Estimates?  Is that going to cost 

. . . what's that going to cost the people of Saskatchewan in 

terms of the volume of dollars that they're going to have put out 

in order to have that problem solved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, to begin with we can 

save money by going to an audit system.  There's no guarantee 

that measuring is completely accurate.  There is no completely 

guaranteed accurate way to get an estimate from Crop 

Insurance.  Well, regardless of where it comes from, Mr. 

Speaker, an error is an error and this system we believe will be 

more accurate and very much cheaper to implement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- My observation and my question to you:  

don't you think that laying off or removing these people from 

work has more to do with partisan politics on your part than 

anything else and that, Mr. Speaker, is a representative of the 

observations that have been made to me by people who are laid 

off and are being laid off, because some of them voted for you, 

some of them voted for me, and some of them voted for the 

people that are 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

sitting to the left of me, because they told me. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's the problem and that's why I'm asking 

the question:  is it a partisan responsibility or a partisan 

reaction to the things that you've been doing till now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know the 

politics of these people involved, Mr. Speaker.  There was no 

politics involved.  All 271 part-time employees were laid off.  

If there was politics involved, it certainly was not on our part 

and I reiterate again, the farmers are telling us, save the money.  

If you don't trust the farmers . . . No more bin police, is what 

the farmers are telling me and that's the reason for action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING OF REPORTS 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, pursuant to section 

222(1) of The Election Act, I hereby table a report prepared by 

the Chief Electoral Officer respecting annual fiscal returns of 

registered political parties for the fiscal year 1990. 

 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 

Agricultural Crisis in Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I rise 

pursuant to rule 17 of the Rules and Procedures of the 

Assembly to seek leave that a matter of urgent public 

importance now be given priority of debate.  In accordance 

with rules I provided written notice of my intention to the Clerk 

this morning, and I took the additional step of providing you, 

Mr. Speaker, a letter explaining the urgency of the farm crisis, 

as well as a copy of the actual motion I would be making. 

 

Pursuant to the rules, I will briefly state the issue, Mr. Speaker.  

There is not a soul in this legislature or in western Canada who 

does not understand and accept the agriculture situation in 

Saskatchewan as nothing short of a crisis.  Indeed there are 

possible consequences of tragic proportions.  And even as we 

meet here, families during this Christmas season are wondering 

if they will lose their homes and their land. 

 

If this House does nothing else, Mr. Speaker, during this 

session, then it must consider solutions to the emergency facing 

the province and provide answers to the children who are now 

even in anxiety because their moms, their dads, are worried 

that they will be off the farm before Christmas. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would present the motion and then ask leave to 

have this pressing matter a priority of debate.  I will move, 

seconded by the member from Morse: 

 

 That this House, in concurring with the Premier's public 

statements characterizing the agricultural situation in 

Saskatchewan as a crisis and in supporting the efforts of 

thousands of farm families 

to have this emergency dealt with: 

 

 1. Urges the government to pay to Saskatchewan farmers and 

their families their portion of the recently announced $800 

million federal aid package before Christmas -- the cost of 

which is minimal compared to the huge human cost of not 

acting and allowing increased farm and business 

bankruptcies, continual rural population loss, and staggering 

decreases to farm income over the winter months; and 

 

 2. Further insist that the government accept its own 

responsibilities and act as other provinces have . . .  as the 

province has in this past, (and) to immediately supplement 

the $800 million federal aid package by working in 

co-operation with other levels of government and farm 

groups to bolster or extend other provincial farm aid 

packages such as topping up NISA contributions, more 

interest rate relief, payment of some portion of GRIP 

premiums; and 

 

 3. Commends the many farm groups and small businesses 

who worked co-operatively to dramatically raise the profile 

of the agricultural and rural crisis in Canada and urges them 

to continue to ensure all Canadians and their respective 

governments recognize the urgent need for ongoing 

assistance to farmers, their families, and the communities 

rural and urban, where they are struggling for economic 

survival. 

 

I therefore ask the leave of the House to give this pressing 

matter priority of debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I thank the hon. member for giving me prior 

notice, as is required by rule 17 and I wish to make the 

following statement: 

 

Pursuant to rule 17(6), I have reviewed the hon. member's 

notice and I find the request to be in order and of urgent public 

importance.  There being no ordinary opportunity in the very 

near future for the House to express a decision on this matter, I 

ask the House therefore, shall the member have leave to 

proceed? 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

The Speaker: -- I hear some objection to this motion.  

Therefore I must ask all those who support the motion under 

rule 17(7) to rise. 

 

Since fewer than 15 members have risen, I must rule under 

17(8) . . . I must now under 17(8) put the following question to 

a vote.  Does the member have leave to move for priority of 

debate?  Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

The division bells rang from 2:35 p.m. until 3:07 p.m. 

 

Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

  



14 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 10 

Nays 

Romanow Hamilton 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Serby 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Koskie Flavel 

Anguish Roy 

Goulet Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Atkinson McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Kujawa 

MacKinnon Crofford 

Upshall Stanger 

Hagel Knezacek 

Bradley Harper 

Koenker Keeping 

Lorje Kluz 

Lyons Carlson 

Pringle Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Calvert Jess 

Murray Haverstock 

-- 50 

(1445) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Continuing Select Committee 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move, 

seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That members Tchorzewski, Hagel, Koskie, Lingenfelter, 

Lorje, Renaud, Serby, Britton, and Martens be constituted a 

continuing select committee with powers to call for persons, 

papers, records, and to examine witnesses under oath, and 

whose duty it shall be to establish from time to time select 

committees with powers to call for persons, papers, records, 

and to examine witnesses under oath, and with power to 

travel to hear testimony away from the seat of government; 

and that the continuing select committee will have the power 

to set the terms of reference for each select committee; and 

each select committee shall report directly to the Legislative 

Assembly from time to time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Recommendations to the Standing Committee 

on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- By leave, I move, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon River Heights: 

That the recommendation of the public documents 

committee under The Archives Act respecting the disposal of 

certain public documents contained in sessional paper no. 

120 tabled during the fourth session of the twenty-first 

Legislative Assembly and any such recommendations tabled 

this session be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

The Speaker: -- It is my understanding that we can't move the 

other motions because the committee has not reported, 

therefore we will move to special order. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the MLA for the 

constituency of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, it is an honour to have 

this opportunity to move the motion in support of the Speech 

from the Throne.  I would like to thank the Premier for 

affording me this privilege of being the first New Democratic 

private member to speak from this side of the House since 

March 1982. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- There are traditions to be respected in this 

Chamber, and before I acknowledge my debt to the people of 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, first, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate 

you on your election as Speaker of this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- I am sure that all members of this House 

recognize not only what an important role the Speaker has but 

also what a challenging position it can very frequently be.  I 

wish you much success in your new office and I have complete 

confidence that your talents will ensure that this House will run 

effectively, fairly, and with the decorum the people of 

Saskatchewan expect and deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Ms. Murray: -- I also wish to express my thanks and 

appreciation to the people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden for the 

support and trust that they have placed in me to be their 

representative.  It is my constituents who have made it possible 

for me to participate in this important and historic procedure 

today.  Their trust is something that I take very seriously and I 

hope to provide them with a strong and a fair voice in this 

legislature. 

 

In many ways the constituency of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden is just 

like the province itself.  Our proportion of town dwellers to 

country dwellers is close to that of Saskatchewan.  We have 

many aboriginal people in our constituency.  We also have 

people of Ukrainian, German, Romanian, Scandinavian, and 

many other ethnic origins, including the British, the Irish, and 

the Dutch.  Since the constituency surrounds Regina, we have  

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

people who work at virtually every occupation -- farmers, 

ranchers, teachers, civil servants, business people, union 

members, health care professionals, and tradespeople of all 

kinds. 

 

Culturally, we are as rich as is Saskatchewan -- graphic artists, 

sculptors, film-makers, singers, musicians, writers, and 

weavers.  We have very many talented people in our 

constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- In my visiting I have got to know many of 

these people.  They are good Saskatchewan people and they 

have told me much.  If there was one thing I learned from the 

people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden throughout the long months 

leading up to October 21, it was that they wanted a change of 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- When I was canvassing I didn't need to say 

much because clearly what people wanted was someone who 

listened.  I listened and I heard plenty.  And as long as I 

represent those people in this legislature, I am going to 

continue to listen to them very carefully. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- They are good and decent and hard-working, 

not overly political, but they know what is right.  They 

deplored the huge addition, over $800 million, to the 

accumulated deficit that occurred during the previous election.  

They deplored the denials made at the time to the charges that 

the public spending that year was virtually out of control.  They 

deplored the cutting of the public school dental program -- a 

program that was so beneficial to the children of this province 

and in the greater scheme of things gave wonderful value for its 

relatively small cost. 

 

They deplored the Weyerhaeuser deal made just when the pulp 

and paper market was beginning to pick up, yet from which the 

people of this province, Mr. Speaker, have yet to get a red cent 

in payment.  And this deal gave Weyerhaeuser total control 

over 13 million acres of forest land -- 13 million acres, Mr. 

Speaker -- with the government agreeing to build forestry roads 

at taxpayers' expense. 

 

Talking of sweetheart deals, they deplored the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government bankrolling the American-owned 

company Cargill to build Saferco.  If this was such a good deal, 

why should a company like Cargill not pay its own way?  They 

deplore giving politicians with minimal business experience 

plum appointments with high salaries and fancy fringe benefits 

to promote Saskatchewan trade. 

 

In the last few months before the election, this was one 

recurring issue -- patronage.  They have deplored the fact that 

while many people in this province have seen their quality of 

life deteriorate because of increased taxes and massive cuts in 

social services, a few people have benefitted a great deal. 

The people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden have deplored the cuts in 

social services.  We in Saskatchewan pride ourselves with 

some justice on our compassion for those in need.  Our climate 

and often unforgiving environment have always demanded that 

we show care and concern for the disadvantaged. 

 

For the last nine years we have had a government that has put 

the bottom line -- or claims to, and been quite unsuccessful 

even at that -- over people's needs.  So many worthy agencies 

in our communities have had their budgets slashed while food 

banks have proliferated. 

 

To sum up, they deplore the fact that the quality of life for so 

many in this province has deteriorated so much that so many of 

our younger people at the most productive time of their lives 

have had to leave Saskatchewan to find work when they would 

far sooner stay at home. 

 

Most of all, my constituents have deplored the huge increases 

in taxes that the previous government made in the last nine and 

a half years. 

 

Sure, cuts were made to gasoline tax and ceilings put on 

mortgage rates in 1982, but with those cuts came the deficit.  

New taxes like the flat tax and the used car tax were 

introduced, yet the deficits mounted.  Taxpayers' assets in the 

Crown corporations were sold, and yet the deficits mounted. 

 

This year came the harmonization of the PST (provincial sales 

tax) with the GST (goods and services tax).  And this, I heard 

from the good people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, was the last 

straw.  All of us I think manage our household budgets better 

than the province's finances were managed for the last nine 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- And most of us were doing this on incomes 

not keeping up with inflation and incomes burdened by ever 

increasing tax loads. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, no one in this House -- not us on this 

side or those on the other -- need these reminders of what the 

people saw as the major shortcomings of the previous 

administration. 

 

For on October 21, the people of Saskatchewan spoke out, and 

they spoke out loud and clear.  What they told us, what they 

told us all, was that governments that do not listen to the 

people, that think that people can be bought or duped, such 

governments do not get re-elected. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- The people of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, the 

people of Saskatchewan, demanded and demand to be included 

in decisions that affect their lives.  They wanted and they want 

to feel involved and part of the process of government.  The 

people must be listened to.  They must.  The people must be 

treated with respect.  For over nine years Saskatchewan people 

have been denied this basic right. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 21, significant changes came to  



16 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

the people of Saskatchewan.  At midnight on that day the 

extended PST was lifted from clothes, from books, and from 

restaurant meals.  And already business people report that sales 

in all three areas are up, and up by quite a bit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Restaurant owners in particular found the PST 

to be crippling to their business and now they see, along with 

so many others, that there is hope. 

 

Part of the honour in being able to move the motion before us 

today, Mr. Speaker, is due to the hope for Saskatchewan that is 

represented in this new government and its new Premier. 

 

Many people have been telling me that this province has been 

under siege for the last nine and a half years, that the province 

had changed from the decent, co-operative, and happy place 

that it once was, that the directions taken by the previous 

government were out of touch and foreign to the Saskatchewan 

way of honesty, co-operation, and compassion. 

 

When the people of Saskatchewan elected a new government 

on October 21, they voted to eliminate the expanded PST.  But 

in so doing they also elected to cancel the further expansion of 

the PST which would have taken place in January 1992. 

 

By stopping this unfair tax now, there has been a precedent set 

that this government will keep its word and will be sensitive to 

the needs of the people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- The financial news has been all bad lately, but 

I am encouraged that the promise to open the books is being 

undertaken so expediently.  The people in 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, along with others around the province, 

have the right to know where all their money has gone. 

 

Perhaps after the books are examined in depth, we will be able 

to understand how it is possible that we are so close to financial 

disaster even when the people have been so overtaxed. 

 

Obviously many wrong and inappropriate decisions have been 

made.  Now at last -- and the throne speech indicates this -- I 

can go out into Qu'Appelle-Lumsden and tell all my 

constituents that we have a government that is going to put an 

end to the waste and the mismanagement and the patronage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- It is clear that this government is taking its 

responsibility very seriously.  This government will be -- as all 

good governments should be -- conscientious stewards of the 

public trust.  The big pay-outs to friends will stop.  

Government work will be fairly tendered and jobs will be 

based on merit. 

 

Saskatchewan people and certainly the people in my 

communities are not looking for special favours or preferential 

treatment, but they do expect and they deserve fair and just 

treatment. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is already providing a positive 

change from the past.  The throne speech indicates that we 

have a fair and reasonable government that is prepared to 

represent all people in this province, not just a select few. 

 

The financial situation of this province is gloomy, that is true, 

but the overall attitude has changed since October 21.  There is 

a sense of optimism that things have already started to improve.  

As expenditures are made, they will be reasonable and based 

on needs and priorities.  No one, I believe, wants the present 

debt situation to continue.  In response, this government has 

made getting our finances under control a first priority.  Action 

in this area will contribute to stabilizing our economy, and with 

that we will be able to plan for the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Another area of governmental activity where a 

completely new direction is needed, Mr. Speaker, is the 

environment.  The previous administration held the attitude that 

cutting ribbons and making announcements and simply pouring 

concrete had to take priority over any environmental 

consequences.  Huge feed lots were committed to be built, in 

one case just a kilometre from the South Saskatchewan River.  

Large fertilizer and pesticide plants have been allowed to 

develop or expand in populated areas.  A pulp mill was 

licensed.  And all of it was done without full and complete 

environmental assessment hearings.  In the case of the Rafferty 

and Alameda dams project, this province set new records for 

ignoring the law and refusing to abide by court decisions. 

 

The leader of our party announced during the campaign the 

creation of a new provincial agency to police, and if necessary 

halt, any developments that have an unacceptable adverse 

impact on the environment.  I think not just conservationists 

and environmentalists but the vast majority of Saskatchewan 

people will see this as the superior policy it is, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is clear that environmental concerns must be dealt with as 

they arise.  Postponement only compounds the problem.  Our 

party showed its commitment to the environment by proposals 

announced during the election campaign.  I know that this 

government will continue to develop policies and directions 

that will ensure a healthy, safe, and respected environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- As I speak with the people in 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, I know that they appreciate that this 

government is willing to take a leadership role in protecting 

that environment. 

 

The recent receipt of the Billinton Report is an important first 

step in developing a long-term energy strategy.  At present the 

majority of our energy sources are damaging, or have the 

potential for damaging, the environment at an 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

alarming rate.  Oil spills, coal combustion, construction of 

hydro dams, and accidents, wastes, and increased radiation 

associated with nuclear power -- all of these energy sources 

have been taking their toll on our world. 

 

It is critical that we begin honest, open, and realistic 

discussions about how to proceed in developing a supply of 

energy that will not degrade and abuse our environment.  We 

only have one world. 

 

(1530) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- The first and best way to protect our world, 

however, is to conserve energy.  In my constituency, not to 

mention Saskatchewan, we have some of the most innovative 

thinkers on energy conservation around.  In much the same 

way that we pioneered medicare, through imaginative 

conservation we could set standards for the rest of Canada, 

thereby saving energy, saving money, and saving the 

environment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Speaker, before I close I want to say a few 

words about national unity and the constitution.  When the 

fathers of Confederation met 124 years ago, their hopes were 

high.  And as it turned out, their accomplishments were 

considerable.  The fathers of Confederation included great 

leaders from lower Canada like George-Étienne Cartier and 

Hector Langevin. 

 

Cartier and Langevin and their followers and supporters 

ignored all the excuses to be distrustful or hostile toward the 

English-speaking majority.  And on the English side, John A. 

Macdonald and George Brown put aside their fundamental 

philosophical differences.  They joined with Charles Tupper, 

Thomas D'Arcy McGee, Alexander Galt, and others from 

Upper Canada and the Maritimes, in negotiating the required 

compromises that made Confederation possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their great work is something we must resolve not 

to squander.  Since the rejection of the Meech Lake accord, the 

federal government has formulated a new set of proposals in 

the hope of preserving our political union.  The federal 

government has indicated a willingness to be somewhat 

flexible in working out a constitutional arrangement with the 

provinces and other interested parties. 

 

We in this province should not ignore this call by our national 

government.  We must participate fully in seeking a new 

constitutional agreement satisfactory to Canadians in every 

region and province.  In that great undertaking, I am 

encouraged and optimistic about the role our province might 

play.  Our delegation will be led by an extremely able and 

experienced constitutional expert in the person of our Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- We wish all those directly involved in the 

constitutional dialogue great wisdom, tolerance, and 

patience.  I firmly believe that this great country is worth 

preserving.  And the people of Saskatchewan should be assured 

that this government will do everything possible to maintain 

Canada as we know it and love it. 

 

Saskatchewan is once again a fair place to live.  Once again we 

will have an atmosphere of tolerance and co-operation.  A 

marvellous example of co-operative effort was the 

on-to-Ottawa farm trek a week ago.  It was a masterpiece of 

organization and effective lobbying of a federal government 

not sufficiently aware of the extent and the depth of the farm 

crisis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Yes, it is going to take hard work to rebuild 

this province and to get our communities back on their feet.  

But Saskatchewan people are not afraid of hard work.  I know I 

am speaking for all my colleagues in saying we look forward to 

the coming challenges of this legislature.  We are ready to 

work hard for all the people of Saskatchewan.  I am confident 

that their trust in this government is well placed. 

 

Saskatchewan has undergone a profound change since October 

21.  Confidence has returned; hope has returned; compassion 

has returned.  We now have a government committed to use 

whatever resources we have to putting people back to work, to 

making sure that all people have the opportunities they deserve 

and, most of all, to helping those who need our help.  Open, 

accountable, consultative, honest, and responsive government 

is our commitment to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Mr. Speaker, I am proud to move the motion 

in support of the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- I move, seconded by the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 

 To Her Honour the Honourable Sylvia O. Fedoruk, 

Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 May it please Your Honour: 

 

 We, Her Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in session 

assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 

speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to 

us at the opening of the present session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In rising to second the 

address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, I must at the 

outset say thank you to the Premier, to the Government House 

Leader, and to my colleagues in 

  



18 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

caucus for honouring me with the responsibility of seconding 

this important motion before the Assembly.  I want you to 

know I consider it a great honour to deliver my maiden speech 

in this legislature on such an occasion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you on your election to the 

Speaker's chair.  As you well know, my constituency has 

elected members to this legislature who have served as 

Speaker.  Your immediate predecessor, Mr. Tusa, was from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood, as was a much-admired CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) politician, Tom 

Johnston, who served in the chair during the T.C. Douglas first 

three terms in government.  As those predecessors of mine did, 

I know you, Mr. Speaker, will preside fairly and impartially 

and command the respect and the confidence of hon. members 

on both sides of the Chamber. 

 

I also want to congratulate all newly elected and newly 

re-elected members of the Legislative Assembly.  The 

considerable time and effort and significant sacrifices required 

to gain a chair in this Assembly are still fresh in all of our 

minds. 

 

But we know too that the work is worthwhile.  It ensures the 

preservation of our democratic system and it determines who 

will win the right to manage the public affairs of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a very important 

work indeed.  And I urge all of you to treat with the greatest of 

respect the vital business our constituents have sent us here to 

do. 

 

I also want to congratulate those members of the new cabinet 

on their selection to Executive Council  The new cabinet has 

the obvious energy and talent which will be needed in the days, 

weeks, months, and the years ahead, and we wish them all the 

best. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, 

congratulations are certainly due to the new Premier who 

campaigned with integrity and honesty along with the theory of 

putting people before politics.  And the people made their 

decision.  Our victory, Mr. Speaker, was their choice, their 

victory -- a victory that we respect and now we are ready to 

serve for the benefit of all the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must thank the electors of my constituency, Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, for the trust that they have placed in me 

to represent them.  The constituency of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood stretches east from Last Mountain Lake 

and north from the Qu'Appelle Valley to include communities 

like Strasbourg, Southey, Nokomis, Raymore, Govan, 

Punnichy, and Semans, and also includes five Indian reserves, 

which are the Standing Buffalo, Kawacatoose, Day Star, 

Gordon's, and Muskowekwan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Last Mountain-Touchwood is a constituency that 

every year hosts the largest country and western jamboree in 

Saskatchewan, in fact in North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- The riding is close to average in voter 

population but there is certainly nothing average about the 

voters.  Last Mountain-Touchwood is one of the most 

politicized areas of the province.  The New Democratic Party 

membership stands at 1,400, and I'm told the Tory followers 

showed close to that figure. 

 

Politics is a serious exercise in my home constituency as it is 

all across Saskatchewan.  The voters of Last 

Mountain-Touchwood are well-informed about the issues and 

the platforms of the parties.  And those knowledgeable, 

well-informed people went to the polls last October 21 and 

voted for a New Democratic government as did the people all 

across this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Last Mountain-Touchwood has sent some 

formidable people here to this Chamber in the past, Mr. 

Speaker, including Jake Benson, Tom Johnston, Frank Meakes 

and Gordon MacMurchy.  All of them worked hard and gained 

the respect of their constituents and it will be my aim to do the 

same, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, a throne speech is a really a 

blueprint of programs and legislation the government intends to 

undertake in the future.  If there is one thing that this throne 

speech does, it brings to the people of Saskatchewan hope -- 

hope that there will be no more deficit budgeting, unnecessary 

deficit budgeting, and hope that the people of Saskatchewan 

will no longer have to suffer with bad government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my remarks today I intend to talk about the 

desperate need that exists to move away from the climate of 

fear, frustration, and failure we have had to endure for the past 

nine and a half years.  I will explain why we must turn away 

from the rampant patronage and unrestrained personal greed 

that characterized the previous administration.  And I will 

argue that the philosophy of looking after only your own 

individual interests and those of your political friends has got 

to end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity now to 

change the direction away from what it has been.  We must 

establish new goals that stress equity, fairness, and sharing.  

Our objective must be wealth creation that is widely distributed 

as possible.  We must reverse the obvious mismanagement of 

government departments and Crown corporations and return 

efficient, effective public administration. 

 

We have to break the previous government's practice of 

involving itself in the economy only to assist the likes of Peter 

Pocklington, Mark Silver, or the Cargill Grain Company, and 

direct our efforts towards helping those in the unemployment 

lines or on welfare get back on their feet and become 

productive members of society. We have to get away from the 

approach of megabucks for megaprojects that create a few jobs 

for the construction 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not going to rely on Bay Street to create 

jobs, but rather on Main Street, Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, there is an immense amount of 

work to be done and the previous government left us very little 

to work with.  But I say this now with great confidence and on 

behalf of all the New Democrats elected on October 21 to form 

this new government:  we stand ready and willing to go to 

work with the people of Saskatchewan to build a better, more 

decent society for all the people of this great province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the areas where a new 

direction is desperately needed is agriculture.  The former 

premier liked to talk about being a friend of rural 

Saskatchewan.  Well I don't think that we should shy away 

from debating that point with him, because his record is not as 

good as he would like us to believe. 

 

As an example, Mr. Speaker, in the 1981 census there were 

67,318 farms in Saskatchewan.  There are now an estimated 

58,000.  The number of family farms dropped by 1,000 per 

year every year the previous government was in office.  Farm 

debt in this province totals $5.1 billion, up from 3.2 billion 

when the Conservatives took over in 1982.  And the PC 

government of Saskatchewan had no policy or program to deal 

with farm debt. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Tory approach was to add to farm 

indebtedness, and when the payments could not be made, to 

foreclose or seize assets, putting the farm family out of 

business.  According to figures released from the Farm Land 

Security Board, 1,121 foreclosure notices were filed by lenders 

against Saskatchewan farm families between January 1 and 

September 30 of this year.  Since the Farm Land Security 

Board was established in January of 1985, it has recorded 

8,159 foreclosures filed against Saskatchewan farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because of this say-one-thing-do-another 

approach to farm foreclosures, lending institutions now own 

1.2 million acres of Saskatchewan farm land -- a tenfold 

increase over the early 1980s.  And, Mr. Speaker, 1.2 million 

acres is more land than the land bank ever held title to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, of that 1.2 million acres of land 

repossessed by lenders, 700,000 acres has been foreclosed on 

or seized by Farm Credit Corporation or the Agricultural Credit 

Corporation, two Crown corporations wholly owned by the 

federal and the Saskatchewan government. 

 

That's right, Mr. Speaker, the FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) 

under the control of Brian Mulroney and the ACS (Agricultural 

Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) 

under the complete control of the former PC government of 

Saskatchewan, have foreclosed on more Saskatchewan farm 

families than all the banks, the credit unions, and the trust 

companies combined. 

 

Quite a record is it not, Mr. Speaker.  And I should remind 

members that it is on this record that the people of 

Saskatchewan made their choice on October 21. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, the province cannot afford this 

kind of a record.  We need people dealt with with compassion 

and caring and we have to work together in a co-operation to 

do whatever we have to to keep the farmers on the land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the breakdown of repossessed farm land is from 

figures out of the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Board and 

the federal Farm Debt Review Board.  In years to come we 

should ask Tories all across the province why, when they form 

governments in Regina and Ottawa, 60 per cent of farm 

foreclosures were done by Tory government lending agencies. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- I must tell you as well, Mr. Speaker, that ACS 

has not limited its efforts to land.  In the last two years, Ag 

Credit Corporation has dragged more farmers into court over 

arrears on loans than any other lending institution.  In most 

cases, it is the production loan program money that has caused 

the lawsuit; and yet it is the production loan program that is 

one of the accomplishments that PC's say they are the proudest 

of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Implement Dealers Association of Western 

Canada has released figures showing that half the farm 

machinery sales and service outlets in Saskatchewan have 

disappeared in the last 10 years.  In 1980 we had close to 400 

implement dealers.  At present time there are under 200, 

according to the association. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a friend of the farmer, the Tory government 

did not object when the federal Tories ended the two-price 

wheat system which was worth 270 million a year to the 

western grain growers.  The former provincial government 

raised no strong objections when their federal PC cousins tried 

to take away the interest-free cash advance on stored grain, and 

did take it away for a few months. 

 

And I remind you that the Saskatchewan PC administration 

supported the decision by Ottawa to scrap the branch line 

rehabilitation program which had rebuilt 3,700 kilometres of 

rail line in Saskatchewan since 1977 and kept several lines 

from being abandoned. 

 

The provincial Tories also supported removing the marketing 

of oats from the Canadian Wheat Board, even though a sizeable 

majority of producers opposed the move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the federal budget of April 1989 shifted 25 

per cent of the cost of crop insurance from the federal treasury 

onto the backs of taxpayers in the prairie 

  



20 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

provinces, and when variable freight rates were introduced, and 

when a moratorium on FCC foreclosures was removed, the 

provincial PC government said and did nothing in defence of 

the Saskatchewan farmer. 

 

Since the previous government did away with the first land 

bank, then their own farm purchase program, we have no land 

transfer program in this province.  For almost five years now 

we have had no program to assist the intergenerational land 

transfer of farms.  Is it no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that big 

farmers are getting bigger, and the sons and daughters of small 

farmers are prevented from carrying on the tradition that they 

grew up with. 

 

Not content to misuse and abuse the adult population of the 

province, the Conservative government of Saskatchewan even 

cut provincial funding to 4-H's from $327,000 to $271,000.  

What an appalling record, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

members would agree with me. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- All of this, Mr. Speaker, is a record to be 

ashamed of.  They continue to tell the farmers that it wasn't 

their fault.  It was because of grasshoppers, of drought, of 

international trade wars and $2 wheat.  And they kept saying 

there was nothing they could do because there was no money.  

There is no money because they gave everything away that 

made money and mismanaged what was left. 

 

And because of that this province is in a financial mess and the 

people of Saskatchewan have suffered because of it.  But things 

can be done, Mr. Speaker.  The government of Tommy 

Douglas in 1944 cancelled debts some farm families had been 

unable to pay off since the Great Depression a decade earlier.  

The Douglas government also passed a law forbidding lenders 

to foreclose on the home quarter. 

 

The New Democratic Party government in 1971 passed the 

family farm protection Acts which stopped foreclosures on 

farm land and seizure of machinery and other assets and 

extended protection against having to make payments if the 

farm family could not afford to, until better commodity prices 

returned. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was then Attorney General Roy Romanow 

who drafted the family farm protection Act and piloted it 

through this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has produced a 

number of politicians who are better friends of agriculture than 

the present Leader of the Conservative Party, and I give my 

predecessor Gordon MacMurchy as an example. 

 

And I could go on but I think I've made my point.  The New 

Democratic Party is offering a good, comprehensive range of 

solutions to the agriculture problems it faces.  The Premier and 

the Minister of Agriculture have mounted an unprecedented 

lobbying effort to obtain a deficiency payment of an adequate 

size.  The 300 million announced so far for Saskatchewan is 

simply inefficient. 

I think it is important to note that unlike the previous 

leadership, our Premier and minister are attempting to get a 

payment for the farmers after an election, not immediately 

before one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Which I believe shows, Mr. Speaker, that we do 

in fact put people before politics. 

 

We are also committed to pushing for substantial alterations to 

the GRIP and NISA.  GRIP should be based on the actual costs 

of production as was the Saskatchewan Beef Stabilization Plan 

that was started by the Blakeney government at the beginning 

of the 1980s. 

 

Because of the 15-year pricing average provision in GRIP now, 

that will reduce pay-outs to zero in two to three years, leaving 

farmers with nothing but a high premium to pay. 

 

The per capita cost of the program is also a problem, Mr. 

Speaker. Saskatchewan taxpayers are paying many times the 

amount coming from residents of certain other provinces. 

 

The New Democrats are also committed to a debt restructuring 

program which will encourage financial institutions like the 

banks, Farm Credit Corporation, Ag Credit Corporation, to 

restructure a portion of Saskatchewan's $5.1 billion farm debt.  

The new government will also be addressing the sizeable 

problems of farm foreclosures and the seizures of farm assets. 

 

This is the start of our plan, Mr. Speaker, and I think it will be 

effective in treating the problems and will be well received by 

the farmers in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just as the two old line parties have neglected the 

best interests of rural people, they have ignored the citizens of 

northern Saskatchewan, particularly the Indians and Metis 

populations.  There are members in this Assembly, two in 

particular, who can and I am sure will speak with much more 

ability than I about the desperate needs for renewed emphasis 

on jobs, on housing, on education, and on health care in 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

But none of us in southern Saskatchewan can ignore the facts.  

The facts that less than 10 per cent of Indian young people 

complete high school.  Four out of five adult native people are 

unemployed.  Infant mortality and tuberculosis are very high 

among northern people because the cancellation of the northern 

food subsidy has made it impossible for low income northern 

parents to provide proper nutrition to their families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, history sets out a clear record of government 

involvement in northern problems.  Prior to 1944 the North was 

a forgotten place, but with the election of the CCF, social 

services, health care, and economic development were stepped 

up.  The Thatcher Liberal government both ignored and 

exploited Northerners in the 1960s. 



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

In the 1970s the Blakeney government set up the Department 

of Northern Saskatchewan and really, for the first time, brought 

our northern citizens some of the goods things we in the South 

enjoy, like the opportunity to find a job, adequate shelter, 

affordable food, and the ability to run their own affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- But for almost the last decade the North has 

again been pushed back into second class status and 

third-world conditions.  Northern people knew all of this, Mr. 

Speaker, and on October 21st registered their overwhelming 

strong support for the New Democratic Party.  It is now up to 

this new provincial government to show our sisters and 

brothers in the North that we do care.  The decade of neglect is 

over and we are once again willing to help. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, another area in which a new 

direction is required is in the handling of the public's business, 

particularly public assets.  The whole issue of privatization, 

from philosophical concept to the reality of the sell-offs, deeply 

disturbed many Saskatchewan people, and I believe the public 

had good reason to be upset. 

 

And I want to go on again on the sale of the Prince Albert pulp 

mill because it is an important one.  I know the previous 

speaker spoke of it.  The associated forest industry operation 

also, a Saskatchewan chemical plant, and the Big River saw 

mill, the sale of those to the Weyerhaeuser corporation were 

typical of the previous government's privatization initiatives. 

 

The Tories waited until there was significant downturn in the 

pulp market, and it is known to be a cyclical market with 

regular dips in that market.  When the pulp prices and sales 

were at their worst in years the PC government decided to sell, 

and the sale price of the assets I have listed was 236 million, 

well below what should have been obtained. 

 

Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington, also got as 

part of the sweetheart deal . . . and, Mr. Speaker, at this time I 

want to ask the farmers in this Assembly who are watching if 

they got as good a deal out of the former Tory government -- 

for $236 million Weyerhaeuser had to put no money down, 30 

years to pay, eight and a half per cent interest, and no payments 

were required in years when profits are less than 12 per cent.  I 

ask you, Mr. Speaker, and the farmers of Saskatchewan, did 

you get that good of a deal out of the former government? 

 

Along with that the province had to build 20 miles of forestry 

road for the company each year.  The province also gave 

Weyerhaeuser an $8.3 million loan guarantee to add a paper 

machine.  And, Mr. Speaker, as the former speaker from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden has said, between the sale in 1986 and 

today, what amount has been paid off on that $236 million 

principal?  Well the answer is not one red cent, Mr. Speaker, 

not a cent of the principal that's owing. 

In fact the Weyerhaeuser corporation can delay making any 

payments until the year 2016 at which time payment can be 

made in company shares. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the P.A. Pulp mill privatization amounts to 

is this.  A Saskatchewan-owned company that had been 

profitable under the NDP (New Democratic Party) and whose 

profits were used for health care and education, and that 

company was sold to a foreign corporation for a song and the 

government even financed the purchase.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

how the PC privatization works. 

 

As another example, in April of 1988 Saskatchewan Power 

under its Tory management sold off its district office building 

in Moose Jaw for $267,000.  Then SPC (Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation) entered into a 10-year leaseback of half the 

building for $37,000 a year plus half the operating costs.  At 

the end of the 10-year lease SPC will have paid well over 

$370,000 in rent and utilities and SPC will no longer own the 

building. 

 

It was for advice such as that to which the Conservatives paid 

tens of thousands of dollars to offshore private experts . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oliver Letwin. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Oliver Letwin is correct.  Also in May 1984, Mr. 

Speaker, more than 400 pieces of Department of Highways 

equipment were privatized in a huge auction sale.  The 

replacement value was $40 million and the province received 

$6 million.  What an incredible record, Mr. Speaker, a record 

of sweetheart deals for their own supporters and an outrageous 

abuse of the people of Saskatchewan who are rightful owners 

of those public assets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will be new direction here as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, my party leader has for the last 

three or four years been promoting the policy of a strong 

economy based on a healthy private, public, and co-operative 

sectors of that economy.  And that will be the direction of our 

new government. 

 

As I said earlier, we are not going to spend millions and 

millions of dollars and rely on Bay Street, Toronto to create 

activity in the economy.  We are going to rely on the men and 

the women on Main Street, Saskatchewan who are dedicated to 

the growth and the development of this province to help us turn 

this economy around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, economic activity in rural areas 

must and will move forward under solid planning.  This 

government will build using the mixed economy, and do it with 

honest and responsible conduct.  We will be developing a 

strong made-in-Saskatchewan economic policy -- you might 

say home-grown policy -- a policy 

  



22 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

for the people and the province of Saskatchewan developed by 

the people and the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words now 

about the highways, that essential network of arteries that 

keeps our province alive both economically and socially.  This 

past summer the Road Builders and Heavy Construction 

Association of Saskatchewan put out a report on the state of 

highways called Our Vital Links. 

 

Now the road builders association, Mr. Speaker, are business 

people and citizens of Saskatchewan with admittedly an 

interest in the highway work, but they also care about the 

highway system in Saskatchewan.  On page 4 of that report the 

road builders association says this, and I quote: 

 

 The reduced expenditure on reconstruction and restoration is 

leading to deterioration, which is accelerating at an 

alarming rate. 

 

And later on page 8 the report says: 

 

 Our highways are desperately in need of major restorative 

work instead of patches on patches. 

 

And in case anyone thinks it is only the local industry people 

and those who are left who are concerned about our major 

roads, I would refer you to a study done by the Canadian 

Construction Association in November of 1990.  In the 

executive summary of that national study it says this, and I 

quote: 

 

 Saskatchewan's highways continue to deteriorate at a faster 

rate than they can be repaired because the provincial 

government has, in the past two years, devoted just 56.9 per 

cent of the required funding to their rehabilitation. 

 

The highway situation we inherit, Mr. Speaker, is not an 

enviable one.  But my party has some experience to draw on.  

When the CCF came to power in 1944, there were 4,000 miles 

of gravel surface and 120 miles of pavement in our provincial 

highway system.  The rest was dirt road.  When the CCF left 

office in 1964, there were 57,000 miles of paved and gravel 

surface in the provincial highway system -- an amazing 

accomplishment for a party that took over a debt-ridden and 

almost bankrupt province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, today we also take over a debt-ridden and 

almost bankrupt province, which will make it very difficult.  

But the task facing this new government is not greatly 

different.  We must bring our highway system back up to the 

high standard Saskatchewan travellers have a right to expect.  

But, Mr. Speaker, I repeat, because of the mess that the 

government finances are in, it will take time. 

 

In a province of 651 square kilometres with fewer than a 

million people spread across most of it in some 130 towns, 360 

villages, and a dozen cities, a properly maintained highway 

system is essential.  It's essential, Mr. Speaker, to keep rural 

and urban Saskatchewan linked 

together and it is also essential to keep Saskatchewan linked 

with the rest of Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just say a little about the financial 

situation that this province was left in and how bad the 

authorities ran our provincial government finances. 

 

It is no question that after 10 straight deficit budgets, the lack 

of fiscal restraint, we are in serious financial difficulty.  The 

main thing during the election campaign that people were 

telling me, their main concern or one of their main concerns 

was the size of the debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government introduced 10 budgets 

into the House.  And much to their surprise, the 10th one was 

never passed in this House.  But the entire speech for those 10 

could have consisted of two lines, Mr. Speaker.  The first line 

could have been that the province of Saskatchewan will take in 

$4.8 billion this year; and the second line could have been, due 

to our own patronage, waste, and mismanagement we will 

spend considerably more than we take in.  That could have 

been the entire budget speech, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, in 1944 when a CCF member 

named Warden Burgess from a riding called 

Qu'Appelle-Wolseley moved the address in reply to the throne 

speech, and again in 1971 when Bev Dyck performed the same 

task, they were the first elected members to speak in this 

Chamber after a milestone election.  And in both cases they 

spoke of the great need for change and a new direction by 

government to accomplish it. 

 

And there were new directions with the elections of 1944 and 

1971.  The Douglas government moved a near bankrupt 

province with only rudimentary services into a modern era with 

the best health, the best social services and education programs, 

and the best labour legislation protecting workers in all of 

North America. 

 

Again with the election of the Blakeney government, there was 

a new direction and impressive change.  There were numerous 

new programs developed to expand medicare.  Seniors, poor 

people, the North, low income working families were a priority 

of that administration and all benefitted from the progressive 

policies of the Blakeney government. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what my predecessors did -- Mr. Burgess, 47 

years ago, and Mr. Dyck, 20 years ago -- I am here to do today.  

I am honoured to be one of the first speakers of my party to call 

for support from elected members for a new direction in the 

1990s and to forecast positive change that will last well into the 

next century. 

 

Some of that new direction has already taken place, Mr. 

Speaker, with the non-political trek to Ottawa where the needs 

of the farmers instead of political needs were highlighted, once 

again stressing people before politics. 

We have brought honesty and openness to government by 

opening the book and appointing a commission to examine the 

fiscal state of the province, and by telling the people exactly 

where we stand. 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

Thirdly, we removed the expanded PST, which will save the 

people of Saskatchewan millions of dollars.  This has already 

stimulated the economy and created jobs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is an impressive record when you consider 

it was achieved by a premier and a cabinet that has only been 

sworn into power for 32 days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- An impressive record indeed, Mr. Speaker.  The 

efforts of this new government will once again establish 

Saskatchewan as an innovator, breaking new ground with 

effective programs and services for people, delivered 

efficiently.  I predict it will not be long before the fiscal health 

of this province is restored and public administration is again 

viewed as an occupation of responsible, ethical people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is populated by good people, the 

best I know of anywhere, and good people deserve good 

government.  And in the years to come with this New 

Democratic Party government, that is exactly what the people 

of Saskatchewan will be getting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to end my address by 

introducing a member from Last Mountain-Touchwood who 

has just joined us.  Mr. Gordon MacMurchy is with us today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- With that, Mr. Speaker, I second the address in 

reply to the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to enter the debate on 

the Speech from the Throne.  And first let me say that I will be 

speaking for a few minutes and then asking leave to adjourn the 

debate as a result of the condolence motion that is before the 

House.  So I will be speaking for a few minutes and then will 

seek to adjourn the debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me begin by thanking you and particularly Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor for her exceptional skills.  I 

know that she makes all of us proud, and I'm frankly a great 

admirer of her dignity, her personal character, and the strength 

of her commitment to the people of Saskatchewan and indeed 

to the people of Canada. 

 

I would also like to express my deep gratitude to the people of 

the Estevan constituency for continued trust in me and their 

continued vision for the future.  And, Mr. Speaker, let me say 

that I am very, very proud of those people and very proud to 

represent them. 

 

At this time I would also reiterate our congratulations to you, 

Mr. Speaker, again for your success in the past and your 

courage to take on the position of Speaker of the Saskatchewan 

legislature, which has a history of being 

very exciting and challenging to say the least. 

 

I am also very proud, Mr. Speaker, to say that I have had the 

opportunity to lead the Progressive Conservative Party since 

1979 and I am very proud of the men and the women in the 

Progressive Conservative Party across Saskatchewan and 

indeed across the country. 

 

It's a party that has made major contributions to this province 

and will continue to do so, from John Diefenbaker, the first 

Prime Minister of Canada from Saskatchewan proposing a 

national medicare system in 1938, to the first Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan that we just introduced and the network of 

community bond corporations springing up all across 

Saskatchewan, frankly like new spring wheat. 

 

The PC Party has sown many a bountiful harvest for our 

people.  We've led the nation in diversification even in a 

recession, Mr. Speaker.  And as you know, we've had the 

lowest unemployment in Canada in the last few years despite a 

recession in all parts of Canada and particularly here. 

 

I want to thank them for their tireless efforts in the face of 

challenges.  And the members of this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, are not afraid of challenges and we will continue to 

push this administration and ourselves to make sure that we 

deliver as much as possible to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would think that a Speech from the Throne 

should lay out a plan for the people of Saskatchewan.  And my 

observation in looking at the Speech from the Throne is that I 

would have very much like to have seen, and I'm sure the 

people of Saskatchewan would have liked to have seen a 

strategy for agriculture, a strategy for jobs in agriculture, a 

strategy for cash for cash-strapped families. 

 

Christmas as you know, Mr. Speaker, is the time that can be of 

tremendous revival and goodwill and a blessing.  But it can be 

also a time of loneliness.  And it can be one of the most trying 

times, Mr. Speaker, if you're under a great deal of pain and 

pressure. 

 

I thought, Mr. Speaker, a Speech from the Throne at this time 

in the province of Saskatchewan with a brand-new 

administration would really put forward a plan for the people 

that are in dire straits, people who are really hurting -- the 

agricultural people, towns and villages, people in the inner city, 

people in northern Saskatchewan, people across this province 

who need some attention now. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I'm sure the people of 

Saskatchewan would be very disappointed to find out that 

there's still no plan.  I look in the newspaper last couple of days 

and the campaign manager for the NDP said, we're very proud 

of the fact that we won the election on people of Saskatchewan 

without a plan.  We didn't present to them what we're going to 

do, how we're going to do it.  We talked about the past and we 

continue to talk about the past.  And, Mr. Speaker, we didn't 

have to talk about the future. 

 

Now we saw that, Mr. Speaker, in the Speech from the 

  



24 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

Throne.  What is their plan for the future?  What are they going 

to do between now and Christmas?  What are they going to do 

in the new year?  What are they going to do to help people 

diversify, to build, to balance the budget, to be creative? 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne . . . and the media all 

admitted it was hollow.  It was empty.  They could hardly 

highlight it for the television and for the newspapers.  What 

was in it? 

 

Just a few minutes ago in this very legislature, Mr. Speaker, we 

said, could we just take the time as a result of the hollowness in 

the Speech from the Throne to ask the government opposite to 

talk about agriculture?  Will you just talk about the crisis and 

we can share solutions.  Let's talk about solutions. 

 

And due to your good office, Mr. Speaker, you allowed us to 

bring that debate forward.  That motion, Mr. Speaker, was 

there because there's nothing in the Speech from the Throne.  

All these new elected members, they want to see help for 

farmers, saw nothing in the Speech from the Throne -- no 

diversification, no community development bonds, no 

diversification, no new jobs, no new hope.  At least hope at 

Christmas time.  Where's the hope for the families? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say again as I said briefly in question 

period, in 1982 we heard the same thing, exactly the same thing 

-- a Speech from the Throne, interest rates were 22 per cent, 

people were hurting, farmers were in a lot of trouble.  And at 

that time the attorney general and today the Premier said, well 

it's out of my hands; I don't know what to do; there's nothing 

we can do; we should phone Ottawa. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll say we heard the same thing all over again.  

Nothing that the new NDP administration can do.  I heard the 

last two speakers with respect to moving the motion on the 

Speech from the Throne, the first and the second.  And a good 

part of it, with respect, was well, the past.  Remember what it 

was like in '44 or 1953 or something like that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What about the future?  Where's the vision for the future in 

Saskatchewan in the Speech from the Throne?  Where's the 

plan that will say, here's how we'll fix agriculture; here's what 

we'll do for cash-starved farmers; here's how we'll lay it out; 

here's what we've tabled in negotiations with other prairie 

provinces, what we've done for the federal government.  

Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the people of Saskatchewan expect from the Speech from 

the Throne something laid out that is a vision, a vision.  And 

they said no, no vision yet.  This is just to start it out and we're 

going to go through some exercise here which is a half a 

Speech from the Throne, a part of a speech.  Nothing really in 

it, but we'll kind of get into the House and we'll blame the 

federal government. 

 

And in good part what we've heard today is we'll blame 

everybody else.  But the brand-new administration has the 

opportunity to make its mark and not a red cent, not a 

dime.  Nothing. 

 

Did all these new members expect to come into the legislature, 

Mr. Speaker, and see their Premier stand up and say, well 

there's nothing here and we'll wait on Ottawa, and if there's 

nothing shows up, there's nothing else that we can do.  Is that 

why you got elected?  Are you going to let the old boys' club 

tell you what to do?  Are you going to just say the same things 

over and over and over again, Mr. Speaker?  Is that what it is? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think a brand-new administration . . . this will 

go down in history as the weakest Speech from the Throne in 

the history of Saskatchewan.  This is the most pathetic Speech 

from the Throne we've ever seen in the history of 

Saskatchewan.  And you can go back a long ways, well before 

'44, and you won't see anything like this.  There is no plan, no 

diversification, no ideas, no money.  I don't even think there's a 

budget, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Hey, Mr. 

Speaker, I got their attention, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Let the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 

make his speech.  We all will have our turns in here. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I really appreciate 

that.  The hon. members did respond, Mr. Speaker, when I 

mentioned the fact that they wouldn't come up with anything to 

help farmers and yet they were full of promises prior to writing 

the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, full of promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch on this and I'm sure we'll get 

into it.  And if there is a budget debate of any kind of budget . . 

. I haven't seen if there's a budget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, they said it was difficult.  They were going 

to help.  They were going to balance the budget and help 

farmers get more, get faster, deliver more, diversify the 

economy of the lowest unemployment and do all of that, Mr. 

Speaker, all at the same time.  And we expected in the Speech 

from the Throne to see that message and how they would do it.  

And it included all kinds of things.  And there are two or three 

lists that I don't have time to read, Mr. Speaker, and I will take 

the opportunity in the very near future when I'm given another 

chance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Just let me say we will put forward our suggestions for a 

speech from the throne.  You're going to see a plan that we 

build on diversification, on economic activity, on working with 

other provincial governments -- the federal government, 

municipal governments.  Not just picking on the past but 

looking at what you do today and for the 1990s and the 21st 

century;  not just living in the past.  And we expect this 

government, with great respect, duly elected by the people, to 

live up to its promises.  And it said that it could do all of that 

and it would help. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the province needs leadership now not just 

politics.  The election is over.  What you need now is what will 

you do in uranium, in economic development, in energy, in 

taxes, with your credit rating, with development, with farmers 

who need money?  What will you do?  Other than just talk 

about politics, where's the 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

plan so the people can take it and dissect it and look at it? 

 

And we need, Mr. Speaker, with great respect, to be careful 

with agriculture because farmers want to know they're treated 

fairly.  The minister responsible for Crop Insurance today had a 

pretty easy ride today and he feels pretty good because he . . . 

I'm not so sure that farmers want that kind of attention. 

 

I'll just say, Mr. Speaker, when you're dealing at $75 million a 

crack, farmers want to know that it's right.  They want to know 

Crop Insurance is run well.  They want to know that everything 

will be done and audited accordingly. 

 

And if you can be flippant about $75 million, Mr. Speaker, 

then at least you might think about 3 or $4 million that could 

put $300 million into the hands of farmers and ranchers right 

now, Mr. Speaker.  And we're going to hold this government 

accountable to that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have much more to say and I'll look forward to 

that opportunity.  I beg leave to adjourn this debate as a result 

of the condolence motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of this 

Assembly I'd like to move, I think, at the end of my remarks, 

seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, a couple of 

condolence motions.  And this first one pertains to the late Mr. 

Sandy . . . 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you to the 

members.  The motion that I'll move at the end of my remarks 

with respect to Mr. Sandy Nicholson reads as follows: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

 Alexander (Sandy) Malcolm Nicholson, A. M. Nicholson, 

who died in Toronto, Ontario on October 12, 1991, was a 

member of this Legislative Assembly for the constituency of 

Saskatoon City from 1960 to 1964. 

 

 Mr. Nicholson was born November 25, 1900 at Kinloss 

Township, Bruce County, Ontario.  After graduating from 

high school at Luchnow, Ontario, Mr. Nicholson left his 

home in 1920 to take a job near Moose Jaw as a farm 

labourer.  Later that year he accepted a teaching position at 

Maple Valley School, near Davidson, Saskatchewan.  In 

1921 Sandy Nicholson enrolled at the University of 

Saskatchewan where he intended to study theology.  His 

family preferred that he return to Ontario to study at the 

University of Toronto, which he did for a year before coming 

back to 

 Saskatoon in 1922.  He enrolled at St. Andrew's College, 

University of Saskatchewan, which granted him degrees in 

Arts and Theology.  At St. Andrew's, Mr. Nicholson became 

involved in the Student Christian Movement and won 

recognition as one of the university's finest athletes.  He went 

on to further his education at the University of Edinburgh to 

become a United Church minister. 

 

 In 1928 Mr. Nicholson married Marian Massey of Wadena.  

During 1930 he moved to Hudson Bay Junction to become 

the village's first United Church minister.  He also became 

interested in politics and became very actively involved with 

the Farmer-Labour party.  In 1940, he successfully contested 

the federal seat of Mackenzie which he would hold until 1949 

and then again return and to hold from 1953 to 1958. 

 

 In 1959, Mr. Nicholson moved to Saskatoon to take a 

position with the John Howard Society.  He did not keep the 

job long because in 1960, he ran in the provincial general 

election and was elected to represent one of the three 

Saskatoon city seats. 

 

I might add that this was the first time that I began to know 

Sandy Nicholson on a personal basis.  Hard to believe I know, 

a relatively young person like myself, that I would know about 

Mr. Nicholson back in 1960, but it's true.  I got interested in 

politics at that time myself primarily as the forthcoming 

provincial election was looming on the horizon, and clearly as 

the debate about medicare was beginning to surface as the 

major issue in 1960. 

 

At that time also, being on campus I was very much attracted 

about the arguments pertaining to nuclear weapons and 

whether or not Saskatchewan, and particularly Canada, should 

be a repository of nuclear weapons which the American 

administration wanted the government of the day to accept. 

 

I might say that I was in good company in expressing my 

opposition to nuclear warheads on Canadian soil because the 

late former prime minister John Diefenbaker also opposed that 

initiative which was supported, ironically I suppose in some 

ways -- politics and life is full of irony -- by the then prime 

minister of Canada, Lester B. Pearson. 

 

None the less, because of those two known main motivation 

factors, I became interested in the CCF and got to know A. M. 

Sandy Nicholson.  And at that point I want to just deviate from 

my written notes to say that I instantly came to know and in a 

way to love Sandy Nicholson. 

 

Based on his life interests and his relationships with people, 

you could see this was a person who truly loved men and 

women in the best and proper sense of that word love. 

 

His training in theology, of course, gave him an added 

dimension of religion, a Christian religion perspective.  His 

commitment to peace, his commitment to improving the 

general lot of people in our society, was evident.  And for a 

young student as myself in those days, this was the stuff of 

what politics was all about -- high ideals, high 

  



26 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

causes, the medicare battle which was soon to loom and to 

follow as it did in 1962.  All of these A.M. Sandy Nicholson 

was a very active participant in shaping Saskatchewan politics 

and I would argue a bit of Canadian history. 

 

And if I might, as a small, one final reminiscence, tell you that 

in those days in the 1960 provincial election campaign, the 

CCF, contrary to popular thought, was not a well-oiled political 

machine.  And television was just becoming to be a force in 

politics.  And the way that we trained our candidates, if I may 

put it that way -- it's rather funny coming from me, training 

candidates, at any time but for sure in 1960 -- was to pretend 

that one of us was a television camera.  And my job was to sort 

of pretend that I was the television camera and I'd be dollying 

forward and back as A. M. Sandy Nicholson was practising his 

lines and looking, trying hard to pretend that my facial features 

were somewhat akin to a television camera.  And I could 

realize shortly why he was not able to carry out his answers 

with a straight face.  But that's exactly what we tried to do in 

training our candidates in that election campaign. 

 

And so in 1960 I rolled up my sleeves and threw in my hat, as 

it were, into the political arena with the CCF and basically with 

A.M. Sandy Nicholson, all the others as well.  He ran in that 

provincial election campaign and he was elected to represent 

one of the Saskatoon city seats.  And given his ability and his 

formal education and training, it was no surprise therefore that 

Tommy Douglas appointed him to cabinet and he served as the 

minister of social welfare and rehabilitation, as it was then 

called, holding the post from 1960 until 1964 when the 

government was defeated at the polls, largely and rather 

ironically as a result of that great medicare debate. 

 

I won't get into the history of that but to keep our doctors' 

committee and all of the acrimony that surrounded that 

particular period, I argue, contributed a lot to the defeat of the 

government and to the defeat of Sandy Nicholson, and I would 

argue, perhaps biasedly, but I think now looking back at it 

historically, objectively, we were all the losers for it.  We were 

all the losers for the loss of people like Sandy Nicholson who 

brought that integrity and that idealism which is so needed in 

public life and in politicians. 

 

In 1967 Sandy did not give up.  He ran again, but this time 

unsuccessfully in the constituency of Saskatoon City 

Park-University and then he retired from active politics in the 

sense of active elected politics.  In his retirement though, 

Sandy Nicholson never did retire.  He became involved with 

the Saskatchewan association for retarded children as a fund 

raiser.  He was also instrumental in the creation of Cheshire 

Homes project for the disabled. 

 

During the early 1970s A.M. Sandy Nicholson was also active 

as an organizer and fund raiser for the Canadian University 

Services Overseas, CUSO. 

 

(1630) 

 

This was indeed a very wide ranging career.  It was a man with 

a great horizon, the big picture and the big interests -- not only 

that life should be okay and better for all of us 

in Saskatoon and Saskatchewan and in the rural parts, but he 

had the picture on the globe.  And even then issues pertaining 

to CUSO and to the concerns of the hungry and the needy were 

very much on A.M. Sandy Nicholson's plate. 

 

Well as can be seen from that motion which I'll introduce in 

just a few moments, social welfare was the very basis, as I see 

it, for most of the things that Sandy Nicholson stood for and 

represented -- social welfare.  He was a true humanitarian who 

fought for better living conditions always on behalf of the poor 

and the disadvantaged.  He knew that those who were well off 

could speak for themselves and looked after themselves, thank 

you very much, but somebody had to be a voice for the poor 

and the disadvantaged. 

 

And he fought for the implementation of social welfare 

legislation, much of which was very controversial, as very 

often social welfare legislation is, especially if you're helping 

those who are poor and less better off.  But he was tireless and 

he persisted in this right to his dying days. 

 

And he was also a strong advocate of women's rights.  And he 

sought more recognition for them in politics.  I remember that 

as well as a very important feature and facet of Sandy's 

personality. 

 

We had in that election of 1960 and in subsequent elections a 

number of very able women candidates who were in the 

legislature.  I won't mention all of them for fear of forgetting 

one.  Marjorie Cooper Hunt.  Having said I wouldn't, I'll just 

mention the name of Marjorie Cooper.  She was one of a strong 

team of candidates. 

 

Sally Merchant in 1967 came along representing the Liberal 

Party, is another very strong and outspoken, able spokesperson 

for not only women's issues but the issues of Saskatchewan and 

Canada. 

 

And Sandy Nicholson, who both supported within the party 

and also was in a sense at the receiving end of a loss with 

respect to elections in this regard, never failed in his advocacy 

of women's rights.  This was a very strong determination and a 

commitment for him.  And I guess the one regret that he would 

have, as I know he's expressed to me, not lately, but when I did 

speak to him about it, is that we've been so slow as a society, as 

a political society, to make sure that women take more of a 

prominent place in political life and we have so much work yet 

to do with respect to the equality provisions, with respect to 

women in society at large.  He believed in and promoted 

therefore a society and a Saskatchewan that was equal, fair, and 

tolerant. 

 

Sandy Nicholson was very much a community person as well, 

not only in politics but as we know by virtue of his strong 

commitment and work for and with the United Church.  He 

was active in church work at all levels, being a theological 

student and graduate. 

 

Well after Sandy retired from political life he continued this 

humanitarian work as I've described in a number of areas and 

he was active almost to the day that he died at the age of 90 in 

Toronto, where he lived with his daughter.  He died rather -- I 

shouldn't say unexpectedly  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

because at age 90 that we all should be blessed -- but he died 

relatively unexpectedly inasmuch as his health was basically 

satisfactory at the time. 

 

And I think the quotation of his daughter, Mary Anna Higgins 

with whom he lived in this latter period, was a very good one.  

She said, according to the newspaper reports, referring to 

Sandy: he was very idealistic, not what a lot of people think of 

now when they think of politicians. 

 

And that's true, both the happiness side of the remark and the 

somewhat unhappy side of the remark.  He was a very 

idealistic politician.  I do think, however, that the memory of 

Sandy Nicholson, his presence in this Chamber on this side of 

the House, his presence in the House of Commons, his 

presence with us as ordinary men and women, will instil in 

many of us, remain with many of us, this notion of idealism, in 

the hope that all of us will have a little bit of that spark carrying 

on in us in our deliberations, regardless on what side of the 

political fence we might be. 

 

He will be remembered as a compassionate, caring person who 

put the good of others above all else.  He was a good man. 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, expresses its most sincere sympathy 

with members of the bereaved family. 

 

And by leave of the Assembly, I would move, seconded by the 

Hon. Leader of the Opposition: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

I'll not repeat the balance of the motion, Mr. Speaker, with the 

consent of you and the House, because I've covered them off in 

the main thrust of my remarks. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Estevan.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise on this 

occasion to make remarks of a very personal nature in 

connection with Sandy Nicholson. 

 

It was my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to have known Sandy 

Nicholson for all of my life.  My family lived in his 

constituency of Mackenzie which he was proud to represent, as 

my leader has recounted, from 1945 to 1949, and again from 

1953 to 1958.  My father was involved in every one of Sandy's 

campaigns for the Mackenzie constituency as his business 

manager, we would now call him, Mr. Speaker.  And I recall 

Sandy coming in and out of our lives on many, many 

occasions. 

 

I have said in this House previously, Mr. Speaker, that I grew 

up on the Sturgis co-op farm.  Sandy Nicholson was a founding 

member of that farm, and lived as a neighbour of mine through 

all of the years in which he was able to farm.  The co-op farm 

started about the same time that 

Sandy was elected -- the election was shortly after the 

formation of the farm -- so he was on a leave of absence in the 

first years of the co-op.  But from 1949 until 1953 he was an 

active farmer.  And my youth was filled with Sandy 

Nicholson's influence and I believe that I'm a better person as a 

result of it. 

 

Sandy was a remarkable human being.  At that time in the 

CCF, Mr. Speaker, we had as a motto:  humanity first -- 

humanity first.  And for Sandy that was a creed by which he 

lived every day of his life.  This was, Mr. Speaker, the least 

selfish human being that I have ever met.  This man would do 

anything for anybody who needed help.  Sandy was always 

there, and his many acts of kindness and generosity to his 

neighbours, to his friends, and to people whom he didn't know 

at all, are legendary in the Sturgis-Preeceville-Canora area of 

Saskatchewan, and indeed in Hudson Bay where he began his 

career as a minister.  He had a social conscience that was . . . it 

just totally consumed his being.  The best example of a person 

with a social conscience that it has been my pleasure to know. 

 

He had a deep aversion to war.  I remember him speaking in 

the early days in the House of Commons, by reading Hansard 

of the House of Commons, and one of Sandy's pet themes was 

the enormous cost of maintaining a military in Canada after the 

threat of war in Europe had been settled by the end of the 

Second World War.  And I remember reading about him saying 

in the House that the cost of training a pilot for an aircraft was, 

I think it was then $46,000 or something which would maybe 

buy the uniform and the paraphernalia that a pilot wears when 

he gets in a plane now, but at that time it was a lot of money. 

 

Sandy made the point, the obvious point that how many hungry 

kids could you feed with $46,000; how much good could you 

do to the needy people in this country with that amount of 

money.  And that of course is a familiar theme for anyone who 

is concerned about social issues, and one that Sandy struck 

with real conviction in the period in which he was in 

parliament from 1945 to 1949. 

 

This was a man of enormous kindness and enormous 

generosity, enormous commitment to his fellow human beings, 

and a person that I will remember all of my life. 

 

He died, as has been noted by my leader, on October 12 during 

the election campaign.  And I was devastated by the news.  I 

was unable to go to Toronto for the memorial service, but I 

grieved with the family and I continue to grieve on this 

occasion, having heard my leader describe the life of this man, 

and having thought about him in the terms that I have just used 

in making my remarks to this House. 

 

I want to convey, on behalf of myself and my mother and my 

wife, my sincere condolences to the family, to Marian, to Ruth, 

Mary Anna, and Alexander.  And I want them to know how 

much I admired and how much I will miss their husband and 

father, Sandy Nicholson. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to share 

a few brief remarks and express my condolences.  Although I 

never knew Sandy Nicholson personally, in 

  



28 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

some of the reading that I've done and some of the people in 

my constituency that I've talked to, I feel as if I almost know 

the man, both because of his experience as a clergyman who is 

a legislator and because of some of the stories that I've been 

told. 

 

I've been told that Sandy was a prince of a man, a paragon of 

virtue and of goodness, as we've heard earlier, always 

concentrating on those who are less fortunate in society. 

 

One constituent told me that there was never any question as to 

whose side Sandy Nicholson was on.  He was always and 

consistently on the side of people without power, people who 

were destitute and disadvantaged, and that's who Sandy 

Nicholson cared about. 

 

He was for ever fighting for the underdog, one constituent told 

me.  And it's really not so surprising that that should be the 

case when one considers the guiding principle behind Sandy's 

life both as a United Church clergyman and as a member of the 

legislature. 

 

Indeed it was a constituent who had sat through some of the 

church services that Sandy conducted at Blighty School in the 

Carragana district that told me there was always in his 

messages, whether it was a sermon or a political speech, the 

theme of love for one's neighbour; of the necessity, the moral 

imperative of helping other people, and the message that we are 

our brother and our sister's keepers. 

 

And so it's no accident then, it seems to me, that when Mr. 

Nicholson was elected to this legislature provincially he was 

made minister of Social Services because of this faith 

commitment that he carried through life. 

 

I was told by a constituent that he and his wife Marian were 

literally the kinds of people who give the shirt off their backs to 

people in need.  The truth of this is made apparent in the 

biography of Sandy's life written by Betty Dyck about three 

years ago.  The biography is called, Running to Beat Hell.  

And I'd just like to quote if I may, Mr. Speaker, a very brief 

passage from his book that I think characterizes the man's life.  

And I quote: 

 

 Sandy was not merely a man of many words, but also one 

who acted on his convictions.  Mrs. Hawke, wife of the 

lumberyard owner, wrote:  "Sandy Nicholson, as our first 

United church parson with his young wife . . . to better 

appreciate the position of those unfortunate people during the 

dreadful depression days . . . voluntarily lived on a relief 

allowance for one month.  Their diet ran heavily to porridge 

and potatoes.  To remedy these conditions, he sought a larger 

sphere of influence and entered politics.  The daughter of Bill 

Morgan, the ferry operator at the Red Deer River in the 

1930s, remembered stories about Sandy returning home from 

visits to outlying areas in his stocking feet, more than once.  

He had encountered a homesteader who needed boots, and he 

left his (to give his) for the man.  The social gospel, towards 

which Sandy gravitated, required a concrete response to 

human needs. 

 

(1645) 

And there are stories over and over again in this book of 

Sandy's response and concern for human need -- the clothing 

he brought to people, of the cow he brought to a destitute 

family, of the fact that he would call on his parishioners in 

those days not at meal times because he was convinced that he 

would be taking food from their table when they couldn't afford 

it, so he himself would go hungry.  Throughout the day he'd 

leave the house in the morning and apparently go hungry until 

the evening when he'd get back home, simply because he knew 

that most families had no food to spare themselves.  He wrote: 

I usually carried a few chocolate bars in order to pass up noon 

meals.  I would make a lot of calls in the morning but walked 

between 10 and 1 p.m.  By the time I showed up, people 

assumed I had eaten.  End quote. 

 

And Sandy was content to have people make that assumption.  

And I say, what a model for us who are in this legislature here 

today, to be concerned about the needs of others and not 

serving ourselves; to be ministering, whether it's out of faith 

conviction or whether it's out of a conviction for public service. 

 

I'm told by a constituent that Sandy . . . two different 

constituents actually, who remembered Sandy's defence of 

people who are on welfare.  At a time when there was a lot of 

concern in public about people abusing welfare, Sandy, as 

minister of social welfare and rehabilitation, got up and gave a 

stirring defence of people in need.  And this kind of defence of 

the most defenceless in society, of the poor and of the needy, 

this kind of advocacy is clearly what characterized the life of 

Sandy Nicholson and what we as legislators today owe the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so it's entirely appropriate that today we publicly express, 

as this motion does, our appreciation for the contribution that 

Sandy Nicholson made to his church and his community and 

this province and the country.  And that we ourselves renew 

our efforts to care for those who are least fortunate among us. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  On 

behalf of the opposition I would like to make a few remarks for 

Alexander Nicholson at this time.  Although as the previous 

speaker I have not known the gentleman personally, I feel that 

after listening to the previous three speakers I have acquired a 

lot of insight into the man and certainly he must have been a 

great individual. 

 

And at times like this, Mr. Speaker, it is always with sadness 

that we mark the occasion of the passing of former members of 

this legislature.  But we do take time to pass what are referred 

to as condolence motions because of the valuable contributions 

that these individuals have made in giving part of their life to 

the service of the people and performance of our democratic 

responsibilities. 

 

And by all accounts as we have heard so far, Alexander -- or if 

I may be permitted to call him Sandy as others have done -- 

Nicholson served his community and his province well both in 

and out of the Assembly and in and out of government.  And 

that is something to be remembered, and that is something I'm 

sure that all the 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

citizens of Saskatchewan are grateful for. 

 

We on the opposition side want to join all hon. members of this 

Assembly in expressing our condolences to the family. 

 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, the one thought that I want to add 

perhaps to the discussion this afternoon is that often one thing 

gets overlooked in this rush of public life, and that is of the 

families of the members, that the families often have made as 

great a sacrifice as perhaps the member themself, his or herself.  

So many times mom and dad are not home, and I think all the 

members in the legislature can attest to that at this moment. 

 

Here we are again.  We're not home because we're out working 

in Regina, or we're not home because we're working out in the 

constituency.  And certainly the sacrifice of families, I think at 

this time, should also be recognized.  So, so often the needs of 

the spouse and the kids have come in second to the needs of the 

Assembly, the government, the party, and hopefully the people 

themselves. 

 

So in expressing our gratitude for the life and the work of 

Sandy Nicholson, let me also thank his family for the sacrifices 

that they most surely must have made in order that his public 

work could go on.  Thank you for this opportunity to say a few 

words on behalf of Sandy Nicholson, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to add 

just a very brief word of condolences.  I of course did not know 

Sandy Nicholson, but part of my constituency, which my 

present constituency encompasses part of Sandy's old 

Mackenzie constituency . . . I've heard many stories of Sandy 

Nicholson campaigning by horse and by foot, widely respected.  

There was never any doubt, I think, about his motive as to 

reason for being in public life and for staying there.  It was 

totally unselfish, and that is well understood in the 

constituency, and he is widely and truly respected.  I would like 

to add my word of condolences. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise on this occasion to 

add my tribute to the memory of Sandy Nicholson and to 

acknowledge his positive influence on my life with gratitude. 

 

We lived at the end of what was fondly known as a road in 

those days, and Sandy Nicholson, as the member for 

Mackenzie at the same time as the late John Brockelbank was 

the member for Kelsey, used to come on foot to visit us.  And 

we always talked about the occasion when Sandy and Brock 

would come. 

 

And it was the end of the road so they would often stay 

overnight and stay up talking with my father until the coal oil 

lamp burned dry, about what some possible solutions to social 

problems might be.  We didn't have access to a library, and on 

many occasions Sandy Nicholson used to bring a cloth bag of 

books and leave them for us to read. 

 

I also remember occasions when he used to come to what was 

then the CCYM (Co-operative Commonwealth Youth 

Movement) camp at Crystal Lake.  He always had time for 

young people. 

 

I just would want his family to know that there are many 

people in Saskatchewan who remember Sandy Nicholson with 

the same kind of love and respect that he had for all his fellow 

travellers of all ages. 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- A few brief words, Mr. Speaker.  Many of the 

constituents of Kelsey-Tisdale knew Mr. Nicholson very well 

from his time at Hudson Bay Junction.  This is where his career 

as minister began and this is where many of his good deeds 

took place. 

 

On behalf of the constituents of Kelsey-Tisdale I would like to 

offer their sincere condolences to the Nicholson family. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I require leave of the Assembly to 

introduce another motion of condolence. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I will again move the motion at the conclusion of my 

remarks.  This pertains to the passing of a former member, Dan 

Daniels.  And the motion will read: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of the Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and the province. 

 

 Daniel Zederayko Daniels, Dan Daniels, who died in 

Canora on November 11, 1991, was a member of this 

legislature representing the constituency of Pelly from 1944 

to 1948. 

 

 Dan Daniels was born November 8, 1907, near Gorlitz where 

he attended the Ukraina School before going on to Canora to 

receive his primary education.  He then received his high 

school diploma from Yorkton Collegiate and then attended 

what was then called the Normal School in Regina. 

 

 His career as a teacher began in 1929 and lasted until 1937, 

the year that he married Kathleen or Kay Franko of 

Buchanan, Saskatchewan.  Throughout his career as a teacher 

Dan Daniels remained and taught in rural Saskatchewan 

teaching at Annak, Vionne, Byblo, and Black Poplar Schools. 

 

 Dan Daniels was a devoted Christian with a special interest -- 

and we've heard of this in our earlier condolences with 

respect to Sandy Nicholson -- with a special interest in the 

social gospel movement.  And later he became an elder in the 

Canora United Church. 

 

 During the 1930s, Mr. Daniels became involved with the 

CCF and in 1944 successfully contested the Pelly 

constituency and became the MLA for 

  



30 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

 Pelly.  As a member he took an active interest in all 

constituency matters but in particular on matters pertaining to 

health. 

 

 In the 1948 general election Dan Daniels lost the Pelly seat 

but did not lose his interest in politics.  He was active in the 

CCF and the NDP.  He was active in politics at another level, 

serving as the mayor of Canora between 1952 and 1958. 

 

 Dan Daniels had many community interests.  As well as 

running a store in Canora, being a small-business person, he 

was involved with a local credit union, the Kiwanis club, and 

also served as president of the Canora Union Hospital.  In his 

later years, he served as vice-president of the Saskatchewan 

seniors' association. 

 

Now as I've said, Mr. Speaker, Dan Daniels died suddenly in 

the early hours of November 11 at the age of 84 at the Canora 

Union Hospital, the institution at which he served so ably as 

president for such a long period of time. 

 

He is survived by his wife Kay and three children, Jean, Luba, 

and Doug, and his sister Mary Yuzik of Gorlitz, plus five 

grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. 

 

Now much has been said about the social gospel movement 

being able to translate to the beliefs of Christianity to the 

temporal real world.  And Dan was a pioneer in the 

Saskatchewan context of the social gospel since his early days 

staying at the Hartley House while at Normal School at 

Yorkton, a teacher at several schools. 

 

As I say, he campaigned vigorously for the CCF using his 

bilingual skills in both English and Ukrainian in many 

elections. 

 

I might add that in my early associations with Dan Daniels -- 

again it's hard to believe, I know, given my relatively few years 

in politics -- but I actually do remember Dan when he was so 

eloquent in his campaigning. 

 

(1700) 

 

Dan and the former minister of some prominence in 

Canadian-Saskatchewan history, Alex Kuziak, were the type of 

speakers who could start off speaking in English and then in 

mid-sentence seize a Ukrainian word and complete the 

sentence in Ukrainian and go for three or four sentences before 

coming back to English and seemingly not missing a beat as to 

the point of a thought or even the grammar.  And not only was 

this effective but it was extremely entertaining -- and to use 

these skills working tirelessly on behalf of the principles of the 

CCF and this idea of the social gospel. 

 

Dan and Kay's home was a drop-in centre for friends like 

Myron Feeley; A.M. Sandy Nicholson, the person we've just 

honoured; Jim Wright; and of course T.C. (Tommy) Douglas.  

And this group, amongst others, the Feeleys, and Steve 

Cardinal, really were the backbone, both in terms of 

organization and in terms of the intellectual thought which 

gave rise to the power and the political 

strength of the CCF in the Canora-Pelly area.  Some refer to it 

affectionately as red square. 

 

It was these people who travelled it all the way from Hudson 

Bay down to this community with their connections of church 

and community, their intellectualism, their devotion to social 

gospel, and the ideals who promoted young people, even 

people as young as my colleague, the Minister of Justice back 

of me, to get involved -- and the member who is now the 

Minister of Education -- into political life.  Their influence was 

omnipresent.  It was everywhere. 

 

And the discussions, although clearly I was not there, but 

having been told of them by people like Sandy and Dan 

Daniels and Tommy Douglas, the discussions of those groups 

were -- how should I describe it -- invigorating, to put it mildly; 

certainly very heated and very lengthy as they debated issues of 

health and social justice and fiscal responsibility and what the 

social gospel really meant to Saskatchewan and to Canada. 

 

He served with a health commission to reform the overcrowded 

mental hospitals inherited in 1944 and dealing with the TB 

(tuberculosis) sanatorium.  As I've said, in the 1950s he served 

as mayor of Canora, elder of the United Church for over 50 

years, and a Sunday school superintendent for 17 years. 

 

Dan and his wife Kay were very active, ever active in civic 

affairs, the church, music, Parkland community college, senior 

citizens' organizations -- in fact Dan was president of the 

Saskatchewan Seniors Association. 

 

Now whenever time permitted, I would make a special effort of 

visiting Dan, especially in his latter months and years, as he 

was in the seniors' home suffering from a debilitating illness -- 

an illness which made it difficult for him to get around but, I 

can tell you, never impaired his lucid thoughts and his blunt 

conversation.  I remember a particular visit in his apartment at 

the home prior to the election which, being very blunt about it 

and without sounding too maudlin, gave me encouragement to 

continue on, something which I needed on that particular date. 

 

Dan was very active in politics right up to the date of this last 

election.  He died at the age of 84, but he was a scrutineer in 

the lodge's electoral poll, notwithstanding his considerable 

physical disabilities, in the recent provincial election.  And I 

know that -- and quite understandably -- he was most pleased 

to see the revival, as I would describe it, and the defence of so 

many of the things that he and his wife and family worked so 

hard and what made his life such a full and productive one. 

 

As I say, he was lucid . . . and one last reminiscence, if I might 

before I take my place, Mr. Speaker.  As has been pointed out 

by my colleague, the Minister of Justice -- no, I think it perhaps 

was the Minister of Education -- with respect to A.M. Sandy 

Nicholson, the CCF and now the NDP has a tradition of every 

summer having a youth camp of young men and women carry 

on a weekend of debating the big issues and some of the small 

issues at Crystal Lake. 

  



December 3, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

And that area, which is in the Canora, Pelly constituency area, 

has been built up by the people like Dan Daniels and A.M. 

Sandy Nicholson.  There's a hall for the youth, there's some 

property which is cottage property and there they are.  The 

youth meet every summer and they debate these big issues. 

 

One of the things that I . . . Nicholson Hall in fact is the place 

that my colleague from Fairview reminds me.  One of the 

things that I didn't know of -- I should have -- is the tradition of 

the Leader of the CCF, NDP to go to this youth seminar every 

summer.  You have to do it.  I thought that was okay.  What 

you have to do is take part in a bit of a discussion and then take 

part in a question and answer seminar period. 

 

That all went very fine at Crystal Lake which is a beautiful lake 

by the way, until unexpectedly and for me totally unexpectedly, 

you are swept up by -- in my case -- many young students, 

lifted up, clothed fully and thrown into this Crystal Lake, shoes 

and all.  This was the practice which goes all the back . . I don't 

know how far back.  I can hardly imagine them doing this to 

Tommy Douglas, but I'm told that T.C. Douglas did it as well. 

 

I commend it to the Leader of the Liberal Party as an 

invigorating experience when you get involved dealing with 

the young Liberals.  It is a chance to challenge your ideas 

intellectually and keep them relevant, and also a chance to 

maintain a sort of a youthful spirit and approach to these very 

important issues which we are talking about. 

 

Dan, as I say, was lucid and active right to the end of his life.  

He gave the opening address at the Canora multicultural 

festival colours this summer and his wife and he acted as the 

official host and hostess for this important event. 

 

Well in my judgement, Dan Daniels was like Sandy Nicholson, 

a man of vision -- one of those rare individuals who works so 

tirelessly to better his community and our community called 

Saskatchewan.  All of us owe a debt of gratitude to him and the 

men and women who served with him in the legislature, most 

notably because of their vision of publicly funded, quality 

health care which was a particular passion of Dan's, but also 

because that vision of neighbour helping neighbour was 

reflected in all that they did, all that they spoke about, and all 

that they did. 

 

And though he only served for a relatively short period in this 

legislature -- four years -- his contribution far outlasts and 

outweighs the short four years that he had here in this 

Chamber. 

 

He was a Ukrainian Canadian.  He was a person who was an 

advocate of the social gospel.  He was a humanitarian.  He was 

a person who proves again to me and to all of us that one 

person can indeed make a profound and lasting difference to 

improving the quality of life for all of us. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in recording its own deep sense of loss 

and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its sincere sympathy 

to the members of the bereaved family of Dan Daniels, 

especially Kay, wife and children. 

And I'd like to move, seconded by the Opposition House 

Leader, the member from Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and expresses 

its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 

community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 

And with a leave of you, sir, Mr. Speaker, and the members of 

the House, not repeat the balance of the motion.  I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too want 

to join with the Premier and other members of the House and 

express some condolences to the Daniels family.  Even though 

I did not know Mr. Daniels personally, I can appreciate his 

contributions to Saskatchewan.  Certainly sitting here this 

afternoon and hearing other members reminisce, it's like sitting 

down and receiving a history lesson. 

 

We had a tea in our community for a lady who's worked over 

the years in politics, just the other day, and there again 90 years 

old.  It's interesting sometimes to sit down and just hear from 

other members as they espouse or just to let us know what 

members have done over the years, especially when individuals 

give of their time to get involved in community life and in 

politics. 

 

Everyone in this Assembly, those who have been elected for 

the first time, will realize that to become involved in public life 

is very demanding, and at times certainly you do give up a lot 

that, as the Premier has reiterated, there are some enjoyable 

moments too, even if it means being dunked in Crystal Lake. 

 

Not knowing a person doesn't necessarily mean that we can't 

express our condolences and show our appreciation. 

 

The Daniels family has, through Daniel, made the sacrifices of 

time and spirit that are necessary when one chooses to serve 

one's community and one's province.  And I understand that 

Mr. Daniels led a varied and a rich life.  I know that he 

experienced much of that life in this province, experienced 

what this province is all about, from running a small business 

to serving in this Assembly.  And those are things that mark a 

life as worthwhile and commendable. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, I recognize the 

loss of the people in the province in the passing of Dan 

Daniels, and I express our condolences to his family at this 

time.  Mr. Speaker, it's my privilege to express condolences on 

behalf of the opposition to the members of the Daniels family. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to add 

my condolences to the family and friends of Dan Daniels.  As 

the Premier has pointed out, Mr. Daniels worked in my 

campaign.  I think it's indicative of his life and his dedication 

that at 84 years old and in poor physical health he was still 

active and concerned about 

  



32 Saskatchewan Hansard December 3, 1991 

the community around him and life in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  He did what he could. 

 

His wife Kay worked very hard in the campaign.  And when I 

said, "is Dan feeling neglected because you're not home?" she 

said "no, Dan understands and he's totally behind me and wants 

to contribute what he can to this campaign."  And I think that's 

indicative of a commitment to public life and a total 

unselfishness that is seldom seen.  And I would like to add my 

condolences. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise again 

because again as in the case of Mr. Nicholson, I have known 

the Daniels family and Dan Daniels all of my life.  They were 

themselves close friends, Mr. Nicholson and Mr. Daniels.  And 

in the wonderful hothouse of Canora politics during the '50s 

and '60s and on into the '70s, Dan Daniels was very much right 

in the centre and remained so actually until his death. 

 

My leader mentioned the occasion of being dunked in Crystal 

Lake.  And Dan Daniels had heard that my leader would be 

there that day and he and his wife had drove out and sat there 

and Dan couldn't get out of the car because of ill health, but he 

rolled down the windows and he heard the exchange between 

my leader and the students who were there. 

 

That probably marked about the 10,000th time that Dan 

Daniels had been to the old CCF grounds at Crystal Lake.  My 

memories of that place and my memories of Dan Daniels are 

inextricably linked and I will remember him all of my life as 

well as Mr. Nicholson.  I want to pass on my personal 

condolences to his wife, Kay, and to his family.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I did 

not have the pleasure of knowing Mr. Daniels, but I have taken 

the liberty of talking to some of my constituents who were also 

his constituents from 1944 to 1948. 

 

Their fond memories of him as a man who served, who was a 

devoted Christian and throughout his life always concerned 

about his fellow man.  As an MLA for Pelly he was known for 

his hard work and dedication to serving the people of his 

constituency. 

 

On behalf of myself and the constituents of Pelly, I would like 

to offer my condolences to his wife, Kathleen, and their family. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move, 

seconded by the Opposition House Leader, the member from 

Rosthern, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the resolutions just passed, together with the transcripts 

of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 

communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of the 

Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:16 p.m. 

 


