




















































Hansard: December 20, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 403 

 December 20, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

morning to introduce to you and to members of this Assembly 

a very special guest to Saskatchewan. 
 

I'd like to introduce to you an actress who is now appearing in 

the play at the Globe Theatre entitled The Other Side of the 

Pole.  Her name is Ms. Viviana Zarrillo. She's seated in your 

gallery, and I'd ask all members to please join with me in 

welcoming her this morning. And I hope that she enjoys her 

stay here.  She's going to be appearing in this play until 

December 21.  Members who have not seen it should . . . I'd 

encourage them to please visit this Globe Theatre and watch 

this very, very good play.  And also I'd like to say that 

members who have seen the play would attest to the fact that it 

is a very worthwhile play both for adults and for children.  So 

please join with me in welcoming Ms. Zarrillo. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in welcoming our member 

from Yorkton, our MP (Member of Parliament) sitting in the 

back gallery here on the government side and welcome him to 

the Assembly today.  And I want to congratulate and recognize 

him for the work that he's been doing for the Saskatchewan 

farmers, as well as his role he played in the recent trek to 

Ottawa. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

First Ministers' Meeting Agenda 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Deputy Premier in the absence of the Premier.  Mr. 

Minister, looking through this morning's Leader-Post I notice 

that five premiers across Canada came forward with specific 

proposals to help the economy of Canada.  I also notice that 

besides finding his luggage, having lunch, that our Premier 

suggested that they have lunch again. 

 

I would wonder, sir, if you would now today be prepared to 

table any proposals or initiatives or correspondence, anything 

at all, that the Premier of this province had to offer to the 

collective group and for the collective good of Canada's 

economy yesterday. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member's question, the Premier will be able to report when he 

returns to the House.  And I know that he will be doing that and 

I invite the member to wait for that and he'll get a more 

substantive report. 

 

But I want to assure the member that those issues of concern to 

Saskatchewan in the context of the Canadian 

situation were raised by the Premier.  He talked at the meeting 

about the farm income crisis that the farm producers of this 

province face.  He talked about an industrial strategy that is 

needed in Canada to create jobs.  He talked about the need for 

research and development and changes in the education system 

so we can prepare our people for building the economy as well 

as a number of issues.  There were a wide range of issues 

discussed.  It was a time for sharing of ideas. 

 

The Premier took the strong position that there needs to be a 

more substantive meeting with preparatory work prepared so 

that some actual decisions will be made.  And hopefully that 

will happen soon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the minister.  Mr. Minister, it 

was very obvious that other premiers went to this meeting, 

given the state of the Canadian economy, with concrete 

proposals which they were willing to put before their provinces 

and indeed, sir, put before the Canadian people; that they were 

willing to go to that particular conference with concrete ideas. 

 

Our premier seems to lack in the ideas these days.  Given that 

agriculture is so important, sir, if he is willing to talk about this 

amongst premiers, other premiers who are willing to make it 

public, why will you not, sir, today table these discussions or 

these new ideas in agriculture which your Premier took to this 

meeting so that the public of Saskatchewan know in this crisis 

that we have some hope? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- One of the difficulty with this 

meeting that has just occurred yesterday, Mr. Speaker, is that 

the Prime Minister did not even have an agenda.  And that's 

understandable in that there was a very short notice.  We would 

have preferred that this meeting be in the early part of January 

so that there could be a development of a specific agenda 

addressing specific topics, but faced with a situation that that 

we are faced . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've taken note already and the 

member from Rosthern has interjected now five times in the 

first few minutes.  If this is going to continue, we're not going 

to have a very successful question period. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- All we want is an answer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Are you challenging the Chair? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Of course not. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, as I was 

indicating, that faced with the circumstances that we were 

faced, we welcomed this meeting because it was the beginning 

of a dialogue which we have been sorely lacking in Canada for 

the last 18 months. 

  



404 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

The Premier did indicate again that there needs to be a cash 

injection for our farming community in Saskatchewan.  He did 

so when he went with the farmers on the trek to Ottawa some 

weeks ago.  He indicated that we are going to make a priority 

to renegotiate the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

program so that the federal government takes more of the 

responsibility . . . not to have . . .  We raised some concerns 

about the off-loading that the federal government has been 

off-loading on the provinces, increasing the costs and trying to 

solve its deficit problem on the back of the provinces. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, yesterday in this House the Minister of 

Agriculture said that he did not give any concrete proposals to 

the Premier to take to Ottawa.  You say today, sir, that the 

Premier had proposals to take to Ottawa.  Other premiers are 

on the record as saying, yes I have concrete proposals. 

 

Mr. Minister, if your Premier had these concrete proposals, 

because he's carrying the ball on agriculture because that 

minister hasn't got anything concrete to give him, why won't 

you tell the people of Saskatchewan what they are.  Let us 

know.  Let farmers know that as we go into this Christmas 

period that there is hope, that there will be money, that you 

have not been totally bankrupt and negligent in your duty, sir.  

Will you answer that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I wish, Mr. Speaker, that the 

member would listen.  I just outlined him some of the issues 

that the Premier raised when he was meeting with the Prime 

Minister for the brief luncheon meeting. 

 

But I need to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the other point that 

the Premier made very emphatically is that a luncheon meeting 

can only begin to identify those things that need to be discussed 

in a more substantive way after there is some preparatory work 

that is done.  I think he achieved a success in that because the 

Prime Minister has indicated that there will be a follow-up 

meeting.  Our only hope is that after the follow-up meeting 

there will still be a commitment by the federal government to 

include any of the decisions that are made in the forthcoming 

federal budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Well it seems, Mr. Minister, that lunch was good because he'd 

like to go back and have lunch again. 

 

But other than that, Mr. Minister, I see by the newspaper 

reports that the Government of Ontario, a New Democratic 

government, has said that they will have put forward a proposal 

on RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan).  Would the 

minister today be willing to tell the House if he agrees with that 

proposal.  Did his Premier agree with that proposal, the RRSP 

proposal, so that home owners, first-time home owners in this 

province might know that they at least have some support from 

their Premier on somebody else's idea? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That is a 

proposal that has some interest and we will obviously look at it.  

It is not simply a matter of having a proposal brought to a table 

and accepting it or not accepting it.  We don't reject it; we think 

that it has some possibilities.  We have to consider a number of 

factors.  We have to consider what kind of benefit will it have 

in Saskatchewan.  Since it's for first-time home buyers, you 

have to ask whether first-time home buyers have got any or 

enough RRSPs to make a difference to them.  That is a very 

significant question. 

 

We will research all that, we will analyse it.  And at the 

follow-up meeting, which is going to be happening early in the 

new year, we will then be in a position to make a further more 

substantive statement at that meeting so that the first ministers 

can then deal with these kinds of matters with the kind of 

information that they should have in order that they can make a 

decision. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Would the minister then care to comment upon Mr. 

Getty's proposal to reduce general income tax by 1 per cent?  

And do you know, sir, did our Premier support that particular 

proposal at the table?  Did he support that very concrete 

suggestion made by another Premier in public in the open to 

stimulate the Canadian economy?  Did he do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to, first of all, tell the 

member that this province has already taken a major initiative 

on the tax side by removing the provincial sales tax. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, we did not wait for 

the first ministers' meeting to take place in Ottawa to take that 

initiative which is helping to kick-start our economy, which 

saved 7,500 jobs which would have been eliminated if that 

policy of the former government had stayed in place.  And all I 

can say to the member opposite is I hope that he will stand up 

in the House and support that Bill when it comes up for debate 

later today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Minister, given that you have some definite 

views on what other premiers have put forward on the 

Canadian economy, would you now be prepared to tell this 

House what other premiers thought of our Premier's ideas, and 

did they support, Mr. Minister, did they support our Premier's 

proposals on agriculture?  I don't see it reported in the 

newspaper, but perhaps in talking with him privately you 

would know whether he had general support on those proposals 

which he put forward yesterday.  Would you tell the House that 

please, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well it is clearly reported in  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

the press and it was clearly an impression I got when I was at 

the Finance ministers' meeting about a week ago that there is 

overwhelming support on the part of all premiers for a program 

to provide an economic recovery for Canada.  That is 

undeniable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the nature of the discussions were at the luncheon table 

where only the first ministers attended -- not even officials, I 

understand -- I can't report to this House.  So I find that the 

member's question is a little difficult and a little strange in the 

circumstances. 

 

I can assure the member when the Premier returns he'll be in a 

position to give a pretty specific report based on the things that 

happened at that luncheon meeting, and then the member will 

be informed, as he desires to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question to the same minister.  Mr. 

Minister, it is very obvious that other premiers went to this 

conference prepared to lay concrete proposals and ideas upon 

the table.  It is very obvious, sir, from the questioning 

yesterday and again today that our Premier took no such ideas. 

 

And I say to you, sir, and my question is: given that over half 

the agricultural land in Canada is in this province, given that 

agriculture is still the number one industry in our province, 

would you not say, sir, that it is both morally and fiscally 

bankrupt not to take ideas to a conference of first ministers on 

the economy when your number one industry is at stake, and 

you are not willing to tell the public of Saskatchewan what 

those ideas were or what feedback that the minister got in 

Ottawa? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

should know that it was that group of members, when they 

were in the government, who bankrupted the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- By the kind of waste and 

mismanagement that took place when they were in power.  But 

in response directly to the member's question, I just want to say 

this:  I think that going to the first ministers' meeting and 

urging the federal government to act on the needed cash 

injection to farm producer is a positive recommendation.  I 

think that raising the question of the need to renegotiate the 

farm support programs like GRIP and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) is a very important issue to raise. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that talking to the federal government and 

the Prime Minister about doing away with the two-price system 

for wheat but doing away with the interest-free cash advances 

which the members opposite supported when they were on the 

government side of the House, is an important initiative.  The 

Premier of this province has done that in the farm trek to 

Ottawa some weeks ago; he did it yesterday; he did it with the 

support of farmers.  The members opposite refused to go.  We 

have taken some action; the members opposite have 

refused to take part in it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, our Premier was recently quoted as saying that he 

planned to talk about constitutional issues during the night-time 

hours while he was at this meeting.  Now I really don't care 

what he does at night-time hours without his luggage, Mr. 

Minister.  But I would like you to tell the House today whether 

our Premier was successful or not in bartering our province's 

support for the constitution for 3 or $4 an acre at least for our 

farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know 

whether the issue of the constitution came up at this closed 

meeting of the first ministers.  I do know that the Premier of 

Saskatchewan emphatically and forcefully put forward the 

proposition that the federal government has some responsibility 

in deciding what it is the federal government believes should 

be the future of a very fundamental industry in this country, 

and that is agriculture. 

 

And the Premier went there and made the proposals on the cash 

injection, made a proposal on the need to renegotiate GRIP, 

raised all of the issues involved with agriculture, because we 

think it's an important issue that needs to be addressed at the 

first ministers' meeting, at this meeting yesterday and the next 

one, because the future of agriculture is not only important to 

Saskatchewan, it's also important to all of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Foreclosure Moratorium 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  And it relates to 

foreclosures -- moratorium on farm foreclosures.  Mr. Speaker, 

the minister has told this House and told the people of 

Saskatchewan several times in this last few weeks that he's 

been . . . that he has initiated discussions with the lenders on 

farm foreclosures and how would it work.  I don't know why, 

Mr. Speaker, I don't know why that he would have to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the Government House 

Leader and the member from Regina Churchill Downs not to 

interrupt when the member from Arm River is trying to ask a 

question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

don't know why you'd have to ask the bankers and lending 

institutions how a moratorium would work when you very 

clearly have stated that you have been asking farmers how it 

would work for them the last nine and a half years, but 

nevertheless you did. 

 

So my question is: will you give this House an update on those 

negotiations and specifically, will he tell us, the farmers and 

lending institutions, whether this moratorium will be a short 

moratorium or a long moratorium or no 

  



406 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

moratorium at all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I will give you an update to the extent that 

it's practical to do that with respect to negotiations.  We've met 

with the Farm Credit Corporation, with all of the independent 

financial institutions in Saskatchewan, and with the credit 

unions.  And the discussions are ongoing and they're ongoing 

in the spirit that, in order to have the best solutions to a very 

tough crisis in Saskatchewan, it means all of us have to be in 

there together.  And we have to have a co-operative spirit about 

the way we resolve the long-term solutions. 

 

We're working in discussion with farmers and discussion with 

lenders and in discussion with all the parties that are concerned 

with the farm debt question.  And we will announce the results 

of those negotiations when that's appropriate to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

I'm glad that he's telling us now what he's been doing and who 

he's been talking to.  This is the first time he's ever specifically 

mentioned a lender like Farm Credit, etc. 

 

Will the minister, on my supplementary, will the minister stand 

up and update this House, update this House on his 

negotiations with lending agencies on the subject of 

moratoriums and also table all minutes and correspondence 

relating to it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I will at an appropriate time inform 

the House of the proceedings that have occurred, and I'm sure 

you understand that it would be completely inappropriate to do 

that at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I do not understand that it 

would be appropriate.  I think you could update us as we go 

along.  Anyway a new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Thousands of farmers are anxious to know whether this 

anticipated moratorium will come early enough to save their 

farms or not.  They're worried out there whether it's going to 

come in time.  Many other farmers though, Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister, want to know whether they will be able to get access 

to operating credit this spring if the private credit dries up as a 

result of legislative moratorium. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I find it interesting that the member 

opposite, Mr. Speaker, chooses to raise, now that I've explained 

that it is necessary to co-operate both sides of the horn of the 

dilemma of that discussion . . . and I appreciate that you 

understand enough of it that you would project both sides of 

that very difficult question.  It's the reason why we're talking 

co-operatively with people in order to get a solution that gives 

both security in the 

short run for those in deep trouble, and access to capital for all 

others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

The minister has made statements that when they come up with 

a moratorium, if they do, that they're going to exempt credit 

unions.  Can you tell me how your negotiations with the credit 

unions is working and if they agree with this, and other bankers 

agree with this; if the farmers agree with this?  Can you tell us 

that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would like the record to show that 

nothing like that was ever said and will not be said.  The 

discussions are ongoing with all the parties jointly and the 

results of those negotiations will be revealed publicly at a time 

when an agreement is reached. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Another new question to the minister.  

Many farmers are telling us this.  The minister announced his 

threat to impose a moratorium -- be it right or be it wrong.  And 

if lending agencies . . . and they're also saying if lending 

agencies do not co-operate . . . in order to clean this up, Mr. 

Speaker, to clean up their books, many agencies are foreclosing 

right now on farmers.  They're doing it just very instantly.  

They're hurrying. 

 

So do you not believe, Mr. Minister, that this here threat of a 

moratorium could be having the opposite effect of what you 

intend to do to help farmers, that they're being foreclosed on 

because of your threat daily -- because the banks and the 

agencies are just moving constantly on farmers.  At Christmas 

time . . . with Christmas coming on, Mr. Minister, farmers have 

been foreclosed like never before.  Can you tell us if you agree 

with this or not, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I would like the minister opposite if he 

would at some . . . or the member opposite to at some point 

identify what his real agenda is here.  As I've said repeatedly, I 

have said repeatedly to you today, and I've said it to you 

yesterday, that the negotiations are proceeding in a 

co-operative fashion because we recognize that it's important 

for everybody's interest to be represented in the discussion 

that's sensitive.  We know the pressure that's on farmers.  We 

know that that did not begin today and we know that the 

actions that your government took in playing footsies with the 

federal government only resulted in the extension of the 

problem and it resulted in the fact that it is a crisis now.  You 

called the election late.  We've done everything in our power to 

have the crisis dealt with since then and we will continue to do 

it aggressively. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- A new question to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

I wonder if you really do understand how the acceleration of 

foreclosures is happening every day in this province.  It's 

happening very quickly.  Do you really understand in here, Mr. 

Minister, what's really happening? 

 

And will you stand to your seat, will you stand up, and tell this 

here province of Saskatchewan -- tell the farmers, tell the 

media, tell the Assembly -- whether your party, the NDP (New 

Democratic Party), made a promise at election time that under 

any circumstances the first legislation will be a moratorium on 

farm closures.  Will you tell us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The promise that was made in the election 

campaign was that we would sit down with the lending 

institutions and negotiate both short- and long-term solutions to 

the debt crisis in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Deputy 

Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, you've heard the questions I've 

asked the minister and you've heard his answers that there was 

not a promise for a moratorium on farm foreclosures. 

 

With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just read one 

part of their election policy at election time: short-term or 

long-term moratorium.  New Democrats believe that there 

should be a moratorium on farm foreclosures.  It makes no 

sense for hundreds of families to be driven from their land just 

as programs which could help them turn their situation around 

are being introduced.  A moratorium on foreclosures would be 

introduced within days of a New Democratic government 

taking office. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, will you tell us if this government is 

breaking their promise on a moratorium or are they going to 

keep it?  Whether it's good or not, whether we believe in it or 

not, will you tell us whether they're going to keep that promise?  

Because it's very clear -- it was also in the Leader-Post 

yesterday . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I want to tell you that the promise that was 

made in the election campaign -- and if you want to go look at 

our election literature you can find that out -- was that we 

would sit down with the lending institutions and negotiate 

agreements to the debt crisis. 

 

The first action of our government, one of the first actions of 

our government, was to commit our institution, the ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan) to no 

further legal actions and foreclosures except for a band of 

exceptions that was there to protect the institution.  And we 

acted immediately to do that before the cabinet was sworn in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy 

Premier or whoever wants to answer.  I happened to be, Mr. 

Minister, in the same campaign as you people were in and I 

never heard one word about talking to the lending institutions 

in this government.  It was a promise for a farm debt 

moratorium.  Will you now stand to your feet and say whether 

the promise is being broken or not.  Are you going to break that 

promise or keep it within days? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again I find the actions of the member 

interesting.  Because on one hand he's encouraging an action 

which, on the other hand, he's saying will be destructive to the 

agricultural industry. 

 

What I'm saying is that the promise that was made in the 

election campaign was that we sit down and negotiate with the 

financial institutions both short- and long-term solutions to the 

debt crisis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we get on to the next item of agenda I 

would just like to remind members, I kept track this morning of 

the interruptions either when questions were asked or when 

answers were given.  There were 26 interruptions this morning 

which interfered either with the question asked or with the 

answer given.  And for the edification of one particular 

member, he interrupted 13 times.  I think this is simply 

unacceptable, and in the future will not be tolerated and will be 

dealt with. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move question no. 

28 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 29 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move question no. 

30 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move question no. 

31 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move question no. 

32 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 33 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 34 be converted to motion for return (debatable).  



408 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 35 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move that question no. 36, as well, 

be moved to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move that question no. 37 be 

converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as well, move that 

question no. 38 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that question 

no. 39 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move question no. 

40 be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move that question no. 41, as well, 

be moved to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Extended Sitting Hours 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the 

opportunity to speak to this motion, and I'll speak only briefly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what this motion is intended to do -- and I spoke 

to the Opposition House Leader this morning on this issue -- 

what we would very much like to do here is to allow for the 

opposition, the independent member, as well as the members of 

the Conservative opposition, to give them adequate time to deal 

with the matters on the order paper in a diligent manner 

between now and Christmas Day. 

 

I think that there is an opportunity to finish up the working of 

the House in the next four days by extending hours a bit 

between now and the day of Christmas.  I think it's fair to say 

that we will be in a position to finish up the work of the House.  

Failing that, to work during the period between Christmas and 

New Year's to see if we can't get the work wrapped up that's on 

the order paper by the end of the 

year.  Therefore the motion. And I would ask that all members 

of the Assembly support it. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I have, 

as I've outlined earlier in this discussion, some remarks to make 

regarding the blending of the taxes of the education and health 

tax together with the goods and services tax to make it a little 

bit easier for agriculture to respond, a little easier for business 

to respond.  And I particularly want to talk about it from the 

aspect of how it affects the people of my constituency, but also 

I want to talk today a little bit about how it impacts into the 

accountability of the province of Saskatchewan to deal with 

their revenues and to deal with their expenses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we took a very serious look at how we were 

going to handle all of the work as it related to the development 

of a fiscal, responsible attitude in developing the policies of the 

government in this past two years.  And what we set out to do 

was, Mr. Speaker, to provide a balance between the expenses 

that were being accrued by the government and also by the 

revenue that we needed to have in order to meet the 

requirements that the people wanted to have. 

 

There are a lot of different things that need to be talked about 

in this, Mr. Speaker.  The revenue for the province of 

Saskatchewan . . . it was very important to realize that it was 

based on the need to get a balance between what people were 

prepared to accept as a tax and what people were not prepared 

to accept as a tax.  And we fully understand that there were 

serious concerns raised by individuals in various sectors that 

dealt with problems as it related to an extension of the 

education and health tax. 

 

And the restaurant business was one of them, and we 

consistently said that that was there and we acknowledged it.  

And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that as I went around and 

visited with the restaurateurs, there was a lot of hesitation on 

their part to collect it.  But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that as I 

went around I didn't notice that there was any less people 

eating out.  I didn't notice that there was any less people who 

were not prepared to pay that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, the very fact that a lot of the people who 

were going into those restaurants were agriculture people who 

were getting the benefit of the extension to the goods and 

services tax . . . the harmonization, synchronization, or 

blending, whatever you want to call it, moving the taxes 

together.  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

We've had in this Assembly the Bill presented to make the 

education and health tax go back to what it was prior to the 

spring sitting.  Now, Mr. Speaker, whether you agree with that 

or not, that really I don't think should be the issue that we talk 

about.  The issue we should talk about is whether in fact 

harmonizing the tax and synchronizing it between what the 

federal government can do and what the provincial government 

can do, that's what we should be talking about.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, I think is where I want to begin my discussions today. 

 

The savings to the province of Saskatchewan were $5 million 

as it related to the impact simply on the administration costs 

that E&H (education and health tax) . . . costs in the province 

of Saskatchewan versus combining the two together and 

allowing the federal government to collect the tax and the 

provincial government to audit. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the agreement was reached with the federal 

government to do that.  And it would have saved the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan $5 million in order to get that done.  And I 

think that was one of the things that should have been looked at 

when the members opposite made this promise to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to point out that the promise was made in a nebulous 

kind of a way.  Many people who went to shop, in fact when 

they were buying or were going to buy appliances or things like 

that, they told hardware dealers in my constituency, well we're 

going to wait till October 22 and then buy the goods and 

services.  And the hardware people said no, you're going to pay 

it after.  It's only on those things that had an extension on the 

E&H tax that we're going to have the drop in the 7 per cent. 

 

And I noted that many of them had arguments with their 

customers about what was going to be taken off and what was 

not going to be taken off.  And, Mr. Speaker, there were people 

who even returned goods because they thought they had been 

told that on the 22nd they would be getting the tax taken off, 

when in fact they weren't. 

 

Mr. Speaker, harmonizing, synchronizing, blending, whatever 

you want to call it, the two taxes together has a very specific 

advantage to the people in my constituency.  Mr. Speaker, the 

individuals who are going to benefit or would have benefitted 

the greatest by synchronizing, blending these two taxes 

together, would in fact have been my farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the goods and services tax was implemented in a 

way to reduce the cost of the federal sales tax and allow a more 

systematic way of handling the federal sales tax by making 

goods and services taxable as a part of the role of the federal 

government. 

 

I have people in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, who are 

machinists, for example, who sell products to industry; they 

sell products to agriculture; they sell products partly 

manufactured; they sell products that are not manufactured at 

all, they're simply a raw product.  And the biggest concern that 

these individuals had was that . . . for example, I'll take a steel 

plate that was bought from IPSCO, put into the machinist's 

shop.  If he put a cutting 

torch to it, he had to apply goods and services . . . or a federal 

sales tax to it, he had to apply E&H to it.  If he did not touch it 

then it went out into that customer's hands and no goods and 

services tax or E&H was applied. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the conscious decision on the part of the 

people who provide the service to rural people was that the 

decision had to be made by them.  Later on auditors would 

come and they would say, well you did this to that and 

therefore it's taxable; are you going to pay it up?  Well he had 

not collected it on the basis that as far as the understanding and 

the complexity of all of the things that he had to do, he was 

collecting as far as he deemed that he was supposed to, and yet 

he was cut down afterwards because of an audit that was done.  

But, Mr. Speaker, it frustrated the manufacturer as a part of 

what he had to apply the tax on and what he didn't have to 

apply the tax on. 

 

Another thing that I want to discuss in relation to this is the 

area where the individual is receiving the goods and services 

tax back. And in certain areas many people across this province 

who are not in agriculture have automatically assumed that the 

farmer did not pay any education tax.  And that is totally 

incorrect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmer pays it on hydraulic hoses, he pays it 

on batteries, he pays it on tires, he pays it on antifreeze, he pays 

it on oil, he pays it on a whole lot of things that are part of the 

education tax.  And he has always paid that. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, what we were going to do is he was 

going to get that rebated to him because he was in the process 

of manufacturing food.  In order to have that benefit we were 

going to blend the two taxes together and then that way, Mr. 

Speaker, make him just a little bit more efficient. 

 

(1045) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that when that tax on the 

goods and services tax was able to be made rebatable, the 

individual producers -- and I've talked to many of them -- have 

had a significant amount of tax rebated on that basis.  And the 

blending of the two taxes together would have allowed the 

agriculture people in my constituency to get a tax break. 

 

And I want to point out to you that that tax break is fairly 

significant.  The average probably would be around $2,500 per 

farmer that he would get back on a GST (goods and services 

tax) per year.  And in fact it may be even higher because I 

know that my family is probably going to get pretty close to 

$10,000 back from the federal government on the goods and 

services tax.  And if that was harmonized or blended together, 

they would receive another $10,000 from the very fact that they 

had paid the tax and had traditionally paid the tax and now 

were going to get it back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I pay tax on batteries -- I paid tax on batteries -- 

I've done that for years, and now I would get it back as a part of 

the consumption to produce food as a business in my capacity 

as an agriculture food producer.  Mr. Speaker, I really do 

understand.  The Minister of 

  



410 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

Finance doesn't understand because his philosophy has 

deflected his mind from being involved in making a rational 

decision about this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance yesterday in discussion 

on the matters before the House as it dealt with tabling of Bills, 

I believe, or one of the other Bills, just said to this Assembly 

that there was about a $72 million loss of revenue to the 

treasury because the E&H would be not harmonized or 

synchronized or blended or whatever you want to call it.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, that cost is going to hinge on who, Mr. Speaker?  

It's going to be a lack of a benefit to the farmers in my 

constituency.  It's going to be a benefit that isn't going to be 

there for my small business, and it's not going to be there for 

the manufacturer in processing in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is where it's at.  We have a Finance minister 

who doesn't understand agriculture.  He doesn't know that I pay 

tax on tires, but agriculture people know that I pay tax, that I 

pay it on my truck tires.  I pay it on my tractor tires.  I pay it on 

my batteries.  I pay it on hoses -- all of the things related to 

that.  I pay that on my vehicles.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very 

significant when it comes to the kinds of things that have to be 

done in relation to agriculture. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that there are other areas that need to be 

pointed out.  In the area of comparison of the rebate for 

education and health tax and the goods and services tax, if that 

was synchronized or blended together, Mr. Speaker, in many 

cases the volume of rebate to the farmer would be higher than 

the payment that will be made to that agriculture producer on 

the money that he is getting from the federal government.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that's fairly significant.  In my case 

and in many others, the rebate would be higher than what 

they're going to get from Ottawa. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that's important for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Do you know why I think it's important?  I 

think it's important because people will have the opportunity to 

spend the money at their own discretion.  That's why I think it's 

important. 

 

People can decide whether they're going to spend that rebate 

money on buying more commodities that relate directly to their 

production, or whether they want to buy commodities that 

relate to their home or their involvement in the home.  Those 

are the kinds of things that, Mr. Speaker, are allowing the 

individual the discretion and the capacity to deal with the 

money in his own pocket.  Not letting the government deal 

with it and say, oh we've got a better idea for you, but allowing 

the producer or the farmer to get the benefit of it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that's really the fundamental 

concern that I have about this removal of this harmonization, 

blending, or whatever you want to call it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another area that will be significantly impacted is 

the area of . . . the people who are in livestock industry, Mr. 

Speaker, are going to be impacted on this too.  Traditionally 

what happened when a person bought material from the lumber 

yard for building his corrals, his 

hog barns, his loafing barns, the tax was paid on the building 

materials.  And, Mr. Speaker, that was a significant amount. 

 

Earlier on, before the goods and services tax came on, it was 12 

per cent, Mr. Speaker, that we paid.  So what we as producers 

paid was 12 per cent of the price and then we took another 7 

per cent of that whole volume and we paid tax on that. 

 

So really, Mr. Speaker, we were almost paying 20 per cent tax 

on buying a two by four or buying a bull rail or whatever you 

were buying for use on your farm.  And, Mr. Speaker, 20 per 

cent tax was way too high.  As a matter of fact when they put 

the goods and services tax in, it lowered that tax from 12 to 7.  

Now we pay 7 per cent on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we would blend the two together, we 

would be paying 14.  If you set them so that the tax, the way 

they're proposing to have it done, if you do that now, you're 

actually paying almost 15 per cent tax on that material.  And 

then, Mr. Speaker, we as a producer, under blending the taxes, 

we would get that back as a rebate. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, before we were paying all of it.  With the 

way that we had proposed it, we would be getting it back.  

And, Mr. Speaker, it would allow me as a user of that product 

to be able to go and buy other things that were needed on the 

farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the reason why I believe that this is the 

wrong route to take.  We can talk about the level of tax or 

whether this should be on or that should be on.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, the idea that the blend be there is fundamental to the 

discussion.  I think it's very important. 

 

I want to point out too, that a large part of the people in my 

constituency work in the oil patch.  A lot of them are involved 

in the small oil field service companies that are in a large part 

the major part of the oil industry in the province. 

 

Many, many times, Mr. Speaker, we have had cases where 

people from Alberta come in and provide the service because 

they bid competitively for the opportunity to do seismic work, 

to service the rigs, to have the rigs come in themselves.  This 

service, Mr. Speaker, was bid competitively.  What 

consistently happened -- and we had that happen for the last 

five or six, maybe 10 or 15 years -- is that Alberta has been 

able to compete more actively because they don't have to pay 

the 7 per cent sales tax on their oil rigs.  They don't have to pay 

that on their truck fleets.  They don't have to pay that on their 

tanker trucks. 

 

However in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we have been 

required to pay that.  With blending the taxes together, Mr. 

Speaker, they now would be able to be competitive with the 

Alberta contractors who are able to now outbid them for the 

opportunity to work in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the opportunity by these oil service companies is 

being eroded by this.  In fact I would just like to say that one of 

the people that I associate with very closely, very good friend 

of mine, has indicated to me that 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

on the 16th of December his job was terminated.  Worked for a 

large, major oil company and that service is being down-sized 

in the city of Swift Current so that the foreman, on a reduced 

salary, is the only one that's going to be employed and he's 

going to do it out of his own house.  And this, Mr. Speaker, is 

an international firm who is closing the shop in Swift Current. 

 

Now that, Mr. Speaker, is very significant in relation to how 

these individuals can competitively bid for service 

opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we may be able to say that we'll build a wall here and 

build another wall there, and that is exactly one of the things 

that our Premier should be talking about -- saying, well I'm not 

going to do that.  I'm not going to allow that to happen.  I'm 

going to lower the restrictions so that I can trade goods and 

services, trade opportunities for employment across the 

boundaries in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that it's important for us to do that.  

These kind of things impact in my constituency to a great deal, 

Mr. Speaker, and they have done it for a long time.  The oil 

field industry is significant in many other ways that it relates on 

how it responds in this focus, also in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the young people on the west side of my 

constituency are involved in farming and they also are involved 

in the oil field.  And, Mr. Speaker, they take from the economic 

opportunity in the oil patch and put it into their farms.  You 

will find that on the west side of my seat, which has some very 

poor farm land, has some of the nicest homes on it.  And it's 

because the oil patch has given an opportunity for those young 

men and women to settle in there and to deliver an opportunity 

for off-farm income that is not only available for the young 

men there, but it's also available for the women in the west side 

of my constituency and on the south side, down around 

Shaunavon.  And, Mr. Speaker, it's important for us that as a 

part of the opportunity we have to blend the tax together so that 

we don't have this non-competitive position in relation to the 

people of Alberta and that, Mr. Speaker, is very important. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we had a manufacturing 

industry develop in Swift Current.  It's been a family 

manufacturing firm for many, many years.  The firm decided 

that they were going to expand their business and probably in 

the late '70s or in about that time they did that.  And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker, is they got permission from the 

provincial government at the time and the federal government 

that they would get a rebate on their federal sales tax or that 

they were going to get a grant.  They were going to get a grant 

of X amount of dollars.  And really what it was, Mr. Speaker, 

was the equivalent to what they were getting back in their 

education tax, their provincial education tax that they had paid 

and the federal sales tax. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was the reason why they could give the 

grant.  Now if it was good for that business to get a grant back 

of the taxes that they had paid, why wouldn't it be good to have 

those businesses get the tax back that they had paid in for 

developing the industry such as IPSCO, industry such as 

Degelman, industries such as 

Leon.  Why wouldn't it be important for them to get that rebate 

on that tax? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why they should become 

involved because, Mr. Speaker, they in fact give more 

opportunities.  They give more opportunities for employment, 

and they have a competitive edge.  What happens now, Mr. 

Speaker?  They got to pay that E&H tax, and that is allowing or 

forcing them to be less competitive in other jurisdictions.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is what we have to consider. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the opportunity for making more 

jobs.  We have consistently heard for the last year and a half 

that this was going to be a heavy-handed, derogatory or pushed 

down on the amount of employment opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it in fact is the opposite.  It gives more 

discretionary income to the individuals to be able to spend it in 

places to give more job opportunities.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

is as important as anything in talking about what gives the 

economic benefit an advantage to the people in Saskatchewan.  

That's the reason why I think it's important. 

 

(1100) 

 

Another thing that I believe is significant is that the NDP at the 

beginning told us that this was the right thing to do.  As they 

sat in opposition last year, they consistently said over and over 

and over again that this was the right thing to do -- harmonize.  

They said it over and over again in this Assembly, outside the 

Assembly, and all over.  They said, harmonize the tax.  Blend it 

together to make it less costly to administer because of the 

complexity of it.  They said it over and over again.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, that is exactly what we were going to do. 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the opposite is in fact happening.  The 

additional costs, as were pointed out by the members opposite, 

was one of the reasons why we did it. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can recall very vividly, the member who 

then represented Regina Centre stood here and he said over and 

over again that the tax was to be harmonized.  It would benefit 

all the people of the province of Saskatchewan in the fact that 

there would be less administration costs.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why we are involved in this discussion. 

 

There are a number of other things that I want to point out.  Mr. 

Speaker, the opportunity for the province to get a reasonable 

approach to getting a balanced budget had an important part to 

play in why we said we were going to do these things. 

 

I want to point out to the Assembly that in the province of 

Saskatchewan we have 50 million cultivated acres.  Agriculture 

has 50 million acres that they cultivate.  We have another 15 

million that they have as pastures, unimproved land. But the 50 

million acres . . . if for example we were to make a comparison 

on the economic benefit that the taxpayers provide for 

agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan . . . And we have 

heard people say, well this program for agriculture 

development with 

  



412 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

GRIP and NISA is too expensive on the consumer, it's too 

expensive on the taxpayer. 

 

Well let me point out to this Assembly that the money from the 

additional items on E&H were going to pay some of the 

shortfall in agriculture.  Now 50 million acres in the province 

of Saskatchewan, the increase in tax would provide an 

additional $4 a cultivated acre to the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  GRIP and NISA were going to cost $4 a 

cultivated acre in the province of Saskatchewan.  That's what it 

was going to cost. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it was not unreasonable to ask for the people 

of Saskatchewan, including the farmers who were paying more, 

including all of the people who are consumers paying more . . . 

this additional cost would be $4 a cultivated acre. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to make a comparison so people 

will understand exactly what I'm talking about.  The taxpayers 

in the province of Saskatchewan on health care today pay $32 a 

cultivated acre, and nobody complains about that.  In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, I spoke the other day to a number of issues that dealt 

with health care, and the people opposite said they're going to 

cut from three and a half per cent down to one and a half per 

cent, the grant available to the health care community in this 

province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, agriculture collects $4 a cultivated acre, and 

what does health care collect? -- $32 a cultivated acre on the 

same basis calculated out of what comes out of the budget for 

agriculture and what comes out of the budget for health care. 

 

Point out another thing, Mr. Speaker, that education costs in the 

province of Saskatchewan are about $20 a cultivated acre.  And 

that doesn't include, Mr. Speaker, the taxes that farmers pay 

themselves.  Put that together and we have over $50 coming 

from the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan for every 

cultivated acre we have in the province of Saskatchewan, for 

health and education.  And I believe in health and education, 

Mr. Speaker.  I think it's important. But only $4 comes to the 

farmer from the taxpayer on the basis of a cultivated acre. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is one of the reasons why I think it was 

important to introduce not only a program to pay for the 

additional costs in health care, additional costs in education, 

additional costs in the agriculture programs that we had . . . 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we need to have a rationalization 

of the tax system so that it blends itself together.  That's why, 

Mr. Speaker, we gave this opportunity for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that I have provided not only for this 

Assembly, but for other people in the province, a rationale for 

the kinds of things that we did.  And I know, for example, Mr. 

Speaker, that the taxpayers of this province were not in 

agreement with it.  But I also know, Mr. Speaker, that the 

people who received the benefit of this tax also said that we 

would like to have the benefits continue. 

 

So we have a dilemma, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand we have 

people saying, no, I don't want to have more taxes 

and on the other hand I want to have more services.  And you 

cannot afford to do that any longer, to have the two not match.  

And I think that it's time that this Assembly and it's time for us 

all to put our heads together to see whether there is an 

opportunity to get an answer. 

 

I want to point out too, Mr. Speaker, that there is a necessity of 

the present administration to give us alternatives to this.  They 

said in fact, Mr. Speaker, that the people who are taking this 

tax off should have an alternative to the kinds of things that we 

suggested.  What is the alternative?  Is the alternative to this 

tax, Mr. Speaker, an increase in the volume of tax from seven 

to maybe nine, in order to meet the same volume?  Are these 

people going to do that? 

 

Are they going to raise the flat tax as an alternative?  Are they 

going to raise the tax on other commodities?  For example, are 

they going to raise the tax on individuals and income tax?  Are 

they going to raise the tax as an alternative from taxing wealth 

as it relates to assets?  Are they going to start to do that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a tax in this province called the capital 

tax.  And what it consistently does is it taxes those companies 

that have major holdings in the province of Saskatchewan, like 

banks, like railroads, and other major companies over a certain 

size.  That, Mr. Speaker, has a tremendous amount of cash that 

it delivers on a half a point of an increase in tax. 

 

However I want to point out, is the Assembly, as an alternative 

to this, going to tax the capital of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan?  And if that is the case, Mr. Speaker, then we 

are in very serious trouble because the capital tax is not a tax 

on a commodity that is easily moved. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, what's the alternative to the tax 

that we have here?  Where are you going to give us jobs; where 

are you going to give us an opportunity for our children to stay 

here and work; where are you going to give us an opportunity 

to have balanced books which you say that you're going to be 

able to do; you're going to cut taxes? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they're in a dilemma.  And they're in a crossroads 

here that they're going to have to think very seriously about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have tried to raise to the public's attention and 

this Assembly's attention that I have a very serious concern 

about not blending the tax together, but I also have a very 

serious concern about where the alternative is that is going to 

be provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that I got involved in 

politics on a tax that I thought was very, very serious.  I got 

involved in politics in 1973, Mr. Speaker -- and I want to point 

this out to the Assembly -- in 1973 my father passed away in a 

car accident and in 1973 there was a tax called the estate taxes.  

And, Mr. Speaker, our family is a very close-knit family and 

we had no problem dealing with my father's estate.  There was 

six children in our family and we had no problem dealing with 

it.  As a matter of fact, what we did with the approval of all of 

us, 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 413 

including my mother, we put the will aside and we drew up our 

own.  We spent about a month doing that.  We set down what 

we were going to do with the assets that my father had left.  My 

mother was going to get this and my brother and my sisters 

were going to get the rest. 

 

And that point, Mr. Speaker, was easily accomplished.  But 

what was the most difficult was the fact that we had to pay 

estate taxes to the provincial government. 

 

Now I became involved after long and serious arguments with 

the provincial tax collectors.  In fact the lawyer who was 

handling our financial settlements in my father's estate, he 

probably said this is the most difficult problem he has ever had 

to face in dealing with a provincial government that he has ever 

tackled.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was from a legal counsel who 

had been in business for a long time. 

 

I said to myself, if government controls me so much that they 

can dictate to someone who has died about his assets, then 

surely there must be a reason why I should get involved in 

politics.  So I did this, Mr. Speaker, I wrote a letter to a person 

who sat in that chair, and his name was Mr. E.I. Wood.  I wrote 

him a letter and I said: if I want to get involved in politics, I 

want to know what your party stands for.  And I got a letter 

back and in it had an application form for a membership.  And 

I took a look at it and I said, is this what I want to have? 

 

And I read it through and on the bottom line was something, 

Mr. Speaker, on the bottom line it says this: I hereby agree to 

abide by all the policies set down by the executive of the NDP 

party.  And I said to myself that is exactly what I don't want to 

have. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I deliberately took and threw that -- I can 

remember the day I did it -- I threw it in the garbage and I said, 

I don't want to have anything to do with a political party that 

does that.  Then what I did, Mr. Speaker, I went to the other 

party that my father supported.  I went, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You were that close? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I was that close, Mr. Speaker.  I went to the 

other party that my father had supported and I said what is that 

party going to do for me and what can I do for that party? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I personally went out to see the candidate 

for the Progressive Conservative Party in the constituency of 

Swift Current and I helped him get elected, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what I decided to do, and at that time I decided that I 

was not going to be involved with a party that said I'm going to 

collect taxes on assets. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say to this Assembly that I 

will definitely not vote for those kinds of alternatives to this 

tax.  To tax assets is, I believe, not correct. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can pick on them because they can't 

move those assets.  Who loses in collecting taxes on assets in 

the province of Saskatchewan?  Is it the oil companies?  No.  Is 

it small business?  No.  Is it rural Saskatchewan agriculture 

because they can't pick up 

their land and go away?  Yes, Mr. Speaker, that's where it's at. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why you have to be very careful 

where you pick an alternative to where you're going to tax.  

And, Mr. Speaker, as a part of what we're going to be doing in 

the next six months as this government unveils its strategy for 

the future is we're going to be very, very close.  We're going to 

watch very closely what these people are going to do, as what 

they consider creative alternative to the kind of taxes that we've 

suggested here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that we need to run this province in a 

very systematic, well-balanced way.  And, Mr. Speaker, there 

are times when we need to have deficits, and there are times 

when we need to have a re-establishment of balanced budgets. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as we ask questions of the Minister of 

Agriculture today, is there going to be a moratorium or is there 

not?  When is he going to start talking about what his promises 

were?  Is he going to implement them? 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this tax was put in place.  This 

tax, the education and health tax provided $4 a cultivated acre 

for the farmers in Saskatchewan so that they could be a part of 

a benefit . . . that they could get a benefit from . . . or a 

reprieve, Mr. Speaker, from the volume of hurt that they were 

having in the province of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

the reason. 

 

And so I want to thank the Assembly and Mr. Speaker for his 

attention.  I feel strongly about this, and I want to say that I will 

not be supporting this motion as it comes to the floor for 

discussion. 

 

(1115) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I only have a 

few remarks to this Bill.  On behalf of my constituents, I want 

to say to the government that this Bill is plain wrong.  The 

former government made some mistakes that are certainly 

recognized by the people of Souris-Cannington.  And we 

recognize that we made mistakes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But let me tell you, sir, that synchronizing the tax was not one 

of those mistakes.  The timing may have been bad.  Maybe we 

should have reduced the rate. But, Mr. Speaker, the basic 

premise of this synchronization of the tax system is right, and it 

is economically sound for the people of Souris-Cannington.  

It's absolutely essential. 

 

Let me talk to you for a moment, Mr. Speaker, about how this 

issue affects cross-border shopping.  And I would be interested 

in hearing from the members who neighbour my constituency 

on how they think this Bill will clearly hurt our communities 

by encouraging more cross-border shopping.  If we 

synchronize the tax system, Mr. Speaker, the federal 

government would agree to collect both the federal and 

provincial tax at the border when people return from shopping 

trips, so if you want a new television you can't escape the 

Saskatchewan tax by going south. 

  



414 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

But with the passage of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, what happens?  

The NDP is keeping the tax at 14 per cent on televisions.  If 

you buy it in North Dakota you pay no sales tax because it's 

rebated.  People buy in Manitoba also because they do not have 

to pay the Manitoba provincial sales tax. 

 

When you come back across the U.S. (United States) border 

the customs agents won't make you pay the NDP's provincial 

tax, so you have actually got yourself a bargain.  So what do 

you think people are going to do, Mr. Speaker?  They're going 

to go south or to Manitoba or to Alberta to shop. 

 

The NDP tried to make the case that synchronizing somehow 

would encourage people to cross-border shop, Mr. Speaker.  

But think about the silliness about that argument.  No one, Mr. 

Speaker, absolutely no one drives all the way to the U.S. to buy 

a hamburger.  They surely are not going to make the trip to 

save 7 cents on a cup of coffee.  No, Mr. Speaker.  What they 

go south to buy are the things that the NDP are keeping the tax 

at 14 per cent on.  They go for big ticket items or for Christmas 

shopping, for toys, cameras, watches, and that kind of thing.  

And on all of those things, the NDP is keeping the tax at 14 per 

cent. 

 

So my communities, Mr. Speaker, are going to hurt.  And what 

do you think is going to happen to the businesses in 

Gravelbourg or Coronach?  Are they going to harvest these 

great bargains?  I ask the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

that.  Or are they going to be subject to more pressures on 

cross-border shopping? 

 

Does the member for Shaunavon really think his communities 

are so far away from the border that he is immune?  Or does he 

realize that when he supports this Bill he will be supporting the 

destruction of businesses in his own constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is bad for border communities.  Mr. 

Speaker, what proposals does this government have which will 

allow border businesses to compete on a level tax field with the 

businesses in Sherwood, Kenmare, Portal, or even Minot, 

North Dakota?  The problem of cross-border shopping, Mr. 

Speaker, is felt as far north as Prince Albert.  The 

Saskatchewan people are taking bus tours south just for 

shopping, Mr. Speaker.  Will this Bill change that?  I doubt it 

very much. 

 

This Bill will also be quite harmful to Regina businesses, 

though the price of a cup of coffee should go down.  Well, we'll 

see.  I haven't seen many prices go down since October 22, but 

we'll see.  And I'll be very interested to find out if the 

government bothers to collect statistics on the increase in 

cross-border shopping and its effect on the Cornwall Centre 

and the Victoria Square Mall and the other malls in Regina.  If 

they do not collect such statistics, it will amount to an 

admission that this Bill has made things worse, and that's pretty 

obvious, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What are the alternatives to collecting a synchronized E&H 

tax, Mr. Speaker?  Will that be an increase in personal income 

taxes?  Will it be, as the member from Morse has already 

mentioned, a death tax, an inheritance tax? 

In our area, that kind of a tax would be very reprehensible.  It 

would destroy a good portion of our farming community.  If 

you farm with, say, a section of land, Mr. Speaker, what's the 

government going to take away when you die?  A quarter of it?  

It's pretty hard to run a unit as the government keeps taking 

away various portions of it.  And most, Mr. Speaker, most 

young farmers do not have the assets to turn around and 

purchase that land back from the government or to pay the 

taxes initially.  So the land will be turned over to the 

government.  And perhaps this is another manner in which the 

government opposite hopes to re-establish their land bank 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is another alternative perhaps an increase in the 

royalty taxes?  We have seen that the previous NDP 

government during the 1970s increased the royalty taxes to 

such an extent that it drove a good many of our oil companies 

out of this province. 

 

I was employed, Mr. Speaker, in the oil patch at that time, and 

we were down at one point to 30 per cent of our capacity, 30 

per cent of our production.  That's the kind of regressive 

taxation that we cannot allow to continue. 

 

That is one of the alternatives that could happen in this 

province if we do not synchronize the E&H tax with the GST.  

Perhaps another alternative that the Minister of Finance will 

propose will be one similar to the tax put in place in Manitoba 

under the NDP government there -- the payroll tax, a tax on 

employees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that does not aid the competitiveness of our 

businesses.  Or, Mr. Speaker, would we have an increase in 

rates for our utilities?  Would SaskPower be raising their rates 

to make up for the shortfalls that the government is going to 

have in its revenues?  The previous government has kept utility 

rates at a very low level, small increases every year but less 

than the cost of living, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Businesses in Saskatchewan cannot afford to have a large 

increase in those utility costs.  We cannot afford to have, Mr. 

Speaker, an increase in power, in gas.  We need to remain 

competitive and increasing those kind of costs, Mr. Speaker, 

will not make us more competitive.  If our costs increase to 

businesses here, if our costs on utilities increase to our 

consumers, that is only going to encourage, Mr. Speaker, more 

cross-border shopping -- more cross-border shopping to the 

U.S., more cross-border shopping into Manitoba and into 

Alberta. 

 

Increased taxes perhaps on gasoline.  Any of these increased 

taxations -- because the government is going to have to come 

up with some money some place to pay the bills -- is going to 

mean more costs to our farmers, more costs to our businesses.  

Costs to our farmers increasing only drives more of our farmers 

out of business, Mr. Speaker.  It only drives more of our 

business away from this province.  When the less business, the 

less farmers, the less purchases we have in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, means there's less jobs, and that's less jobs in the 

cities. 

 

If you talk to any of the retail outlets downtown, you'll find out 

that over the past year there has been a decrease  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 415 

in the amount of business.  That is because people out in rural 

Saskatchewan do not have the money to come in for shopping.  

And if they do have some money, Mr. Speaker, they go 

wherever they can find the best bargains, which in a lot of 

cases means across the border. 

 

The synchronization of the E&H tax with the GST, Mr. 

Speaker, would save the government some money -- $5 million 

in collecting that tax.  And $5 million, Mr. Speaker, is enough 

money to have got Saskatchewan's share of the $700 million 

farm pay-out into the hands of Saskatchewan farmers this year 

-- 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Most farmers are sending in their GST forms every three 

months.  If we had harmonized the E&H tax with the GST, 

those farmers would be getting back double what they are now.  

They would be getting back that portion of E&H tax on their 

purchases that apply to farm expenses.  And this could be a 

significant amount of savings, Mr. Speaker.  And even the 

members opposite that are farmers realize that and know that. 

 

If we can drop the costs of operating to our farmers, to our 

businesses, it makes our businesses more efficient, Mr. 

Speaker.  Yes, and even more profitable.  And what does more 

profitable mean, Mr. Speaker?  It means more jobs for the 

people of Saskatchewan -- more jobs, more income, and more 

revenues for the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member opposite mentioned: bigger 

houses, bigger houses mean more jobs.   More carpenters get 

employed, more electricians, more plumbers, more retail.  And 

all of those things are a benefit to the entire economy of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the GST is here.  This provincial legislature 

cannot do anything about it.  We must learn how to work with 

the GST, rather than simply trying to ignore the fact that it is 

there.  It is not going to go away, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Farmers and businesses pay the E&H tax now on a good many 

of their purchases.  By harmonizing, by synchronizing with that 

tax, there is a definite cost saving to those farmers and 

businesses.  Those farmers and businesses are not avoiding 

paying any E&H tax, Mr. Speaker.  They pay it the same as 

everybody else does when they make personal purchases. 

 

Since October 21 the cost of a TV, Mr. Speaker, or any other 

consumable goods, have not gone down with the removal of 

the harmonization even though a good many people felt that it 

would.  A good many people had the misconception that on 

October 22 there would be no E&H tax in this province. 

 

One of the things that doing away with the synchronization of 

the E&H tax, it makes our businesses less competitive, Mr. 

Speaker; less competitive with Alberta, less competitive with 

the U.S.  It puts us on the same footing, Mr. Speaker, as those 

businesses in Manitoba. 

 

We had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to gain an advantage on 

our brothers in Manitoba.  Our businesses could have been 

without the provincial sales tax.  That would have given them a 

competitive edge.  We have 

many oil related businesses that do work in Manitoba.  This 

would allow them to have the same advantage that Alberta 

currently has in Saskatchewan.  Their equipment would have 

been 7 per cent less, Mr. Speaker.  They could have made their 

bids 7 per cent lower perhaps. 

 

We have a large amount of oil in our constituency, Mr. 

Speaker.  And quite often we have seismic crews coming 

through, working in that area.  And yet when you look at these 

seismic crews coming in with a large number of trucks, a large 

number of employees, they all have, Mr. Speaker, Alberta 

licence plates on them; they all employ people from Alberta. 

 

We get the benefits of their being here for the money given to 

the landowners for access.  We get the benefits of the meals 

that they buy or the hotel rooms that they rent.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we do not get the benefits that we could have received 

if those people remained here permanently -- if they had their 

offices, their headquarters here, and they paid their taxes here.  

Those benefits all go to the province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1130) 

 

As I mentioned yesterday, a good many people do go across 

the border to shop. They go across to North Dakota to avoid 

paying our E&H tax, they go across to Manitoba, and they go 

to Alberta.  If that tax was collected at the border, Mr. Speaker, 

it would allow our businesses to have the same opportunities as 

the businesses across the border.  We go across and buy any 

item.  You pay their state tax, or if you go to Manitoba and 

have it shipped into Saskatchewan, you do not even have to 

pay the Manitoba tax, Mr. Speaker.  You buy in North Dakota, 

you apply for a rebate, you get your tax back.  You come to the 

border, Mr. Speaker, and the customs agents do not collect 

E&H tax at the border. 

 

Had we synchronized, Mr. Speaker, with the GST, we would 

have collected that E&H tax at the border.  Therefore if you 

bought an item in Sherwood or if you bought that item in 

Carievale you would have still paid the 7 per cent E&H tax, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Not only does having not being able to get the rebate on the 

E&H tax back penalize our businesses in Saskatchewan, but it 

makes our exports more expensive, Mr. Speaker.  If someone 

was setting up an industry to sell offshore, where would they 

look to go to, Mr. Speaker?  Would they come to Saskatchewan 

where all of their inputs are taxed?  Or would they perhaps go 

to Alberta where they do not have that tax?  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that they would go to Alberta to allow themselves to 

be more competitive, to compete with people in other 

jurisdictions who do not pay that kind of a tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on election day, October 21, the people of 

Saskatchewan not only elected a government but they also 

voted on some plebiscites.  And one of those plebiscites, Mr. 

Speaker, was on balanced budgets.  The people of 

Saskatchewan voted overwhelmingly to have balanced budget 

legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they voted for balanced budget legislation, and 

that puts the members opposite in a bit of a squeeze. 

  



416 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

They have to somehow, if they wish to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan, balance the budgets.  That means they're going 

to have to do one of two things, Mr. Speaker.  They're going to 

have to raise taxes some place else, or they're going to have to 

cut. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the E&H tax is one of those areas where 

they could have increased some revenues, but those revenues, 

Mr. Speaker, go to support our health and education system -- 

two systems that are very important. 

 

I believe that we need to maintain those systems, Mr. Speaker.  

But how are the members opposite going to do that?  They 

need to raise some revenues at some point, and as I mentioned 

earlier, Mr. Speaker, those revenues are going to take various 

forms.  And I think the synchronization of the E&H tax with 

the GST, Mr. Speaker, is a preferable method to those others 

that will be implemented. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have made my main points, and as my 

colleagues have covered some of the other areas, I do not want 

to take up a great deal of time in this Assembly.  But we have 

some very serious concerns. The people of Souris-Cannington, 

the people of Saskatchewan have some concerns of how the 

bills in this province will be paid. 

 

On behalf of the constituents of Souris-Cannington I will be 

opposing this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing me in 

this debate.  Mr. Speaker, this Bill is quite simply very bad 

policy.  You have heard my colleagues tell about how the NDP, 

including the leader himself, have supported synchronization of 

the two taxes in the past.  And now they have flip-flopped 

purely for political reasons. 

 

Any policy, Mr. Speaker, that is put forward for purely political 

reasons is bad policy.  And this Bill I say again, Mr. Speaker, is 

bad policy.  Mr. Speaker, the government thinks it has pulled a 

fast one on the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public perception in my constituency was that 

the PST (provincial sales tax) would all be taken off.  I'll give 

you an example, Mr. Speaker.  The weekend before the 

election the phone rang in my home and I answered it, and an 

older voice I think said to me, you tell your leader to quit lying.  

And I answered, what is my leader lying about?  And this 

person said, he is lying because he is saying that the PST will 

not be coming off.  I answered, what part of the PST are we 

talking about?  We are talking only about the expanded part of 

the PST. 

 

And they must have had a two-phone connection, Mr. Speaker, 

because a lady's voice came on and it sounded like an elderly 

lady, and she was very, very angry, and she shouted at me.  She 

said, you quit lying too.  Because the leader of the opposition at 

the time said -- and I hesitate to use the name, Mr. Speaker; she 

used the name of the now Premier -- said, and I seen him on 

television say that the PST was gone.  And I said, dear lady, the 

portion that is going to be rescinded is the expanded portion.  

She said, 

you are lying too. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I couldn't say any more to this lady.  The 

perception was out there that the whole 7 per cent E&H tax 

was gone.  And they promised, Mr. Speaker, they spent years 

leading up to the election promising everyone everything that 

they wanted.  They promised the rural municipalities more 

money in revenue, more money in revenue sharing, and they 

promised their urban municipalities the same thing. 

 

In fact, it's a simple disgrace for the member from Melfort to 

have put forward a Bill that cuts grants after she personally said 

more money was possible.  She argued with us that there was 

more money to be had for rural municipalities and urban 

municipalities.  And then she presents a Bill like this, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the reason she presented that Bill, I submit to you, was 

that the other Bill is because . . . that is the reason we are 

debating this Bill today, Mr. Speaker.  They are throwing away 

a lot more than the 200 million that would be lost directly -- a 

lot more, Mr. Speaker.  And I'll touch on that in a moment. 

 

But in throwing away this money, it is clear that the politics of 

the government is to say, no money for highways, no money 

for rural people, no money for urban people, no money for poor 

people, and no money for any of the problems we face. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as you well know, there are only a couple 

of choices when it comes to providing services that the people 

need.  You either get more revenue or you cut spending.  This 

government wants everyone to think it has chosen to do only 

the latter, to cut spending. 

 

But I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, you watch them -- watch 

them very closely.  They will be taxing and increasing rates 

and putting on brand-new taxes like no administration before 

them.  And I say to you again, you just watch.  And it will be 

because they haven't got the political courage to do what they 

know is right.  And synchronizing the tax system is right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want the government to consider a few things.  They think 

they're only giving up $200 million.  But, Mr. Speaker, that is 

not so.  They are also giving up $5 million every year that 

would have been saved in administration cost by having the 

federal government pick up the tab -- $5 million, only pay one 

tax collector, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They are giving up the revenue that will be lost to cross-border 

shopping, as my colleague outlined just a few moments ago, 

because the feds will not collect the NDP provincial sales tax at 

the border.  And they have given up the economic benefits for 

diversification and growth, that will cost us a lot of money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Let me give you an immediate example that the province is 

going through right now.  If we had synchronized our tax 

system, we would have been on par with Quebec.  It would 

mean that a business locating in Saskatchewan would be tax 

free, sales tax free. 

 

Now there's this company with 5,000 jobs up for grabs,  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 417 

called Piper Aircraft.  All government members will be very 

familiar with Piper airplanes because we have all been flying 

around in them, Mr. Speaker, at some time or another.  

Anyway the Piper Aircraft company is looking for a new home 

and they say Quebec has the inside track. 

 

Well, what are the reasons that Quebec looks so good to Piper, 

Mr. Speaker?  Because if Piper goes to Quebec under a Liberal 

government, the company will pay no sales tax -- none 

whatsoever.  And it will have more money to hire more people, 

do more research and development, and pay higher salaries -- 

all because the Quebec Liberals had the political courage to 

synchronize their tax system. 

 

And what does Piper look forward to in Saskatchewan?  Well, 

for starters, a Liberal leader that probably for the first time in 

history votes for an NDP throne speech as a sign of her 

acceptance of the NDP government.  And far more seriously, 

Piper would look forward to paying a lot of provincial sales 

tax.  So Saskatoon can forget about getting Piper to match with 

Promavia; it just isn't going to happen.  And this government 

knows it. 

 

The Premier couldn't take 15 minutes out of his day to meet 

with the people from Piper, Mr. Speaker, but the member from 

Elphinstone did manage to do that.  And what did he tell Piper?  

Well he sure didn't tell them that if they came to Saskatchewan 

that they would be coming to a tax-free province -- sales tax 

free.  No, no, because they were and are determined to pass this 

Bill.  Instead the member from Elphinstone told Piper, well we 

really have nice clear blue skies to fly your airplanes around in. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid that that is not enough.  Five 

thousand jobs in Saskatoon lost because of this Bill -- because 

of this Bill.  No louder condemnation can be made of this Bill 

than that.  But this Bill will lose this province and the 

government itself even more. 

 

There's some farmers across the way, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

would say to you farmers, when you go home, figure out how 

much you spent on taxable goods last year.  You'll come up 

with between 7 and $12,000 in sales tax, depending on which 

member does the calculation.  That's what you will lose under 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill will deny income to farm families in the 

thousands of dollars -- thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, by 

farmers.  Mr. Speaker, what is wrong with a tax that helps the 

very people that the tax is on? 

 

When I was in business, Mr. Speaker, every budget that came 

down for years put tax on gasoline.  I would have to go to my 

customers and tell them that I had to raise the price the amount 

of the tax.  And they would say to me, well how much more 

can I pay?  And I would say to them, well you want good 

roads, don't you?  These are road taxes. 

 

In this Bill we were putting a tax on some food that had never 

had tax on.  Mr. Speaker, I lived with that for 32 years.  And I 

would say, what is wrong with taxing gasoline to provide better 

roads?  What's wrong with taxing a hamburger to give a better 

income to a farmer? 

Mr. Speaker, we are denying the farm families thousands of 

dollars.  And if you multiply 7 to 12,000 each by 60,000 farms 

in the province, we are talking about tens of millions of dollars 

being taken out of the farm economy.  And these are not just 

figures drawn out of the air, Mr. Speaker.  These are facts.  

These are things that those farmers over there can check out as 

soon as they go home.  I have done so and they're there. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the farm income is way down, and 

it has to be made up somewhere.  I have a son-in-law who is a 

farmer, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill takes $4,000 out of his pocket 

because he's a smaller farmer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that same son-in-law of mine is having trouble to 

make his payments to keep his farm; $4,000 would go a long 

way to make the credit union look favourably upon extending 

his loan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think all of us will agree in Saskatchewan, 

when farm income is down it has to be made up somewhere.  

We have a clear indication that it will not be made up directly 

by this government, so it will be made up with farm 

bankruptcies, Mr. Speaker.  And that means increased cost to 

the government anyway, somewhere or another, and a terrible 

destruction of the rural way of life. 

 

And that is part of what this Bill is all about, Mr. Speaker -- 

taking money out of farmers' pockets.  And, Mr. Speaker that is 

a shameful thing.  That is the most shameful thing, actually, 

about this whole process. 

 

The Leader of the NDP had people convinced that he was 

going to take off all of the sales tax.  Now, Mr. Speaker, in all 

due respect, I'm not going to stand here in my place and say he 

done it deliberately.  But I will point out to you, sir, that the 

background of the leader . . . the Premier is in law. 

 

And we've all stood and watched TV programs or shows where 

the prosecutor will say something.  The judge will say . . . the 

other attorney will get up and say, objection.  The attorney will 

say, I withdraw that, sir.  But the seed has been planted.  The 

seed has been planted.  How do you withdraw something that 

has been said? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I watched the program where the now Premier 

said at midnight on the 21st the PST is gone.  The young lady 

that opposed me on the NDP ticket, hon. young lady, went 

around doing the same thing.  She said there will be no PST.  

Going back to what I said a few minutes ago about the couple 

that phoned me and were very, very angry, shouting at me and 

saying you are lying.  Mr. Speaker, the perception was there. 

 

I had coffee with a friend of mine who told me he did not 

support me.  He's an NDP supporter.  He is a fine gentleman.  

And he said to me: how come I still have to pay the PST?  I 

said to him, where?  And he mentioned the store in our town, 

and I said well, you must remember -- Mr. Speaker, I said to 

him -- there is only two ways you can do this. The storekeeper 

has two alternatives:  he can charge you the PST and you can 

ask for the rebate, or he 

  



418 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

can take it off and he has to ask for the rebate.  And he said that 

is not so; he shouldn't be charging it at all.  And I explained to 

him that all that was done was the expanded portion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You said that once. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I said that once; that's right.  And that is the 

truth.  The trouble with you, sir, is that you don't understand the 

Bill that you're putting forward.  You don't understand the 

implications of rescinding this Bill. 

 

I say to you, time will prove that this was not a bad Bill.  I 

agree with my colleague.  The numbers could have been 

different.  The timing could have been different, but this is the 

right thing to do. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What would have happened . . . 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Oh yes, what would have happened. 

 

The leader, Mr. Speaker, his own Finance officials have been 

quoted in the media that there is a lot of confusion out there by 

people who think the NDP took the sales tax off. 

 

What I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, well they didn't take the sales 

tax off.  Six months ago you paid 14 per cent on a television.  

Today, under the NDP, you pay 14 per cent on a television.  

Six months ago you paid 14 per cent on children's toys.  Under 

the NDP you still pay 14 per cent on children's toys.  Six 

months ago you paid 14 per cent on lipstick.  Mr. Speaker, 

under the NDP you pay 14 per cent on cosmetics, and a little 

cosmetics wouldn't hurt some of you over there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm beginning to feel at home.  The chorus has 

started.  I'm used to having a chorus when I'm up there. 

 

Six months ago, Mr. Speaker, you paid 14 per cent on 

everything except restaurant meals and the Reader's Digest.  

Under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, you will continue to pay 14 per 

cent on almost everything.  The people have been taken, Mr. 

Speaker, for one big ride by the NDP administration and as the 

time goes by they will realize this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to give a demonstration or an 

illustration of why I believe that this is not a bad tax, if you will 

permit me.  In our town at the Co-Op store cafeteria you buy a 

first cup of coffee for 30 cents.  Now the PST would have 

added 2 cents to that cup of coffee.  Across the road in one of 

the hotels coffee is $1; you would pay 7 cents on that cup of 

coffee. 

 

Now when you argue that the poor people were being hit by 

this tax, I would suggest to you, sir, that if you were on a low 

income you would go to where you bought the coffee at 30 

cents.  And if that low income person happened to be a single 

mother with three children, she loses $600 in tax credits.  Now 

$600 in tax credits at 2 cents a cup for coffee would buy an 

awful lot of coffee, pay the tax on a lot of hamburgers. 

 

So the argument that the poor people were being hurt by 

this tax, Mr. Speaker, does not stand up under scrutiny. 

 

Another illustration, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to give you to 

illustrate why this is a more fair tax than income tax or flat tax.  

If you can picture two friends meeting up town and they say 

one to the other, you know, Mother's Day is coming up and I 

haven't bought my wife a gift.  Oh I haven't either, says the 

other fellow.  Let us go and do that.  One guy is rich, the other 

is not so rich.  He buys a $4,000 fur coat for his wife.  He pays 

7 per cent of $4,000.  The other guy who is not so rich buys a 

$2,000 coat.  He pays on 2,000. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the point is the people that can afford it are the 

people who pay, under this type of taxation.  And the more I 

look at it, Mr. Speaker, with some improvements maybe, time 

will prove that this was the right way to go.  Every time 

someone pays 14 per cent on some item, we will remind you 

that we told you that you didn't have to. 

 

That is what has led the people of this province to believe that 

this Bill does not accomplish that promise, Mr. Speaker.  For 

no other reason than the fact that this Bill breaks faith with the 

electorate that trusted them, it can not be supported. 

 

If this Bill did eliminate the PST as it was promised, Mr. 

Speaker, I would have a hard time standing in my place and 

opposing it.  Every time someone pays 14 per cent on some 

item, we will remind you, we will remind you what you told 

them. 

 

If you actually, Mr. Speaker . . . if they actually delivered on 

the things that they promised, the things you were elected on, I 

would have a tough time not standing up and saying, well it 

appears that that's what most of the people voted for, so I'll just 

have to vote for it or sit it out.  But you are not delivering . . . 

they are not delivering on their promise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill is a fundamental betrayal of all those people who 

walked into the ballot box thinking that if they mark their "X" 

for the NDP, there would be no 14 per cent.  Mr. Speaker, that 

perception was out there.  And no one done anything to dispel 

that.  Fourteen per cent is still here and there is so much more 

that is worse, and it's on the way. 

 

One of my colleagues said, this is a shameful day for the 

member from Riversdale.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it is.  I know 

better, they know better, we all know better.  This province 

needs to synchronize its tax and they full know it . . . they 

know it full well.  They supported it before the election, Mr. 

Speaker, and for purely political reasons they have turned and 

flip-flopped on it.  That's the only reason they changed -- 

because it made political hay, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . But they won't do it.  They are trying to sneak 

by with a broken promise and that the media dutifully to report 

as a kept promise. 

 

I guess there must be a lot of disappointed people in the back 

benches, Mr. Speaker, because I don't think they knew what 

they were doing when they allowed this to go forward. 

 

Go back and face your farmers, those that are taking a $12,000 

loss because of this Bill.  Tell them that it's a good 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 419 

thing.  A lot of people once thought the NDP would stand by 

its word, Mr. Speaker.  The new, honest, open government  

_- new, new people.  Well, Mr. Speaker, they clap.  Today, Mr. 

Speaker, we have proof that not only does it throw away its 

philosophy whenever it's convenient, but is also willing to 

throw away its solemn word to the people. 

 

They are in government, Mr. Speaker, because they won.  We 

know that.  But, Mr. Speaker, there has never been a better 

reason, never been a better reason to vote against this Bill than 

the fact that they broke their promise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not support this Bill, and I thank you for 

your time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a pleasure 

to take part in this debate.  This Bill will have a significant 

impact on the Kindersley riding.  As you are aware, Mr. 

Speaker, in my constituency we have a significant oil sector 

largely made up of small independent producers.  The major 

corporations out in the Kindersley constituency have pretty 

much pulled out over the last number of years -- bought out by 

small independent producers.  It's interesting to note that, I 

think that most of the small oil and gas producers there own 

almost the entire number of wells.  In our constituency there's 

about 4,000 wells throughout the entire constituency -- 4,000. 

 

All of the people from there make their living on wells that are 

very, very low producing wells -- four or five barrels is a 

normal well.  That sort of production is something that you can 

be assured is the normal production.  There are about 650 

directly related jobs in the oil industry in the Kindersley 

constituency and there are countless more jobs that are 

indirectly related to that.  I think you will only have to drive 

through Kindersley and see the large automobile dealerships as 

a testimony to that.  There's a significant number of vehicles 

purchased each year as a result of the oil activity in our 

constituency and it directly relates to that. 

 

I believe that synchronization of the E&H tax and the federal 

sales tax truly provided that industry with some benefits.  A tax 

reposition that would not only protect those direct jobs and 

indirect industry jobs but would have provided these 

companies with the opportunity for increased drilling and 

employment. 

 

I think you will find in our constituency right now there's a 

tremendous sense of uneasiness.  They're not sure what 

direction this new government will be taking in regard to oil 

and gas royalty structures, and they're very, very worried about 

the new government's direction in that area. 

 

As a result the oil patch activity is essentially stopped.  There's 

no new drilling programs being put in place, no gas drilling 

programs being put in place.  I think we're all waiting.  As well 

as the people on this side of the House, but the people in my 

constituency, particularly the oil people and the farm related 

people are wondering what the new government's plans are in 

that area. 

The Speaker: -- Pursuant to an order passed earlier today in 

this House, this Assembly stands recessed until 2 p.m. today. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


