




















































Hansard: December 21, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 471 

 December 21, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

The Speaker: -- Pursuant to an agreement yesterday in this 

legislature, we will not go to routine proceedings until 2 o'clock 

this afternoon but we will go immediately to orders of the day. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move that question no. 42 be 

converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I move question no. 43 be converted 

to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I wonder if it wouldn't be easier to 

convert question no. 44 to question no. 50 to motion for return 

(debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for return (debatable) 44 to 50 

inclusive. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 18 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Public Disclosure of Crown Employment 

Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in Crown Employment 

Contracts governing Payments and Benefits in Termination or 

Expiration of those Contracts, to Void Provisions in those 

Contracts respecting those matters and to Extinguish any Right 

of Action and Right to Compensation for any Loss or Damage 

resulting from the Enactment or Application of this Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You will remember 

at the close of yesterday I was expressing my concern with this 

Bill, Bill 18.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue for a few 

minutes and raise a few other questions that we have on this 

side of the House about this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, we have reason 

to believe that there are several things about this Bill that is 

most unsettling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill gives us over here a lot of uneasiness.  

One of the questions I wonder about, Mr. Speaker, does this 

Bill make all Saskatchewan citizens and the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) government equal before the law?  This is a 

question I think we have to answer. 

But, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to us that there are some 

citizens more equal than others under this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, 

under this Bill it would seem to us if you were a union member 

you were more equal than if you were a private citizen.  These 

questions, we feel, Mr. Speaker, must be answered before we 

can feel comfortable with allowing this Bill to pass. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill identifies at least 57 people who, in their 

view, the opposition find have objectionable severance 

packages.  Mr. Speaker, we feel on this side of the House that 

this Bill allows the government to cut deeper than 57.  We feel 

that this Bill removes the right of these people to a fair trial 

before the courts on what's left of their case after they have 

been stripped of their constitutional rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House feel very uneasy 

with this part of the Bill.  Mr. Speaker, the very fact that those 

people would consider a Bill like this after the now Premier 

gained, I think in all due respect, some fame and credibility 

when he, along with others, brought home the constitution, Mr. 

Speaker, it indicates either the party or the people who are 

driving that party have no consideration for the law and for 

constitutional rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their refusal to respect the Constitution of Canada 

and the basic right to a fair hearing is very disturbing.  In 

Canada, Mr. Speaker, we allow people like Clifford Olson and 

Charles Ng to retain their right to a fair hearing -- those people 

have the right to a fair hearing. Under this Bill, just because 

you might be suspected of having blue blood, you are not 

protected under our constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP's refusal to respect the basic right of all 

citizens to a fair trial is suggestive of a party that only respects 

the rule of law and political pluralism when they're in 

opposition.  It's passing strange, Mr. Speaker, when the people 

that are now government were in opposition, they were quick 

to criticize -- very quick to criticize -- anything they thought 

was unfair.  Now, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that they 

are government and they still think they're in opposition. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan gave them the right to govern, Mr. 

Speaker, and we on this side of the House suggest to them they 

better do so.  They better do so, Mr. Speaker, with fairness and 

open and honesty as they promised.  We are not prepared, Mr. 

Speaker, to agree that they are doing that at this time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even a lay person if they read that Bill, has to 

become very uneasy -- very uneasy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The NDP pledged less patronage, less partisanism, and the 

election victory they won, Mr. Speaker, in all fairness was 

impressive.  Mr. Speaker, it's our point of view on this side of 

the House they should live up to the promises they made to 

people of this province who put their trust in them and are 

looking for fair, open, and honest government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question I think could be asked today: will 

this type of Bill be the standard procedure for dealing 

  



472 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

with the opposition? 

 

First, Mr. Speaker, they select the person or situation that has 

the least public support.  For instance, George Hill.  They use 

that to stir up the mob, Mr. Speaker, the union leaders, get the 

support, and then they bring in the Premier with the rope, or the 

Justice minister.  They make sure that no one can escape, Mr. 

Speaker, by using legal trickery.  Like the Charter of Rights or 

a fair trial, those things are stripped from the people.  So they 

can't escape the rope brought in by the Premier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had some time to think last night after I was on 

my feet.  The more I think of this, Mr. Speaker, the more I 

believe, in all fairness to the opposition and to the people 

whom we represent and indeed to the people they represent, 

this Bill should go to the Court of Appeal, the appeal court.  

Let the appeal court decide if we are right or they are right, Mr. 

Speaker.  If they are so sure, if they are so sure, it makes me 

wonder why they wouldn't do that.  Where is this open 

government that would like to consult with people? 

 

In The Globe and Mail November 21, 1991, the quote of the 

day was: 

 

 We are at a point where every true democrat, everyone 

adhering to democratic ideals, must take his place on the 

barricades. 

 

Do you know who said that?  Eduard Shevardnadze  Mr. 

Speaker, today I believe we all must take our place on the 

barricades.  This Bill goes to the very foundation, the very 

foundation of why we are here in a place like this where we 

debate, where we disagree, and then maybe end up agreeing 

after some debate.  There are some countries, Mr. Speaker, that 

don't have this right.  We must protect that right at all costs. 

 

The very fact, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is before us has to be 

disturbing.  It must cause uneasiness among the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will hear more from me on another Bill for 

the very same reasons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've got to be careful about the things I say about 

this Bill, because it does bother me, it does bother me.  And the 

chorus is starting up again, and that's fine.  They laugh and they 

chuckle and they chortle over there, Mr. Speaker.  They don't 

think this is serious.  I don't think they read it.  I don't think 

those back-benchers have read this Bill.  They have taken the 

word of their Justice minister.  The Justice minister, in my 

opinion, did not write this Bill. 

 

I say again, sir, your name will be on this Bill.  The Bill will 

read: the -- your name -- Bill for hereafter if you pass this Bill.  

Do you want to be known for that?  That's the question you ask 

yourself.  If you do and if you feel you're safe, then let it go to 

the Court of Appeal.  If the Court of Appeal says this is right, 

Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to stand in my place and vote for it.  

I don't believe this would stand up under scrutiny in the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of things I could say about this 

Bill.  I know there are others who would like to speak to it.  

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your attention.  I will now take 

my seat, with regret. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  What we are 

discussing today is a Bill that, when passed, will allow the 

government to change employment contracts that it finds 

unacceptable.  What we have here is a Bill which will allow the 

government to change the law.  What we have here is a 

government who is omnipotent, or at the very least has 

illusions of being all-powerful. 

 

First they change the law of the legislature, and now, Mr. 

Speaker we have them changing the laws of the land. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the members across the way share the 

member from Regina Albert South's opinion that the individual 

is not as important as the system.  That is why we have them 

today debating a Bill that will use this legislature to target 

individual citizens.  That is why we have them using the 

powers of this legislature to conduct a witch-hunt. 

 

If what they are proposing with this legislation is correct and 

right, Mr. Speaker, they would extend it to include private 

sector contracts.  But we don't see them doing that, Mr. 

Speaker, and why?  I would like to ask them why, but they 

have stripped me of every opportunity to ask questions other 

than during question period. 

 

(1015) 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes far beyond reducing severance 

packages, as the NDP would have the public believe.  This Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, suspends fundamental principles of law. 

 

I do not believe that the Minister of Justice truly approves of 

this Bill.  I know that the member from Saskatoon Fairview is 

an honourable individual.  I do not believe that he wants to be 

known for ever after in law schools as the individual who 

introduced this law.  The individual who set a precedent of this 

calibre with a Bill that will carry his good name.  He does not 

want our future lawyers to examine and study a law that hangs 

individuals out to dry and strips them of their rightful 

severance; a Bill which will be associated with his name.  I do 

not believe he wants that to be his legacy. 

 

I cannot believe that our Justice officials agree with what this 

Bill encompasses.  This Bill does not require that all Crown 

employment contracts be made public.  It does nothing of the 

sort. 

 

What this Bill does is provide a method for the NDP to make 

public only contracts of the previous government.  What this 

Bill does is provide the NDP a method in which to maintain a 

cloak of secrecy around all future employment arrangements.  

What this Bill does is legalize the slander, libel, and 

persecution in so far as civil remedies are concerned.  This Bill 

creates a clever environment exempting the NDP from all 

scrutiny including, Mr. Speaker, scrutiny of severance 

payments by limiting the effect of the Bill to those agencies 

with boards of directors appointed 90 per cent by the cabinet. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

Just as the Minister of Finance's Bill suspends the 

constitutional guarantees of the legislature and the rules and 

procedures of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I'd just like to draw to the 

attention of the members that the noise level last night in this 

Assembly was much too loud and it's again beginning this 

morning.  It simply will not be acceptable and I ask members if 

they wish to have discussions at that level to please do it in 

their lounge, but not in this Assembly.  And it will not be 

acceptable. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate 

your concerns and efforts on my behalf. 

 

So does Bill 18 suspend the application of law for a narrowly 

defined group of individuals?  This government is arbitrarily 

changing rules and laws at their leisure.  They are abusing their 

majority in this legislature.  They are so caught up in revenge, 

pent up anger of having had to wait 10 years to gain control of 

this province, that they are persecuting innocents with no 

political affiliations.  Mr. Speaker, this NDP government so 

wants to defame the Conservatives that they have lost sight of 

why they are here. 

 

You are not here to continually condemn a party that defeated 

you, and you feel cheated out of power 10 years ago.  You are 

now here to govern a province.  But, Mr. Speaker, the members 

across the floor are not even considering what is good for this 

province.  They are too busy hunting down whatever they 

perceive as Tory loyalists. 

 

Do you think you gain votes by firing civil servants and 

denying them their severance package?  Not likely, Mr. 

Speaker.  Why doesn't this government put their energy to good 

use?  Why doesn't the government have their various 

departments devise constructive legislation rather than 

destructive legislation? 

 

The farmers out there are waiting for assistance from this 

government.  Why doesn't this government introduce some 

farm aid legislation here in the legislature?  Will the farmers 

benefit from your legislation legalizing a witch-hunt? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I do not have at my disposal right 

now, for my own scrutiny, the speeches that were given last 

night.  But if my memory serves me well, those words are 

almost identical, if not identical -- and I will check that with 

Hansard -- to a speech that was given by a colleague on your 

side last night.  I think the words are identical, and I ask the 

member if he . . . it must be his own words and not the words 

of another member or a speech of another member.  So I want 

him to keep that in mind. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, these words may indeed 

sound similar because we do feel the same way about this issue 

-- why the farmers benefit from your legislation legalizing a 

witch-hunt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the civil servants that the NDP are denying 

severance may very well be farmers.  Farmers do have second 

income positions, Mr. Speaker.  Even some of us in here are in 

that position.  Who is to say that you are not 

hurting those who claim are so important to you?  Where is the 

NDP pledge that agriculture would be a number one priority?  

You cannot just make statements and never do anything about 

it.  You cannot just fly off to Ottawa and then say, yes, that 

should hold them.  Let's go get some Tories. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why doesn't this government stop wasting time on 

vengeful legislation?  Why do the members opposite want to 

spend millions of dollars defending this legislation in court?  

That is what you'll be doing.  Don't kid yourselves.  The NDP 

government is going to be in court defending this Bill that they 

are ramming through the legislature.  We've seen evidence of 

this already. 

 

The Leader-Post reported on it.  Mr. Speaker, it's not the real 

motive behind this . . . Is not the real motive behind this 

legislation purely political?  The public is busy, they are 

involved in the holiday season, and they are not watching the 

NDP right now.  They are not closely watching as the NDP 

slowly makes room for their patronage appointments, 

patronage appointments they claim they would not participate 

in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government resumed this sitting claiming 

they would be out of here in two weeks.  That in itself is 

arrogant.  They decided before the House resumed that we 

would only be here for two weeks.  Why then doesn't this 

government . . . why then does this government insist on 

introducing legislation that is so complex, so devious, that we 

can not possibly let it pass without scrutiny? 

 

I would much rather be at home celebrating the season with my 

family.  Last night, my family had a Christmas concert to 

attend in which my three young children were participants.  

Mr. Speaker, my family is very important to me; however this 

legislation is even more important to the individuals of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

My family would like me to be at home. They are not unlike 

the members opposite's family.  They do not want this season 

disrupted.  But, Mr. Speaker, I cannot allow this legislation to 

pass, let legislation such as this Bill before us pass through this 

Assembly without a fight.  I cannot let the NDP pick and chose 

who in the civil service will go without what is rightfully 

theirs.  My conscience will not allow me, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Why should I be at home enjoying this festive season when so 

many others would be spending it in fear of losing their jobs 

and their severance?  Why should these people be forced to sit 

through this season in fear of the NDP?  This legislation 

legalizes open hunting season on civil servants.  Mr. Speaker, I 

ask the government to reconsider their actions.  There is no 

need for this legislation. 

 

I ask the Minister of Justice to reflect on the ramifications of 

this Bill that he has introduced.  I ask him to follow his 

principles to guide his actions.  Do not allow your colleagues to 

push through legislation that will have your name tied to it.  No 

one else will specifically be tied to this Bill.  It will be known 

as the NDP Bill endorsed by the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview. 

  



474 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, one of these clauses has a small preamble to it 

which I think sums up the whole attitude of this Bill.  And this 

small preamble is four words: actions and rights extinguished.  

And I believe that's the whole heart and soul of this Bill. 

 

And I would like to discuss a few of the premises in this Bill: ". 

. . includes any claim in damages or debt for unjust dismissal . . 

."  Well I would, not being a lawyer, Mr. Speaker, have to term 

unjust dismissal in my mind as dismissal without cause. 

 

And I would like to quote to you from the Regina Leader-Post 

of Thursday, December 19.  And it says: 

 

 The NDP has consistently refused to make the firings known 

publicly. 

 

 But Rural Affairs Minister Darrel Cunningham, minister 

responsible for the Liquor Board, confirmed the firing was 

without cause and had little to do  with Urness's work. 

 

 "I'm not going to be critical of Mr. Urness's work," 

Cunningham said.  "He's done a credible job." 

 

 "I'm not knocking the guy.  I'm just saying we're moving in a 

different direction." 

 

It goes on to say: 

 

 "He was one of my favorite football players," . . . "He was 

the best centre Saskatchewan ever had." 

 

Those are the words of the minister is not . . . he's 

complimenting the man for the job he did and yet he fired him.  

Is that not unjust dismissal?  Should not Mr. Urness have the 

right that this Bill is trying to take away from him? 

 

This kind of firing, Mr. Speaker, I believe could be termed a 

breach of contract by the government.  Again without this 

legislation that type of action could go to the courts and the 

gentleman in question could seek redress, but this type of 

legislation he cannot do so. 

 

Another part of this includes inducing breach of contract, when 

you force a person into a position to break their contract, Mr. 

Speaker, so that the government can say that the individual is 

the reason why we had to terminate him.  That is not right, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

One of the areas which in this Bill which is perhaps difficult to 

deal with in public is to know for sure what is happening . . . is 

the idea of mental stress. The member from Saskatoon 

Greystone has discussed it quite often in public and I believe I 

have an example here which could show exactly what mental 

stress is, and yet under this Bill there would be no recourse by 

the individuals involved. 

 

I would like to quote from an issue of Maclean's magazine 

beginning of December.  And this is a quote from Daryl Bean, 

Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure you're familiar with it because it was 

quoted in this House before: 

 

 After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad and the 

vampire he had such awful stuff left with 

which he made a scab.  A scab is a two-legged animal with a 

corkscrew soul, a water-logged brain, and a . . . backbone of 

jelly and glue.  Where others have hearts, he carries a tumour 

of rotten principles . . .  No man has a right to scab as long as 

there is a pool of water to drawn his carcass in, or a rope long 

enough to hang his body with. 

 

When this kind of thing is directed to employees of the 

government, Mr. Speaker, I believe that puts those employees 

under a severe amount of stress -- stress to try and force those 

people from their jobs. 

 

(1030) 

 

And yet this legislation would give those employees no 

recourse to the courts, no manner of compensation.  And I do 

not understand how the Minister of Justice can sponsor this and 

how he can support it. 

 

This type of defamation, Mr. Speaker, ruins a person's 

reputation.  This gentleman, from which I quoted, can defame a 

person, defame a government employee.  The members 

opposite, the ministers, can do the same.  And yet there is no 

recourse. 

 

The employee who is defamed cannot go back to the courts and 

say, that gentleman was not telling the truth about me, this is 

the truth.  There is nothing they can do. 

 

I don't know why the Minister of Justice would not refer this to 

a constitutional question.  Perhaps the law firm that he has been 

discussing . . . has advised him that it is constitutional. 

 

The firm of Olive and Waller, Mr. Speaker, have been advising 

on this Bill.  Were the lawyers in the Justice department not 

competent enough to prepare this Bill?  Or were they advising 

against it?  Were they advising the minister not to go ahead 

with this? 

 

What was the fee, Mr. Speaker, that the law firm of Olive and 

Waller were charging to prepare this Bill?  Did they work for 

half the pay, a quarter of the pay of Sid Dutchak?  Or perhaps, 

Mr. Speaker, were they working for free, for future 

considerations?  Or were they working, Mr. Speaker, just to 

taste Tory blood?  In fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe that Olive and 

Waller were the law firm doing the actual firings of the people 

involved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the groups that were protected in this 

legislation were the unions.  And why were the unions 

protected?  They have a contract with this government, but yet 

others that have contracts with this government are not 

protected. 

 

And perhaps I can demonstrate why the unions were protected.  

I have a copy here of The Labour Reporter, November '91, 

published by the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Mr. 

Speaker, volume 6, no. 7.  This says: 

 

 Election Win Highlights Busy Year.  Representing working 

people in Saskatchewan means taking on a variety of issues 

in many different ways.  Our resistance to Devine's attacks 

and our support for  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

The New Democrats played a major part in the massive 

election victory of October 21. 

 

Is that why unions are protected? 

 

 All the contributions have not yet been added up, but we 

estimate that more than $250,000 as well as many full-time 

workers were contributed through the Federation by our 

affiliates leading up to and during the campaign. 

 

And I'd like to repeat that, Mr. Speaker: "more than $250,000 

as well as many full-time workers were contributed through the 

Federation by our affiliates leading up to and during the 

campaign." 

 

Mr. Speaker, are unions being protected because: 

 

 50,000 copies of a leaflet on the government's record, a series 

of nine issue sheets on labour's political program, and a 

leaflet on occupational health and safety issues were 

produced and distributed to affiliates just before and during 

the election.  We also covered the province with thousands of 

stickers pointing out graphically that Devine would have 

trouble holding on to his seat. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Estevan did hold his seat. 

 

 In November and December we organized to ensure big 

crowds, demonstrations, and tough questions at former 

Finance Minister Hepworth's round of budget consultation 

meetings.  This campaign was greatly assisted by affiliates 

providing staff or taking people off the job to serve as 

co-ordinators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they took people off their jobs to serve the NDP's 

purposes. 

 

 In March we produced a series of four television ads on SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) privatization, the 

children's dental plan, rural services, and health care which 

ran for two weeks on CTV stations in Regina, Saskatoon, 

Prince Albert, and Yorkton.  The ads were designed to build 

on last year's radio and booklet campaign done through the 

privatization committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this why the unions have been exempted from 

this legislation; why they seem to be the sacrosanct group in 

our societies today?  Why are the unions being protected?  Are 

they going to receive huge wage increases from this 

government in the near future?  Are they going to receive other 

compensations which, while not wages, do actually amount to a 

wage increase in the sense that they will work less hours?  To 

the Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest 

that he does not allow his colleagues to sully his good name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member of Saskatoon Greystone does not 

approve of this Bill.  However, Mr. Speaker, she does not have 

the courage or the intestinal fortitude -- the conviction -- to 

vote against it. 

Mr. Speaker, I do not approve of this Bill before us today and I 

will not be supporting this Bill in any way, shape, or form.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The past few 

weeks have proved more than interesting for the members of 

this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  Bill 18 surpasses interesting and 

goes straight to Draconian.  Some of the members may not 

understand what that means but they'll look it up in the 

dictionaries I'm sure.  I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, they'll be running 

for their dictionaries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has attempted to railroad 

the members on this side of the House.  They've established 

committees to carry out their political revenge on the former 

Tory government.  That's what they've been doing, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's what this is all about.  They have fired 

hundreds of innocent people in order to begin a long string of 

patronage appointments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have brought a budget document before 

the House and refused to debate it.  But the Bill before us today 

-- Bill 18 -- goes even further.  The Bill is a result of promises 

of open and honest government from the NDP. 

 

The promise itself, Mr. Speaker, is honourable.  Too bad the 

results are not.  Bill 18 goes far beyond reducing severance 

packages and suspends fundamental principles of law.  It does 

not require that all Crown employment contracts be made 

public, but provides a method for the NDP to make public only 

contracts of the previous government and maintain all future 

employment arrangements in secrecy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is honest and open government, they say.  

They say it's honest and open government.  The House Leader, 

Mr. Speaker, has stood in question period in one day and said 

that some new contracts are going out, new salaries.  And he 

mentioned several, the $150,000 per year of salaries -- 

$150,000.  Now this bothers me, Mr. Speaker, that he's 

perceiving the people of the province to believe that they're 

going to get $150,000 a year for ever. 

 

Not that I'm sticking up for George Hill.  He'll look after 

himself.  But George Hill had a contract . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I knew, Mr. Speaker, that I had to say some 

word, some name, to bring them to my attention. 

 

Now George Hill, when he started, when he got his first 

contract . . . now I might not be exactly right here, but it was 

around 110 to $120,000 per year.  It was about $120,000 per 

year if my memory serves me correct.  They say they're starting 

up several of their new contracts out at 150.  I wonder where 

they'll end up is what I wonder, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder where 

they'll end up.  Because George Hill ended up at $208,000 a 

year.  So we have to compare $208,000 for a man that was 

there for years before he rose to 208, to somebody starting now 

at $150,000 a year. 

  



476 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

And we'll see after he qualifies himself, Mr. Speaker, where he 

ends up. 

 

Now they're talking about George Hill ending up with 

$400,000 a year, which he did.  But it was a percentage of the 

profits.  So that's what I'm saying here about what they'll likely 

do to fool the public.  They'll give them their $150,000 or 

100,000 or 80,000 or 160,000, but then it's going to be the 

hidden benefits, Mr. Speaker.  There's where they're going to 

fool the public -- you know, the way George Hill did.  But he 

had a reason to do it.  When you make a profit, it pays. 

 

But the NDP as long as I've know them -- and I knew the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) people -- they think 

it was a dirty word to make a profit.  They thought it was 

wrong.  I don't think it's wrong to make a profit. 

 

It's hard for any farmer, Mr. Speaker, to make a profit today.  

It's hard. But when the days were good in this province, it 

wasn't hard to make a profit because if you managed well, you 

made a profit.  It's the same thing with all the workers that they 

have under contract.  If they do their job well, they should 

make a profit and get some extra money.  I believe they should. 

 

And I believe you people should do that.  I believe you should.  

If some of the contracts the House Leader's giving out for 

$150,000 and they're running multimillion dollar corporations 

and they fumble it and they don't do well, he should lose his 

job and get someone else that can do it.  But if they can make a 

profit, do well, pay them for it.  You've got to have some 

initiative to do well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP must be looking . . . Bill 18, Mr. 

Speaker, allows the NDP government to suspend the 

application of law for a narrowly defined group of individuals.  

That's what it does. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it affects far more than the big-ticket people.  

This Bill will apply to all out of scope public service and 

Crown sector jobs, in excess of 400 of whom we've been able 

to document have been fired by the NDP.  I have the names 

that they want on record of Crop Insurance field men that were 

hired to measure bins for GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program).  And these are about 12, 15 names that have 

contacted me and said that they have worked 44 days or less 

and then they were fired.  They were fired. If they were 45 

days, they belonged to a union, they were protected. 

 

There's a man from Kenaston, Don George.  He says, mention 

my name.  He says, I'm hurt.  My family is suffering at 

Christmas time because we thought we had more money 

coming in.  We planned on this extra money.  But what 

happened to the man?  He got fired. 

 

And Mr. Johnson from Davidson, the same thing, a large 

family, worked hard to try to do well on his farm and to try to 

succeed he put his name into be a Crop Insurance adjuster 

years ago and now was accepted to go out and measure bins 

and what happened, Mr. Speaker?  He got this written letter 

saying your services are no longer required.  And his job was 

there in a contract to measure bins from September 15 to 

December 15 and longer if 

need be and which it would have longer. 

 

A Mr. Bob Dezotell from Davidson and a Roy Kenny from 

Davidson, Mory Dolan from Girvin, all the same.  These three 

now are three young people.  They're trying to get started 

farming.  And they showed enough initiative, Mr. Speaker, 

showed enough initiative to go out and try to do an off-farm 

job.  And they just get in the middle of it -- the middle of it -- 

with their plans made that I got a few dollars. 

 

I won't mention this name, but had one that said, I promised my 

banker my whole . . . every dollar I get from Crop Insurance, I 

promised him, and a contract was broken.  And I think that's 

terrible to break a contract and up and say you're gone.  Why 

didn't they have, Mr. Speaker, why didn't they have enough 

decency about them to at least finish out the contract for this 

year, to measure the bins and do what you want for another 

year; at least it wouldn't have been quite so bad. 

 

(1045) 

 

There's an Arnold Wright and Bill McConwell and a Fred 

Watt, these people are really hurt.  These are three that I wrote 

down here that phoned me specifically.  One of them I didn't 

know before, a person from Liberty.  He said, I got a Crop 

Insurance contract because my business was going under; 

because, he said, I've been overhauling machinery.  He's a 

mechanic for many years in the Liberty area and this is the 

same area where the NDP candidate was from, Bobby 

Robertson.  And he said, I'm sure glad that you were able to 

succeed in getting a Crop Insurance adjuster's position and if 

I'm elected, I'll see that you keep it. 

 

Well he didn't get elected.  I made sure of that.  But the 

member from Canora did get elected and he didn't keep the 

promise of one of his own candidates.  I just feel badly about 

this because this person is a mechanic that went out to try to do 

extra work to keep his business open. 

 

The whole thing, Mr. Speaker, that they broke a contract at 44 

days.  They would not go to 45 days. 

 

Now I'm worried, Mr. Speaker, about the crop Insurance agents 

in this province.  They have a five-year contract, and there was 

nothing wrong with the five-year contract.  Now we haven't 

heard they're going to do anything about the Crop Insurance 

agents.  But, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid when a Bill like this goes 

through, Bill 18, it'll give them a right to be able to sweep off a 

five-year contract.  And these people at least knew when they 

took on these agencies, they had to rearrange their lives.  They 

had to put up a large bond.  And some of them had to borrow 

money.  And I know they'll get this back.  But they had to 

rearrange their lives.  And now they're out there worried . . . is 

this heavy-handed government going to see to it that no longer 

we're going to be a service as an agent? 

 

Is it a way, Mr. Speaker, is this whole plan, is it a way of 

getting rid of contracts that the Tories put in place?  Is that 

what they had in mind or were they really sincere about this 

Bill? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think that they really were sincere.  I 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

think that there's a method behind it all because no 

heavy-handed government would be so heavy handed to bring 

in a Bill with some of the clauses that I can't get into, only in 

committee . . . that we will if it gets there, if we ever let it get 

there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past couple of months we already have 

real examples of shop stewards tormenting some of these out of 

scope employees with a goal of obtaining resignations from 

those individuals.  This Bill goes a step further, Mr. Speaker.  It 

actually legalizes these actions -- actually legalizes the actions. 

 

Unjust dismissal; breach of contract; inducing breach of 

contract; Interference with a contract; mental distress -- these 

are terrible, terrible things.  These people can have a loss of 

reputation.  It can hurt them.  Cause of action in contract; Tort 

or equity -- this is quite a mouthful that I'm saying here.  I 

jumped over some of them because of time here; some other 

members want to speak. 

 

Imagine a case where a manager working for this government, 

and any member over there decides to make their contract 

public.  And it can hurt them, and hurt them for the rest of their 

life.  They might even be able to come out and say, well they 

stole something, and it turns out that they didn't because they're 

going to make it all public.  It can hurt people.  They're not 

thinking of how it can damage the lives of people. 

 

If this ever did happen to some manager of a corporation, he'd 

have no legal recourse, would he, Mr. Speaker?  He'd have no 

legal recourse whatsoever.  And the reputation of his family, 

his income security, would be harmed.  And I think that the 

Minister of Justice . . . these things I'm sure bothers him 

because he's a thoughtful man, and I'm sure he's thinking these 

things over very carefully.  I can see him thinking more and 

more each day here, getting very serious about this Bill.  I just 

wish that when they put it all together that they had have got 

serious about it then, not now. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Justice rose to his feet many times to 

answer questions on this Bill.  But did we receive any answers?  

Instead the minister took the canned NDP response and tried to 

blame this Bill on the former government.  Now what's this Bill 

got to do with the former government?  If there's only half a 

dozen contracts out there, or three or four that are out of reason 

. . . I think some of them are, Mr. Speaker.  To be fair I think 

some of them were.  I didn't know anything about them.  And if 

they're unreasonable, Mr. Speaker, go deal with a few of those.  

Deal with them in any way that you have to.  And I think that's 

what the law is for.  The law would work it out.  You can take 

it to arbitration.  Do what you have to, but don't go bringing all 

these other people back in. 

 

Fact, Mr. Speaker, no other province or territory of this country 

has ever gone to such extremes as a Bill like this, Mr. Speaker 

-- never.  This Bill provides that all contracts are exempt from 

the law if they do not have explicit provisions for benefits at 

the termination of employment. 

 

So what this means is that the NDP can enter into arrangements 

that, for example, include a monthly payment into a trust fund 

instead of a severance payment. 

This is dangerous.  The trust benefit would be paid during the 

life of the contract and would therefore not be payable on 

termination.  It is very clever, Mr. Speaker.  It's well put 

together.  Such an arrangement would be completely exempt 

from any of the public scrutiny.  But eventually the people on 

this side of the House . . . and I hope the media will help us get 

the facts out on what it's really going to do to people. 

 

These contracts could be completely hidden.  But what I'm 

more worried about, Mr. Speaker, is the contracts that we won't 

find out about, the contracts that the public won't find out to be 

scrutinized.  It'll be the contracts that'll be hidden in the 

protection of Bill 18.  That's what really worries me. 

 

The question is, Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government 

interested in hiding contracts at all?  Why do they want to hide 

a contract?  If they're going to do things so well the next four 

years, approximately next four years the government's in 

power, if they're going to do things so honest and open, why do 

they have to worry about putting a Bill in to protect the 

mistakes they're going to make?  I mean I don't know why 

they're worried so much about this first Bill that has to be in. 

 

I heard in the rumour mill that, I think from one of the 

members, talking to them -- I won't say which one because I'm 

not sure who told me this -- they've got to do it, got to do it 

because we're going to save the taxpayers about 3 or $4 

million.  Well if all this huffle-bumble is over 3 or $4 million 

and they could go back and go to court or whatever -- 

arbitration, like I said before -- and settle with those few 

people, maybe they can save half of that anyway. 

 

But why go through all this commotion over . . . and that's the 

only reason they can give because they want to get back on the 

Tory blood.  They want to get after Tory blood. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Principle, principle of the thing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Somebody said it's for the principle of the 

thing.  If it was for the principle of the thing, they wouldn't be 

worrying about the 3 or $4 million.  You can go out and you 

can take them to court and save that.  The principle of the thing 

is that what you're going to do is hide your contracts for the 

next four years.  You're not going to bring them out . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That is ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- No, that isn't ridiculous.  Mr. Speaker, 

somebody's chirping now -- no, sorry, Mr. Speaker, it's the 

Minister of Health.  And she said it's absolutely ridiculous.  It 

isn't ridiculous because they have the right in Bill 18 to do what 

they want.  They'll start all over again.  They'll make their 

contracts.  They'll have their $150,000 a year contracts, and 

they'll have all these other benefits.  Don't think that they can 

fool me.  I've been around a little bit longer than she has and I 

understand what will happen.  And I'll be around maybe a lot 

longer than she will and she will realize what's happening. 

 

Further, Mr. Speaker, if this kind of action is appropriate for 

governments, then nothing can make it inappropriate 

  



478 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

for private employees.  Where is it going to go next?  Will they 

bring down legislation that says private employees will have to 

do the same thing?  Will the government pass similar 

legislation so that successor employers in the private sector 

who deem the terms of employment contract entered into by 

their predecessors excessive or unfair . . . to change those 

contracts and engage in infamy to obtain termination.  Why 

not?  They might as well.  They've done this one.  You might 

as well do another one. 

 

And who says they won't, Mr. Speaker?  Why should the 

government be above the law while the public must abide by 

it?  Why should they?  Why should you people be above the 

law?  You might as well let the rest of the people in the 

province do the same thing.  Other organizations are exempt 

from the law.  It is possible, even likely, that the NDP in 

paying off Barb Byers will enter into an unjustifiable contracts 

with the union.  We'll never know about that, but, Mr. Speaker, 

it'll happen. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not apply to unions.  It 

doesn't apply to unions.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask the 

Minister of Justice what makes union agreements any different 

than the private ones?  And when we get into committee, if we 

get there, Mr. Minister, you'll have to answer that question.  No 

matter how we look at it, Mr. Speaker, the real motive behind 

this Bill is purely political.  It's just political. 

 

We've been told that in private conversations.  And I'm not the 

kind of a person that mentions the names that tells me those 

things.  It's strictly political.  They got the whole Saskatchewan 

out there, all they can think of . . . they don't think of contracts 

and the seriousness of this.  But they will in time.  All they can 

think of now is the two or three people with the large contracts.  

That's all they can think of that is wrong.  And I think some of 

them were wrong.  But that's all they have the people thinking. 

 

But while they're slipping this Bill through . . . and what a time 

to slip it through when we want to all get home for Christmas -- 

what a time.  Why didn't they bring this House in about 10 days 

earlier or two weeks earlier?  But no, that isn't what their plan 

was.  They thought if we get into a jam on this Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, if we get into a jam on several things here about the 

supply Bill -- and there's two or three Bills that we're really 

unhappy about -- that they could force us out by Christmas. 

 

Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, they can't force us out.  Because 

if we on this side of the House think it's wrong, we think in our 

hearts that it's wrong, and we think our people that elected us 

think it's wrong, we have the right to fight that Bill and just not 

quit because it's Christmas time. 

 

All laws and all governments doesn't stop because of Christmas 

holidays.  We can go home and take our holidays and come 

back and go at this in January.  There's nothing to stop us. 

 

And as the Premier said to me last night, the member from Arm 

River hasn't got the jam, along with his colleagues, to fight this 

another 10 days.  Well those kind of heckles, Mr. Speaker, 

coming from a Premier of this province, all that does is rile up 

people like us that are set in our ways and 

what we believe is right.  It'll just set our feet more solid to the 

ground and make us fight. 

 

So if you want to get things done, and we want to get out of 

here in a friendly fashion so we can all say that the work of the 

legislature for the short term is done, for goodness sakes, give 

in a little bit.  Change some of these things that the public don't 

like. 

 

The NDP are riding high on their blame-the-Tories campaign.  

In the meantime they're cleaning house for the NDP hacks and 

flacks.  That's exactly what they're doing. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it's time the NDP started answering 

questions, started being truthful and up front with the 

Saskatchewan people.  It is time the NDP government started 

working for the people, not against the people.  And that's 

exactly what this Bill's going to be, is working against the 

people. 

 

If I had the time, Mr. Speaker, I should have the government 

directory here.  We could go through every name -- several 

hundreds on there -- one by one, and ask them.  And I could list 

all their phone numbers.  We could do that.  We're not going to, 

but I'd like to -- every individual name that works for 

government, what they're thinking at their Christmas table, say, 

I wonder if I'll be one of those contracts one day.  I wonder if 

I'll be one.  People that likely didn't even vote for us.  But 

they're going to have second thoughts about you next time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's time the NDP realize they should remove the 

democratic name from their party's title, because they have 

proven to be anything but democratic. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's permissible to read the Bill we're 

talking about.  I just want to read the Bill, with your 

permission, Mr. Speaker, so we can think about it very 

carefully: 

 

 Bill No. 18, An Act to Provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in 

Crown Employment Contracts governing Payments and 

Benefits on Termination or Expiration of those Contract, to 

Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting those matters 

and to Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to 

Compensation for any Loss or Damage resulting from the 

Enactment or application of this Act. 

 

Now the first thing you can look at this Bill, an Act -- it is an 

act all right.  It's an act to fool the people and provide public 

disclosure of Crown employees.  It's terrible.  I just can't 

believe that the minister, the member from Fairview, a man 

that I've watched come into this House in 1986, and I earnestly 

say, Mr. Speaker, that I do believe, I earnestly say this right 

here, Mr. Minister, that you were one of the members that 

stood over here and handled yourself with honour. 

 

Now we're not just saying this thing to you, Mr. Minister, just 

to make you feel good to kind of blow you up a little bit.  We 

earnestly mean it.  But I think you want to stay that way.  And 

all I'm asking you, all I'm asking you, Mr. Minister, is when we 

get into committee -- and I don't 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

know when that will be -- that you seriously, seriously I ask 

you please to consider and talk over some of our amendments.  

That's all I'm asking. 

 

And if some of these amendments that we're serious about, Mr. 

Minister, if we're really serious and we don't understand, if you 

can prove to us -- because none of us are lawyers; we've talked 

to some lawyers and we think we have real reasonable doubts 

-- but if you can prove to us and give us reassurance, it will 

make things much easier.  And I'm sure the minister will, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

 

So I want to leave it on that note.  I think some more members . 

. . I'm not sure if they do or not.  But I want to close now, Mr. 

Speaker, and leave it that way that when we do go to 

committee . . . And I've had a nod from the minister and I know 

that I can trust him that he'll at least consider our amendments. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate the 

opportunity to speak on this Bill as well. 

 

In the past few weeks I think it has been proved conclusively 

by the members of this Assembly that Bill No. 18 goes far 

beyond being just interesting and goes straight to being 

Draconian.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has attempted 

to railroad the members on this side of the House.  They've 

established committees to carry out their political revenge on 

the former Tory government, and they have fired hundreds of 

innocent people in order to regain a long string of patronage 

appointments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP have brought a budget document before 

this House and refuse to debate it.  The Bill before us today is 

Bill No. 18.  It goes even further, Mr. Speaker.  The Bill goes 

to the result of promises of open and honest government from 

the NDP.  They promise to be honourable, Mr. Speaker.  Too 

bad the results are not. 

 

Bill No. 18 goes far beyond reducing severance packages and 

suspends fundamental rights of law.  It does not require that all 

Crown employment contracts be made public, but provides a 

method for the NDP to make public only contracts of the 

previous government, and maintain all future employment 

arrangements in secrecy.  Is this open and honest government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite that they need to 

check on these words in the dictionary a little bit.  I think the 

word open means: not closed; not blocked up; to make 

accessible; to reveal.  Under "honest" there are phrases like fair 

and righteous in speech and act.  But, Mr. Speaker, I think 

these words ring a little hollow to the other members. 

 

They've suspended the application of law for a group of 

individuals, a very narrow group of individuals.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that while we have no problem whatsoever 

with the government wanting to negotiate 

with the contracts of some of the large ticket type contracts that 

were there, it's the people that are at the other end of the spectre 

that we're concerned about, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This Bill will apply to all of the out-of-scope public service and 

Crown sector jobs in excess of 400 of whom we've been able to 

document that have been fired so far by the NDP.  Over the 

past couple of months we already have examples of shop 

stewards tormenting some of the out-of-scope employees with 

the goal of obtaining the resignations of those individuals.  This 

Bill goes a step even further.  It actually legalizes those actions: 

 

 . . . unjust dismissal, breach of contract, including breach of 

contract, interference with a contract, mental distress, loss of 

reputation, defamation, or any . . . (case) of action in contract, 

tort or equity . . . 

 

This is quite a mouthful indeed, Mr. Speaker.  Imagine a case 

where a manager is subjected to a public campaign by the 

member from Regina Elphinstone that the member stole public 

funds.  The manager would have no legal recourse whatsoever.  

None whatsoever.  And his reputation, his family, and income 

security would be devastated.  Imagine that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday the Minister of Justice rose on his feet many times to 

answer questions on this Bill a few days ago.  But we didn't 

receive what we believe were proper answers to these 

questions.  Instead the minister took the NDP's standard lines 

and blamed the Bill on the former government. 

 

I assure the minister that we would never want to have that 

type of thing happen in this House.  We believe, sir, that this 

Bill is not a good Bill.  There are a number of provisions in it 

that we disagree with whole-heartedly.  In fact no other 

province or territory in the country has ever gone this far, Mr. 

Speaker, ever gone to these extremes.  This Bill provides that 

all contracts are exempt from the law if they do not have 

explicit provision for benefits of the termination of 

employment. 

 

So what this means is the NDP can enter into arrangements that 

for example include a monthly payment into a trust fund 

instead of severance payment.  The trust benefit would be paid 

before the likely contract and would therefore not be payable 

on termination. 

 

It's clever, Mr. Speaker.  Such an arrangement would be 

completely exempt, completely exempt from public scrutiny.  

It would hide the contract within the protection of Bill No. 18. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is, is the NDP government interested 

in hiding contracts?  Why are they interested in hiding all 

contracts like that?  Is this the type of open and honest 

government you people talked about?  Further, is this the kind 

of action that is appropriate for governments with nothing to 

make appropriate for individual private employers? 

 

Will the government pass similar legislation so that successor 

employees in the private sector who deem the 

  



480 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

terms of employment contracts entered into by the predecessors 

successive or unfair to change those contracts and engage in 

infamy to obtain termination. 

 

Why not, Mr. Speaker?  Why should the government be above 

the law while the public must abide by it?  Other organizations 

are exempt from the law as well, Mr. Speaker.  It is possible or 

even likely that the NDP are paying off Barb Byers, will enter 

into unjustifiable contracts with the union. 

 

This Bill does not apply to unions.  Mr. Speaker, I'd like to ask 

the Minister of Justice what makes union agreements more 

sacrosanct than private ones?  No matter how we look at this 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, the real motive behind this Bill is purely 

political.  The NDP are riding high on their blame-the-Tories 

campaign.  In the meantime they're cleaning house for their 

NDP friends. 

 

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is time the NDP started answering 

questions, started being truthful and up front with the 

Saskatchewan people.  It is time that the NDP government 

started working for all of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, not against the people of Saskatchewan.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, it is time the NDP realized they should remove 

the word democratic from their name.  They are anything but 

democratic. 

 

On a standing vote, the public of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

looked on in horror as each and every member of the NDP 

voted to suppress individual rights.  They believe the same I 

think as the member from Regina Albert South, that the system 

is more important than any one individual. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House will always 

stand in support of individual rights and freedom.  And now the 

public has on record who is for and who is opposed to 

individual rights.  The Conservatives are for and the NDP are 

opposed. 

 

In the election campaign, Mr. Speaker, it was interesting.  The 

member from Riversdale made reference in Estevan to a 

steamroller rolling over the previous government.  Well what 

the people of Saskatchewan didn't realize -- although the quip 

was amusing, what they didn't realize was now the steamroller 

had indeed arrived.  What we see the steamroller, the NDP 

steamroller doing now is rolling over everything that gets in its 

way.  Freedom of speech for the opposition members in the 

supply Bill, the crushing of individual rights in the severance 

Bill -- this steamroller, the NDP steamroller, the steamroller 

with vengeance as its licence plate. 

 

The sole purpose of the last three weeks of the NDP 

government, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, as a new member of 

this House . . . and very proud to be a new member of this 

House.  But what I've seen here in the last three weeks, Mr. 

Speaker, is a government that has been completely consumed 

and motivated by vengeance, the lowest form of motivation 

known to man -- vengeance.  That's what you folks have tried 

to bring before this House in the last three weeks.  Vengeance, 

and only vengeance.  Try to destroy the Tories; try to destroy 

us. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it isn't working.  Here we stand and 

here we'll remain.  The sole purpose of the last weeks I believe, 

as I said, was to try and make the Conservative opposition look 

bad -- to try and make us squirm, try and make us squirm.  But 

so far I think the only thing that we've seen happen so far, Mr. 

Speaker, in the last few weeks is a couple of government 

members squirm. 

 

We've seen the Minister of Agriculture squirming in regard to a 

Bill on farm debt moratoriums -- trying to get out of their 

commitment during the election campaign on the farm debt 

moratoriums.  Well we've seen him squirm, and now we're 

seeing the Minister of Justice squirm on this Bill.  I'd be 

squirming too if I were you, sir.  I'd be squirming too if I were 

you, sir.  That's why, Mr. Speaker, he stomped across the 

Assembly last night to speak with our member on this Bill.  

That's the reason why you did, sir.  That's why you stormed 

across the floor. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before the member continues, it's not 

customary in this House -- and I know he's not familiar with it 

-- to refer to activities that go on on the floor of the Assembly.  

And I know he's not familiar with it, and we are not to impute 

motives of members on activities that pertain on the floor. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that.  I 

wasn't aware of that.  That indeed was my interpretation of the 

events though -- that was my interpretation of the events 

though.  That was my interpretation of the events. 

 

I would like to just move on a little bit, Mr. Speaker.  We think 

that that was indeed the motives of the government of this last 

few weeks, was to try and make the opposition look as bad as 

absolutely possible and that's the only reason we were called in 

for this last three weeks in this session. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I'd like to move an amendment to this 

Bill, moved by myself and seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek.  And the amendment is as follows: 

 

 That Bill No. 18, The Crown Employment Contracts Act be 

now read a second time and that the subject matter be 

referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Moved by myself and seconded by the member from Maple 

Creek. 

 

Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- An amendment has been moved by the 

member from Kindersley and seconded by the member from 

Maple Creek that Bill No. 18, The Crown Employment 

Contracts Act be not now read a second time and that the 

subject matter be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

I find the amendment in order and the debate will continue on 

the amendment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm seconding this 

motion of amendment to send this legislation to the committee 

on Public Accounts so that it should not be 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

read for the second time. 

 

And I will be speaking to the amendment where I hope to 

demonstrate the evils of this Bill and why it should be sent to 

the committee and why it should be re-examined to have these 

evil things either removed or reworded as we feel that in its 

present form it is fundamentally wrong, and that it may 

possibly even be unconstitutional in our country. 

 

And I'm sure that the members would agree that they would 

probably not want to pass a Bill that could be somehow 

misunderstood as being unconstitutional.  I'm sure that their 

motivations here are to do things according to the rules of our 

country and to the rules that we've set up through a long 

process of parliamentary procedure. 

 

As was pointed out earlier, some members of this Assembly 

have worked long and hard as elected members of government 

over the years. And in that process have been included in the 

very repatriation of the constitution of this country, and in that 

repatriation of the constitution, the writing of the rules that 

govern us and direct us through our own constitution to this 

present time.  Some members, I recall, have actually been 

quoted in many of the news medias as being very proud of their 

contribution to the constitution and the way that we have 

brought it into place within our nation. 

 

I have to admit that I have some quarrel with that at times, 

especially when I see how many things do in fact end up in our 

court system.  And it makes me wonder sometimes if we 

haven't just created a tool to keep the lawyers and judges all in 

business and employed. 

 

(1115) 

 

But that's another question altogether. And the reality is here 

that we have a Bill before us that now seems to take away the 

basic fundamental rights and privileges of individuals, and at 

the same time we have worked so hard over the past 10 or more 

years to bring a constitution into our country that would protect 

the people's individual rights. 

 

And even though sometimes I'm frustrated by how long things 

take in our court system, I have to say that above all things I 

believe that we are doing the right thing when we take the time 

to protect individual rights.  That's the rights of each small 

individual person, each big individual person, and everybody in 

between in the scale of whatever measure you happen to decide 

to use in your philosophy or your thinking. 

 

The rights of individuals, that's what we protect through our 

constitution. And those rights, it appears to me, Mr. Speaker, 

have been taken away from us in Bill 18.  And our amendment 

would simply ask that you take this Bill to a committee and 

re-examine the possibilities that maybe we've gone too far in 

this Bill or maybe we have worded it in such a way that we 

accomplish much more than what our original intention was 

intended to do. 

 

Perhaps we intended to have the right to be able to dismiss 

some folks without recourse from the courts.  And in the need 

to change some people at the tops of certain 

corporations, you felt that you had to protect yourself from the 

recourse of the courts.  And perhaps you felt that even in your 

minds that you're justified to change these people because their 

philosophical direction isn't the same as your own and you 

need to have that direction changed. 

 

But in so writing this piece of legislation, you may have found 

that you've gone so far that you're not just accomplishing the 

goals that you've set for yourself in that respect, but you are in 

fact setting up the stage for future things to go much further to 

hurt an awful lot of people that you weren't even considering 

when you wrote this piece of legislation. 

 

All of the folks that work within our society for any kind of 

government office or government position, it would seem now, 

are at jeopardy as to their individual rights and their individual 

security within this province.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

that is so basically and fundamentally wrong that we have to 

stand here and challenge this whole concept and this whole 

idea, even to the extent that we might miss being home for 

Christmas. 

 

And I think our other colleagues here have pointed out how 

distasteful it is for those of us here to have to debate and 

challenge a Bill of this nature through the festive season.  And 

it does make me wonder if they aren't right when they suggest 

that the government was in fact intending to use the festive 

season as a wedge or a prying bar to motivate us to drop this 

issue quickly and to forsake the needs of the people of this 

province and leave this kind of legislation go through 

unchallenged so that we could go home and enjoy being with 

our families. 

 

And I want to emphasize, as some others have done, that it's no 

small measure of sacrifice for those of us on this side to be here 

any more than it is for those on the other side at this particular 

time.  We have families that I think hopefully enjoy having us 

home for Christmas.  At least we ourselves would like to be 

there. 

 

I have a daughter who's working in Edmonton who is coming 

home for the Christmas season today.  I only see her once or 

twice a year.  And that sacrifice to me now is extremely great 

that I won't be there to be with her for the next few days 

perhaps, maybe not even through the whole Christmas season 

as this thing unfolds.  And that is a great sacrifice to fight for 

the rights of the people of this province to see to it that this 

motion goes back as an amendment to the committee to make 

sure that it is reviewed. 

 

And we have more sacrifices that I think you should be aware 

of -- sacrifices of not being with our family.  My second oldest 

daughter goes to school in Minot.  She's coming home today.  I 

won't be there to see her.  My third daughter makes lunch for 

me in Moose Jaw.  As a rule when I go home, I stop and have 

lunch with her and we've missed that occasion.  There are 

sacrifices to be here. 

 

And my second oldest daughter teaches.  And she is at home 

now, and I won't see her for a long time after this because she'll 

be back to her job.  My son had a Christmas concert yesterday.  

I wasn't there because I had to be here 

  



482 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

as a result of the fact that this government tried to jam this 

legislation through this House during the festive season and 

tried to use that as a cover-up to get away with something that 

will hurt a lot of people over the next four years. 

 

I suggest to this government that one of the first actions that 

any new government after four years will bring into place will 

be a change in this kind of legislation because it takes away the 

fundamental rights of the individual in this province. 

 

There are so many people, Mr. Speaker, that are affected by 

this kind of legislation that I don't believe the opposition took 

into consideration for one minute.  Here's a book of 

supplementary information -- payments to individuals.  There's 

82 names to a page on average.  There's 224 pages in this book, 

and that is a book of the names of the people that work just for 

the province of Saskatchewan just in certain areas.  There's 

another book, at least twice as big as this. 

 

And we can just take a name just at random out of this book, 

and go across here, a permanent, a Russell E. Haukeness.  Is 

this person's rights being protected, or are they being taken 

away by this legislation? 

 

We could go through and ask you the question on every name 

in this book, every name in this book.  Are their rights as 

individuals being taken away in this legislation?  Are their 

fundamental constitutional rights that are written into our new 

Canadian constitution, the rights of the individual being taken 

away?  And we as an opposition have a responsibility to stand 

here and defy this legislation and say to you, yes, this 

legislation does take away those basic fundamental rights of the 

individual in this country. 

 

And if that is so, then we are justified in asking you to accept 

the fact that this piece of legislation should be re-examined 

through the committee.  It is not an unfair request.  And it does 

give you time to look at it again.  And if you're so determined 

that this is right to do, can't you take a few more weeks to look 

at it and bring it in in your next sitting of the legislature?  Are 

you that sure that you're right that you have to jam it through 

before Christmas?  Or can you wait and re-examine it and bring 

it in later?  And if you're still so sure you're right, you will 

bring it back then. 

 

And we've asked you simply to take another look at this whole 

matter to re-examine it, to re-examine in your hearts and your 

souls.  Is this the kind of legislation you want to pass, a 

legislation that will take away the basic fundamental rights of 

individuals in our country and destroy the very constitution that 

your own people have fought so hard in the past to bring about 

in this country? 

 

Do you really want people to be fired without recourse to the 

courts when they've suffered mental distress or loss of 

reputation or defamation?  How would any of you like it if 

someone could defame your character out in public so that you 

could no longer hold a job?  Suppose you're a school teacher 

and somebody defamed your character in such a way that you 

couldn't any longer hold a job in this province, wouldn't you 

want recourse to the courts?  Why would you not give that 

same right to the people that work 

for the government? 

 

We are asking in this amendment, Mr. Speaker, that the people 

in the government take a very serious look at sending this 

matter back for further study.  And we believe that sending it to 

the committee is a reasonable and fair way of doing this and 

bringing about some re-examination and some fairness for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks and 

hope that you will seriously consider this matter.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for this 

opportunity to rise and debate on this Bill.  And I want to say at 

the outset, Mr. Speaker, that I certainly will not be supporting 

this Bill.  And I want to give evidence of that as I speak to the 

amendment, Mr. Speaker, that has been proposed, and basically 

surround my remarks around the premise that this Bill should 

now not be read a second time, Mr. Speaker. And I want to 

provide evidence to the viewing public and to members 

opposite why I believe that to be the case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise at this time to debate a Bill that has no 

match in the free world.  All the legislation proposed by the 

NDP that is their own legislation and not legislation left over 

from the previous government, has the same character as the 

Bill that we have been debating over the last while and 

certainly will continue to debate in the near future. 

 

They started, Mr. Speaker, by appointing a secret tribunal with 

political appointees. And that has been well documented in this 

House on previous occasions, Mr. Speaker, and I have no 

intention in getting involved more into that. 

 

But secondly, they started a process of firing large numbers of 

people without cause.  My colleagues already have listed a long 

litany of these types of people that have fell victim to the axe of 

the government opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they further have expanded on that by dismissing 

all boards of directors that had private citizens sitting on them 

and replacing these private citizens with NDP cabinet 

ministers.  They followed by announcing publicly that they 

would make sure that this first session of the legislature would 

only last two weeks, disregarding thereby the wishes of the 

opposition and indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Assembly itself. 

 

Further, why this Bill should not be read a second time, they 

continued by proposing a motion that would essentially 

suspend the constitution of the province of Saskatchewan and 

eliminate the rules, procedures, and practices of this Legislative 

Assembly.  Any law, any rule, any precedent that we have 

established in this Legislative Assembly that would be contrary 

to the wishes of the Bill, and specifically in this supply Bill, all 

of these would be suspended and they would not have any 

effect any more. 

 

And now they have brought forward a motion that in my 

opinion -- and I preface my remarks by admitting candidly I am 

no lawyer -- in my opinion they have 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

brought forward a motion that goes against the Charter of 

Rights and the fundamental rights of the individual to equal 

protection under the law as well as many other breaches of 

rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that government did not expect the 

opposition to object to this bit of infamy.  They expected, in 

my opinion, that we would be frightened by the ability of the 

member from Elphinstone to conduct a campaign by talking 

about George Hill and others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not here to support and to defend George 

Hill.  I am by trade an educator and I am also only a hog 

farmer.  And in my humble opinion, $1.3 million is not going 

to be defended by this particular member. 

 

But I think it goes much, much deeper than that.  That is not 

the principle that we are talking about.  We're talking about a 

basic, fundamental right, not just a privilege, a right that has 

been enshrined in this Charter of Rights.  Mr. Speaker, that is 

what I am opposing to -- when that fundamental right, when 

that fundamental principle is put in jeopardy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government assumed further, in my opinion, 

that this opposition would value the favours of the media more 

than the rights of the individual.  Well, sir, they were wrong.  

Be clear, Mr. Speaker, that we do understand how difficult it is 

to make people understand the evil nature of the Bill.  And I 

want to spend a little bit of time on that. 

 

People in general hear what the member for Elphinstone has to 

say and believe that it is good to reduce the severances.  We 

know that, Mr. Speaker.  And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that if 

all that this Bill did was to reduce the severance payments, let 

me assure you I for one -- and I believe all of my colleagues -- 

would not stand in its way.  That is not the issue.  That is not 

the issue in my opinion. 

 

(1130) 

 

But it goes far, far beyond that objective and fundamentally 

attacks the most basic rights of individuals, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is why I am standing in this place now speaking in protest 

to the Bill.  And even though the Bill is very complex and even 

though the media does not seem to assign importance to those 

things that I have just mentioned, the opposition cannot remain 

silent. 

 

For if we do not speak up for the rights of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, who will speak?  If we do not carry this 

battle, even at great costs to ourselves and other members of 

the House at this time of the year, who shall be the protection 

of these historic and hard-won rights?  If we do not stand in the 

way of a massive majority that apparently has no concern at all 

for the terrible consequences of it's bloodthirsty ways, if we do 

not put up whatever barrier we can, then who shall challenge 

the tyranny of the majority, the steamroller that my colleagues 

have talked about that seems to be running amok?  If not us, 

Mr. Speaker, who then?  Certainly, with due respect, not the 

Minister of Justice in this case, Mr. Speaker. 

He has stood in this House and he has defended the Bill, and I 

expect that he will continue to defend the Bill, even though not 

publicly, Mr. Minister of Justice, but you are doing a good job 

occasionally from your seat in a silent way.  But he has said 

that it was the only option the government has to reduce 

severances and that it is just kind of unfortunate that 

fundamental protections may have to be forfeited. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill shall carry the name of the member 

opposite.  His name, as my colleagues have already pointed 

out, shall ever be as an example of a Minister of Justice, who in 

my opinion, sir, will not exercise his duty as a top law officer, 

the primary defender of justice. 

 

I just say to members opposite, please, don't put politics before 

justice.  Don't put politics before justice. 

 

So I say again, Mr. Speaker, and I ask who will stand up for 

justice in this Assembly if it is not the Minister of Justice who 

continues to endorse the Bill?  Who will stand up, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

I submit to you and to the members opposite, it will also not be 

the media, Mr. Speaker.  They do not have the time to digest 

the meaning of this Bill, and frankly, Mr. Speaker, I also don't 

think that they have the inclination to do so.  And I hasten to 

add I don't think that they can necessarily be blamed for that 

because, Mr. Speaker, they are not lawyers and they are not 

politicians.  And I hear them saying now, thank God for that.  

All they do, Mr. Speaker, is report what the politicians tell 

them. 

 

The Minister of Justice tells them that this Bill will only reduce 

severance payments.  I tell them that it will do the basic 

fundamental . . . it will undo the basic, fundamental individual 

rights.  And the media does report both sides.  But they report 

both sides in a 30 second clip that we as members of this 

Assembly are so familiar with. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, freedom cannot be defended in a 30 second 

clip.  And I truly wish there was some way the media could 

look at the individual sections of this Bill and decide in their 

wisdom that it is important for the people of this province to 

know just how grievous and how extreme the provisions of this 

Bill are. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, that is why I am on my feet defending 

individual rights and why I must insist that this Bill not be read 

a second time. 

 

So they cannot and so they shall not -- the media -- be the 

spokesmen for the rights of the people. 

 

If not the Minister of Justice, if not the media, I pose the 

question then, Mr. Speaker, who then?  Who then?  Mr. 

Speaker, the opposition clearly has no choice but to oppose this 

Bill even at great cost to ourselves.  We simply, Mr. Speaker, 

have no choice. 

 

Let me read you a brief quote, Mr. Speaker, that should convey 

something of what I'm trying to communicate in this debate 

that is apt to last for however length of time we need to do. 

  



484 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

And the quote I would like to quote, unfortunately I don't have 

the name of the original speaker, but the quote goes like this: 

They came first for the Communists and I didn't speak up 

because I wasn't a Communist.  Then they came for the Jews, 

and I didn't speak up because I was not a Jew.  Then they came 

for the trade unionists, and I didn't speak up because I was not 

a trade unionist.  Then they came for the Catholics, and I didn't 

speak up because I was a Protestant.  Then they came for me 

and by that time there was no one left to speak up.  End quote, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in my humble opinion that is what this Bill is all about.  

That is what we on this side of the House are speaking about.  

If no one speaks up, it will be giving the government the 

power, the right, the quiet permission to dispense with the 

rights of the individual so long as the public is in some state of 

anger about something. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the public is in a state of anger.  And the 

NDP, the government opposite, is using those conditions to 

impose Draconian, unacceptable laws that appeal to the most 

negative part of human nature.  Whether it was Draco himself 

back in the 7th century B.C., he has lived because of the 

harshness of his laws, to execute people literally for the 

simplest of transgressions against the law.  His name has lived 

into infamy as a result.  I want the Minister of Justice to 

consider that possibility in this case. 

 

It is precisely, Mr. Speaker, politicians making the use of 

emotions of people that make this Bill acceptable to them.  And 

that is why, Mr. Speaker, this opposition has no choice but to 

speak up.  And certainly speak up we will, and we will 

continue to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if this government is so confident that the Bill 

does not fail on constitutional grounds, so confident that it is 

not itself against the law, then why would it not accept our 

proposal, our motion that it be referred to the court for a 

decision -- to the Court of Appeal -- as we suggested in our 

amendment?  Why would they not do that, Mr. Speaker? 

 

They have no worry about timing, since the law that they are 

proposing itself is retroactive.  So if it is ruled to be legal, then 

it would have the same effect then as it would have today. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, again, in my humble opinion, it is not legal.  

It is a shameful piece of legislation that has no place in the 

hearts of our people and no place on the floor of this Assembly.  

This Assembly must always be the greatest defence of 

individual rights.  It is from those rights that all others spring, 

Mr. Speaker; it's from those rights that we have the 

fundamental basis of all of our other rights. 

 

It is from those rights that the rights of the members of this 

Assembly spring.  My right to free speech, already attacked by 

the government in other ways, my right is directly the result of 

the fight for the protection of individual rights, dating back 

hundred of years, and which this Bill is now attempting to 

overthrow. 
 

Yet the government, in spite of all of this, will not allow a 

referral to the courts.  And let the people be clear, let the people 

understand that the government has the ability to do that.  The 

government has the ability to do that under 

another small Act called The Constitutional Questions Act.  

There's an alternative.  And let me quote that Act to document 

the fact that the government does indeed have the power to ask 

the court to make a ruling on this Bill before it is imposed upon 

the people.  I quote: 

 

 The Lieutenant Governor in Council may refer to the Court 

of Appeal for hearing and consideration any matter that he 

thinks fit, and the court shall thereupon hear and consider the 

matter. 

 

The lieutenant council . . . Executive Council, the Premier and 

his cabinet, sir, have the right to do that.  And it goes on, and I 

quote: 

 

 The court shall certify to the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

its opinion on the matter referred, with the reasons therefor, 

which shall be given in the same manner as in the case of a 

judgement in an ordinary action; and a judge who differs 

from the opinion of the majority may in the same manner 

certify his opinion and his reasons. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I'm not certain whether I 

have the wrong amendment here, but the amendment says that 

it should be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts.  I have nothing here which says that the Bill should 

not be read a second time and referred to the courts.  The 

members have moved that it should be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts and I'm not certain whether the 

member is speaking on the amendment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought I clarified myself and 

I'll do so again for your edification.  When I got up . . . we will 

have further speakers on this debate. 

 

The amendment is in two sections and the two sections are: no. 

1, that it not be referred . . . or that it not be read a second time, 

Mr. Speaker, and that is what I'm doing.  I'm giving forth the 

logical sequence of arguments why it should not be read a 

second time. 

 

Subsequent to my speech, Mr. Speaker, there will be 

colleagues of mine addressing the second half of that 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I have no difficulties with the member 

explaining to the House why it should not be read a second 

time.  I have some difficulties when the member gets off of that 

and then says it should be referred to the courts when the 

amendment says that it should be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts.  I have some difficulty in 

following the argument and the logic of your argument in 

stating that it should be referred to the courts and not to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that.  And my 

line of reasoning is simply that I'm giving this as an alternative 

to what the government could be doing if it does . . . and so that 

it would not be read the second time.  But because they are not 

so far willing to do that, then the only alternative we have is to 

send it to the Committee of Public Accounts.  That's the 

rationale, sir. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

Thank you very much.  I appreciate your indulgence and I also 

appreciate you giving me the opportunity to make myself more 

clearly understood. 

 

So now, continuing on then, Mr. Speaker, what that means is, 

the material that I was just explaining then, is that the 

government . . . all that the government has to do is to have the 

cabinet make that decision.  And if the Executive Council 

would take that piece of advice, if the minister is prepared to 

get up at this stage and say that this is what he would do, then 

of course the amendment becomes redundant, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I have no indication from the minister opposite that he is 

willing to do that.  And therefore I must continue on in my 

series, my sequence of arguments, to try to make the minister 

understand so that he will indeed change his mind, take it to the 

courts, Mr. Speaker, and then the discussion that we're having 

here certainly would be redundant and we could get on with 

other businesses of this Legislative Assembly. 

 

(1145) 

 

And that's all there is to it, Mr. Speaker -- no big effort, no 

huge commitment of time, no huge commitment of resources.  

There's nothing really more involved.  And I can't make it any 

simpler and clearer than that. 

 

But the former government, Mr. Speaker, did precisely this:  

when there was dispute by members opposite, whether there 

was constitutionality in the electoral boundaries Act, for 

example, you did it then, sir.  You took that route.  And in my 

opinion . . . or we took that route, pardon me, and in my 

opinion that was the route to go. 

 

And very efficiently, effectively, the courts rendered the 

decision and that is where we went.  And then everyone knew 

precisely where they were at.  We said it is better to have the 

court issue an opinion than to have the law operate in a 

situation of disrepute. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, there is no shame 

in asking the courts for an opinion.  That's why the court 

system is there; that's why our judicial system is there.  And I 

would strongly, strongly urge you that it is there to help defend 

the people and to protect the basic law of the land.  And I'm 

having difficulty understanding why you will not do that, and I 

hope that during the balance of my remarks that I will be able 

to persuade you to have a real close look at some of the 

alternatives that we're providing. 

 

And that's why we don't want this Bill read a second time, 

because we have alternatives.  We're proposing those 

alternatives so that indeed the integrity of this Legislative 

Assembly and the basic rights of the individuals in this 

province will be protected. 

 

A wise government, Mr. Minister, a prudent government would 

make use of the expertise and wisdom of the courts that are 

before us.  Because I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this Bill if passed 

would wind up in the courts anyway.  There's no question but 

that this Bill will be tested in case after case by those that have 

been affected by it.  The Bill offends the Charter of Rights very 

deeply. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to turn for just a moment as further 

evidence why this Bill should not be read the second time, I 

want to turn to the Charter for a moment and see where this 

Bill attacks the fundamental rights of the people.  The Charter 

of Rights, Mr. Speaker, starts with section A . . . with a section 

providing a balance guarantee, a balance guarantee, and I 

would like to quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees 

the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such 

reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be 

demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. 

 

Now that is a very important section, Mr. Speaker, because 

what it tells you is that this government knows that this Bill, 

this Bill 18, cannot be saved by the test of being reasonably 

justified in a free and democratic society.  If it did it would 

agree to ask the court for a ruling on the Bill.  But the 

government knows full well that this Bill cannot be justified in 

a free and democratic society because it is such a clearly 

Draconian attack on the rights of the individual. 

 

Now just very quickly to make my points, let's go on to the 

next section of the Charter: 

 

 2. Every one has the fundamental freedoms: 

  (a) freedom of conscience and religion; 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this free society we are supposed to have 

freedom of conscience.  Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes 

beyond reducing severances.  That's the fundamental issue 

here.  The severance package -- all right; go for it.  But it goes 

beyond that and attacks the individual's freedom of conscience.  

What it says is that you can be fired for no reason other than 

the fact that you might be the supporter of a political party that 

doesn't necessarily share your viewpoints.  The Bill does that, 

Mr. Speaker.  It says that if your conscience makes you not 

support the NDP, you can be fired without any recourse at all. 

 

Let's just look at a few of the people who have come under the 

gun.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP like always to point to George Hill 

as a rallying point.  That's the focal point.  It's the emotional 

point.  It's the public attention getting point.  They say that he 

was a Tory and he must go.  Well, perhaps.  Fair enough. 

 

The woman, Mr. Speaker . . . let me pose you the question this 

way.  They fired George Hill.  I say, fair enough.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, should they have been able to fire the man's secretary?  

The woman answered phones and typed letters, Mr. Speaker.  

Not exactly, in my opinion, a dangerous creature to the NDP 

government.  But they fired her anyway.  And to try and cover 

themselves they are passing this Bill, which says that the 

woman, the secretary, will no longer have the freedom of 

conscience because it does not happen to suit the purposes of 

members across the floor. 

 

Get rid of Hill's secretary and anybody else who had lunch with 

Hill -- fire them.  That could be the tyrannical cry of members 

opposite.  But what about Elaine Kivisto, 

  



486 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Mr. Speaker.  What about Elaine?  She was fired because her 

conscience was not the conscience of the member from 

Elphinstone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about Norma Morrow?  Fired for her 

conscience.  What about Marge Haddad?  Fired for her 

conscience.  What about all the other secretaries being secretly 

tossed into the streets by the government opposite without 

cause?  Why are they firing people who answer phones and 

type letters?  What terrible threat do these people pose for the 

massive majority across the way?  What possible threat could 

they be?  They pose the threat of a free conscience, alive and 

hopefully, in a government dominated by people who 

apparently do not have any use for freedom of conscience. 

 

Going back just for a moment to the Charter of Rights, Mr. 

Speaker, that I am so fundamentally worried that is being 

transgressed.  We find the second fundamental freedom in the 

list is, and I quote section: 

 

 (b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, 

including freedom of the press and other media of 

communications. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is clearly set against freedom of 

thought, belief, opinion and expression. 

 

Why was Richard Perry fired, the CBC (Canadian 

Broadcasting Corporation) anchorman?  They fired him 

because of his beliefs.  How dare he cross a picket line?  This is 

a man who believes he should be allowed to feed his family 

and that the union bosses should not dictate his life for him, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now we know that the government office apparently is against 

those beliefs, but they are this man's beliefs and the constitution 

guarantees him the freedom to have those beliefs. 

 

Be clear, Mr. Speaker, that this man never had a membership in 

my party, and as far as I know, Mr. Speaker, in fact had no 

membership in anybody's party.  He has been a man who has 

exercised his beliefs quietly and appropriately and he has had 

that right, but not under this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the business that SaskPower will not be 

engaging in any more communication is plain silly.  A pathetic 

excuse.  The new emperor of SaskPower, one Jack Messer, said 

the kind of stuff that SaskPower had been doing was useless, 

and he gave specific examples of energy conservation. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this government is made up of the same 

party that says we need a lot more education about energy 

conservation.  So, Mr. Speaker, they fired Richard Perry for his 

beliefs, and that is clear to every one. 

 

Ted Urness, Mr. Speaker, Ted Urness is not exactly a 

prominent Tory.  I know the member with Crop Insurance has 

made a comment about the significance of this gentleman and 

this member of Saskatchewan society.  Ted Urness has been an 

extremely productive, an exemplary executive officer of the 

Liquor Board.  He was fired.  And this Bill, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill says that's it's 

okay. 

 

And that's why I'm saying that it's not okay to give second 

reading to this Bill.  That's what the amendment is all about.  

This Bill legalizes the illegal firing of Ted Urness.  Why did 

they fire him?  He did a good job.  We heard that.  They fired 

him, Mr. Speaker, because of his beliefs. 

 

Let's go back to the charter just for one moment, Mr. Speaker.  

I may not make it by 12 o'clock.  I'll try my best to conclude 

my remarks.  Let's go back to the charter, Mr. Speaker, because 

this Bill offends even more provisions. 

 

In this list of fundamental freedoms we find that in this free 

and democratic society people are also guaranteed, "(d) 

freedom of association," -- freedom of association.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, freedom of association means you can associate 

yourself with who you will in a lawful way and not be 

discriminated against by government.  That's what it means. 

 

And the last time I looked, Mr. Speaker, the NDP had not yet 

gotten around to making political parties illegal, and I wouldn't 

suggest that that's necessarily coming.  But, Mr. Speaker, it is 

perfectly lawful to associate yourself with the Progressive 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan.  It's perfectly lawful to do 

that in spite of the harangue from the member of 

Rosetown-Elrose who obviously does not agree with that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in spite of that opposition, I would suggest 

to you that there are hundreds of thousands of people in the 

province of Saskatchewan who are accepting their legal right to 

be members of the Progressive Conservative Party.  But it 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite is now 

saying that if you associate yourself with the Progressive 

Conservative Party you shall be fired.  That is what they're 

saying. 

 

And members opposite applaud.  That in essence, Mr. Speaker, 

makes my point exactly.  That makes exactly the point that I 

am making here. 

 

And I give you further evidence of that, Mr. Speaker, why this 

Bill should not be read a second time.  And the member from 

Rosetown continues to harangue and harass me as I'm trying to 

make my point.  But I shall, in spite of that, speak up for the 

people of Saskatchewan.  The member from Rosetown-Elrose 

will not drown my voice.  I will continue to speak, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Why was Rod Hiltz fired, Mr. Speaker?  Why was Rod Hiltz 

fired?  He was a realty manager for SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation), and as such a realty 

manager he had absolutely no impact on government policy -- 

no impact whatsoever.  Nothing.  He posed no threat to the 

government, politically or otherwise, yet he was fired because 

the NDP said he had the audacity to work for the PCs during 

the last election and out he must go.  You can't have that. 

 

Freedom of association. Well he associated himself with the 

PC Party, and so he paid the price -- he paid the price, Mr. 

Speaker.  He's being denied the fundamental freedom which 

the constitution of our nation guarantees him, and  

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

that, Mr. Speaker, is shameful. 

 

Let us go back to the charter, Mr. Speaker, and we will find 

even greater evils and sins in this Bill.  Section 7, brief quote: 

 

 Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the 

person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in 

accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 

 

Security of person, Mr. Speaker, means my person is 

sacrosanct from attack by the government.  But this Bill takes 

the security of the person and holus-bolus throws it out.  This 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, makes it legal for the government to defame 

people and try to get them quiet. 

 

It makes it legal to cause mental distress, if it causes someone 

to break a contract.  My colleagues have talked about that. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, when you're defaming a person you are 

infringing his person.  When you're consciously causing mental 

distress you are most clearly attacking the person, invading the 

person; in fact, Mr. Speaker, defiling the person.  And so much, 

Mr. Speaker, then for the security of the person under this 

government. 

 

And I will, Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence at this time, 

suggest that we go for lunch. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 


