




















































Hansard: December 02, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

 December 2, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 

 

Clerk: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that I have received a 

communication from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 

stating that she will open the first session of the twenty-second 

legislature at 10 o'clock a.m. today, the 2nd day of December, 

1991. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

10:03 a.m. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I am commanded by Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to inform you that she does not see fit to 

declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 

until later today, when the Legislative Assembly shall have 

elected a Speaker according to law. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:04 a.m. 

 

Clerk: -- Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 

to inform you that only one candidate has declared his intention 

to stand for the election of Speaker, pursuant to rule 24.1.  

Therefore it is my duty to announce that Herman Rolfes, the 

member for the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, is declared 

elected as your Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Members of the Legislative Assembly, I beg 

to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 

the high honour the Assembly has been pleased to confer upon 

me. 

 

And while I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the 

Speaker's chair, I feel that I also leave all political partisan 

feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all, 

and to the best of my ability, the various and important duties 

pertaining to the high office of the Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

As your Speaker, it will be my intention to work with all hon. 

members to ensure that the dignity of this legislature is 

protected.  Although the Speaker is the servant of the 

Assembly, you have invested in me considerable authority.  I 

hope to use that authority to protect the rights and privileges of 

all members of this Assembly. 

 

The public has a lot of cynicism concerning politicians and 

democratic institutions.  It is incumbent upon all of us as 

elected individuals to behave with integrity and decorum.  I ask 

for your assistance in this regard. 

 

I want to remind all members of the citations in Beauchesne's, 

and of our own rules and procedures concerning language and 

decorum.  Heckling and political quips are part of our tradition.  

Shouting and personal insults are not.  One member must never 

interfere with another member's right to speak in this 

Assembly. 

 

I therefore intend to be as firm as I can in dealing with 

members who persist in abusing our rules -- especially those 

that pertain to language, decorum, and freedom of speech.  

Behaviour that interferes with the rights and privileges of other 

members reflects badly on all of us and on this noble 

institution.  Let's work together for the betterment of society. 

 

I ask for your co-operation as we begin the first session of the 

twenty-second legislature, and invite all members at any time 

to come to my office to discuss matters pertaining to this 

Assembly.  The Speaker's door will always be open to you. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, on behalf of myself and all the members on this side 

of the House -- I dare say on behalf of all the members of the 

House -- we want to congratulate you, sir, on the election to 

this most important position in the Assembly as Speaker of the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

I believe that all of us who have served with you, both in 

government and in opposition -- whatever side of the receiving 

end we were -- know of your experience and your commitment 

to the institutions of democracy and particularly this institution 

of the legislature.  Your experience will hold you in well stead 

and in good stead, and we look forward very much to working 

with you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the second time, as you know, that the 

Office of Speaker has been elected.  The reform was instituted 

by my predecessor, the former premier and now Leader of the 

Opposition, and I think it was a significant reform for this 

House with the election of the hon. Arnold Tusa. 

 

Arnold Tusa had a very difficult job as Speaker of this House, 

particularly in the period after election, which was the fourth or 

fifth year of the government's term leading up to an election.  

That's when always the legislature, in my experience, tends to 

be perhaps a little more rancorous and the debate a little more 

emotional and a little more partisan.  But Mr. Tusa performed 

his functions by and large with skill, with aplomb, with 

decency and dignity, and above all, a sense of fairness. 

 

And I believe he did that not only because he is that kind of a 

person but he also did this because of the mere fact of election, 

the fact that now this is no longer an office that is appointed 

upon the recommendation of the Premier or selected 

exclusively on the part of the government members.  It is now 

an office which has the approval of all members of the 

Legislative Assembly.  And it is that extra authority, if I will, 

Mr. Speaker, that extra support which we all give to you, which 

I know will make this very difficult job of yours just a little bit 

easier. 

 

We're beginning the first session of the twenty-second 

legislature right after the election.  I might say, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't know whether your task will be much easier in this first 

period as opposed to the period coming toward the end of the 

term of the government. 

 

But I would like to just very briefly deviate from my 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 1991 

remarks to say that I welcome, sir, to the legislature, all of the 

members who have been elected, especially those who are the 

first-time members in this House.  This is a great honour 

indeed for anyone to have received the trust of the voters and to 

sit in this Legislative Assembly.  Few have this honour and 

privilege, and we have a responsibility to fulfil our duties in the 

best ways that we can. 

 

A special word of congratulations and thanks to my 

predecessor, the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 

Estevan, for the way in which the campaign was conducted, 

and I look forward to a spirited exchange in the legislature with 

him.  And a special word of acknowledgement to my 

colleague, the Leader of the Liberal Party, who is present with 

us here in this session as well. 

 

To close, Mr. Speaker, we are all of us -- certainly I can speak 

for our side of the House -- committed to making your job a 

little bit easier.  We're committed to making this parliament, 

this legislature, work.  Your experience both as a former 

cabinet minister and as a prominent member of the opposition 

is going to be of tremendous importance and assistance to you. 

 

I don't pretend for a moment that it's going to be easy all the 

time.  I'm sure that it'll be difficult a lot of the time.  But in this 

regard you can rest assured that we will do our very best to 

pledge our support and to follow the dictates, the standards 

which you have set for us. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of the government 

side, on behalf of myself, I want to congratulate you and your 

family on this great honour.  It's a great additional new step in 

your very long and worthwhile career of public service.  Thank 

you, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take the 

opportunity to congratulate you today on being the second 

elected Speaker in Saskatchewan's history.  I am aware of the 

fact that you will be the next in line of a history of Speakers in 

this Legislative Assembly that have done a remarkable job. 

 

Saskatchewan has always been very alive politically, and from 

your own distinguished career you're very much aware of that.  

And to now have this position in the Legislative Assembly is 

important for not only your family, but the tradition of 

Saskatchewan and our democratic process.  The chance to be 

an elected Speaker is an important one for the principles of our 

Assembly and I commend you, sir, for your willingness to take 

on this responsibility. 

 

We have the opportunity to bring forward our ideas in the 

democratic process, and the kinds of vital responsibilities and 

the tasks that you have, many times will not be particularly 

easy, but I know that you're up to it. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that you will be a very unbiased Speaker, 

and I was happy to hear you say that your door is always open 

to come in and discuss or have a cup of coffee or view or go 

over anything that this Legislative 

Assembly would like to discuss with you. 

 

(1015) 

 

Your rulings no doubt will be consistent with the long 

established and somewhat unique practices of our 

Saskatchewan Assembly and that is what makes being a 

Speaker in part, frankly, so much fun from time to time -- 

actually I suspect enjoyable for not only the Speaker but 

everybody. 

 

For example, we have evolved traditions over the years that 

have allowed for much longer questions, and I have to admit 

even much longer answers than many other jurisdictions in the 

country, and I know that that has tried the humour of many a 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I know that you're up to that and up for it.  We have the 

right in the Assembly, unlike many, to ring the division bells 

for basically as long as we would like, and as you know, that's 

lots of fun for the Speaker.  I'm not so sure how much fun it is 

for the rest of the people of the province, but again I know that 

you're prepared for that.  And we have rather unique quirks of 

parliamentary practice, all of which make life very interesting 

in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly -- traditions that 

have gone on over the years. 

 

We only hope that these will not try you too much, Mr. 

Speaker.  In fact we're looking forward to as much reform as 

the Premier is prepared to discuss and look at and I'm sure his 

House Leader and others will be presenting ideas, and we will 

be, because the productive part of the Legislative Assembly 

should be that. 

 

As former premier Allan Blakeney said, this is not always an 

efficient place, but it's a good place to discuss democracy.  But 

it should provide the opportunity for all of us to have our say 

and do it in a fashion that is seen to be fair.  And I know, Mr. 

Speaker, that you will be instrumental in making sure that that 

happens. 

 

I want to join with the Premier and congratulate not only you, 

sir, but the Premier and all the members of the New 

Democratic Party that were elected, particularly the new 

members; the member from Saskatoon Greystone, the new 

Liberal leader -- congratulations -- and to all members, frankly, 

for having this opportunity to serve the Saskatchewan public. 

 

You will find this an interesting exercise.  You will certainly 

see that the democratic process is maybe not perfect, but it's a 

way ahead of whatever is in second place, and we certainly on 

this side of the House will do everything that we can to uphold 

the traditions, the valuable traditions of an elected Speaker and 

our Legislative Assembly here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And finally just let me say to you personally, Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that we met in the mid-'70s and you have had a 

distinguished career as a member of the legislature, as a cabinet 

minister, as a member of opposition, and as a public servant.  

And to you and your family now to be in this position, I 

sincerely say congratulations and I wish you the very best. 

  



December 2, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I want to deviate just a bit from the 

procedures here and take this opportunity to thank the Premier 

and the Leader of the Opposition for those kind words.  I want 

to reassure the Assembly again that I will be fair, as much as I 

can be and is within my abilities to be fair.  You will from time 

to time, however, find me to be very tough, to make sure that 

the rules and the rights and privileges of members are 

protected. 

 

And I want to reiterate again what the Leader of the Opposition 

has said.  The doors to the Speaker's office is always open to 

you.  Please do come in and chat.  I know in speaking to the 

former Speaker, Mr. Tusa, I went to see him on a number of 

occasions when he and I had some differences in this 

legislature, and it was always good to discuss those differences 

with the Speaker at that time.  And I invite all of you from time 

to time to stop in.  And let's make sure that this Assembly is 

working for the benefit of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan who have elected us to this Assembly. 

 

Now this House will recess until 2 p.m. this afternoon when 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor will present the Speech 

from the Throne. 

 

The Assembly recessed at 10:20 a.m. 

 

 


