




















































Hansard: December 20, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 449 

 December 20, 1991 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 4 -- An Act 

to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I think most 

members in the Chamber are aware, Mr. Speaker, the Act 

before us was integral to the previous one that was being 

discussed in this Chamber.  And certainly the members of the 

opposition I think have done their best, Mr. Speaker, over the 

last number of hours to put the case forward that the 

synchronization of our E&H (education and health) tax along 

with the federal GST (goods and services tax) made sense in 

many instances for people in the society in which we live 

today. 

 

It made a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker, because of the ability to 

spread the tax load more evenly across our society and to give 

the sectors in our society that have the best ability to generate 

jobs, have the best ability to generate the income that is so 

necessary for government in Saskatchewan, to fulfil its services 

to the people.  The Bill that we're talking about here is the 

repeal of the child tax credit that went to low income families 

because of the synchronization of the two taxes. 

 

One of the biggest problems facing government today, Mr. 

Speaker, whether in Saskatchewan or I believe all across 

Canada, is the ability to have a tax system that is fair.  And 

certainly the question of fairness becomes all that more 

important when we're talking about low income people. 

 

My colleague, the member from Maple Creek, in his delivery 

this afternoon on this subject, went through a number of 

circumstances about people on lower incomes and how the fact 

that synchronization definitely had a positive effect on our 

lower income people in this province. 

 

Everyone in the province is a consumer, Mr. Speaker.  We all 

consume usually according to the amount of disposable income 

that we have.  And I've always felt, Mr. Speaker, when it came 

to the question of taxation, that you're always better to tax 

spending then you are to tax earnings.  When you tax earnings 

at source, you deduct 

the ability of people to make choices.  You deduct the ability of 

people to take their income and spread it through the rest of our 

society in a way that is beneficial. 

 

I also think that you, when you deduct at source, when you 

deduct on income, that you also take away some of the 

initiative that most people in Saskatchewan feel about getting 

up in the morning and going to work.  And it doesn't matter if 

it's the farming community that I come from and I'm so 

familiar with or the small business community where people 

have traditionally had family-run operations where many 

members of the family, for instance, will participate that 

particular business, or whether you're a labourer and you are 

out there working basically now till some time in July in order 

to have take-home pay for yourself.  Because the level of 

taxation in government -- both federal, provincial, municipal, 

school, that type of thing -- takes a very large segment, a very 

large segment, Mr. Speaker, of the disposable income of 

people.  And most of those deductions through the current 

income tax system are done at source. 

 

The question has always come along, Mr. Speaker, when we're 

talking about people on the lower ends of the socio-economic 

scale about how you treat them the most fairly.  And one thing 

is very obvious, Mr. Speaker, when you're talking about a 

consumer type of tax such as the GST is that the ability to tax 

people with the larger amounts of disposable income is there. 

 

Traditionally through our tax system in Canada -- and I remind 

all members that the primary tax system is instigated by the 

federal government in this country and provinces tag along in 

various ways -- that that tax system, even through all its 

adjustments and machinations over time has probably still not 

been as fair as we would like.  In other words, people at the 

higher income scales -- through access to legal advice, access 

to good accountants -- have always been able to structure their 

incomes in such a way that there is a certain amount of tax 

avoidance.  And I think the numbers that were released by the 

federal Finance minister recently on the amount of back taxes 

owing by individuals across Canada clearly points out to us 

that there are some deficiencies in the tax system in our 

country. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, where you have a tax that taxes directly 

on the amount of money that you spend, you have the ability to 

tax those at the higher income level more because with more 

disposable income, they will tend to spend more money on 

goods and services than someone at the lower end.  So when 

you make comparisons between those two different opposites 

in the socio-economic scale, you can see that that type of 

taxation system is weighted in favour of people at the lower 

end because they tend to purchase more basic necessities in 

life.  They're concerned about food.  They're concerned about 

clothing.  They're concerned about heat and light and those 

basic things that are essential to all of us. 

 

By doing away, Mr. Speaker, by doing away with the child tax 

credit, which I think most people who have studied this 

particular situation would agree, put more 

  



450 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

money in the pockets of people with an income up to $24,000 

than they have under the present system of a side-by-side 

taxation system.  For instance, Mr. Speaker, the tax on almost 

all children's toys that is in place today, with E&H, after this 

Bill is repealed, Mr. Speaker, was there before.  But what will 

happen, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill is passed is that those people 

on that lower end of the scale will receive no benefit.  The toys 

will still have the tax on them, but they will not receive the 

investment tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see no indication from the Minister of Finance, 

as he removes this particular benefit to people in that category.  

He has not said how he will replace it.  And I think it goes back 

to the argument, Mr. Speaker, that was made by many of the 

members opposite as we talked about the various ways that 

government taxes its people and about the fairness aspect that 

goes along with it.  If the minister is going to repeal 

synchronization of E&H with the GST, he must replace that 

loss in income.  If the minister is going to take the child tax 

credit away from people on the lower end of the income scale, 

then he must replace that benefit in some other way.  Because 

one thing is for sure, Mr. Speaker.  As it was mentioned by one 

of my colleagues, death and taxes are about the only two 

constants in life. 

 

And I am sure that any new tax instituted by the Minister of 

Finance is going to impact on those people in some way.  If it's 

going to be an increase in the E&H tax, then that E&H tax will 

hit lower income people as well as higher income people.  If it 

is to be an increase in the gasoline tax, it will impact on lower 

income people as well as higher income people.  But I say to 

you, Mr. Speaker, that the impact, the amount of impact, the 

ratio of impact with taxes like that on all areas of our society 

are harder to bear on the low income side than they are by the 

high. 

 

There was a recent study done by a committee of parliament in 

Canada.  It was an all-party committee put together to study the 

ways that taxation affected various areas of our socio-economic 

strata.  The governing party, the Conservative Party, brought 

forward a majority report on that committee saying that 

consumer-type taxation in conjunction with family tax credits 

was probably the fairest way to redistribute wealth in our 

society. 

 

The New Democrats and the Liberals on that committee came 

forward with minority reports.  The New Democrats not only 

endorsed that part of it; they even stronger suggested that the 

best way to handle people in our society on the lower end of 

the income scale was to take that tax credit system and boost it 

even further, that make it apply to other areas so that we can 

redistribute that wealth in a more fair manner to people in our 

society. 

 

And it's interesting, Mr. Speaker, that an all-party committee of 

parliament would have that opinion, basically unanimously, 

that that was the best way that people that were disadvantaged 

in our society could better themselves and better their position 

in regards to how money in this country was redistributed.  

And I think, Mr. Speaker, as taxpayers, as all of us are, and the 

people that we represent, that that is always what you strive for, 

is fairness in that taxation system. 

Mr. Speaker, the minister, as I said before, comes forward with 

the repeal of this particular child tax credit because he is doing 

away with synchronization. 

 

I think it would have been important, Mr. Speaker, that during 

first reading of this Bill that the minister would have given 

some indication as to what the alternatives were, because I 

think there's a lot of people out there today that have been used 

to getting these cheques on a quarterly basis that are all of a 

sudden going to come to a sudden abrupt end and say, my God, 

what has happened here to my income. 

 

And in the case of a two-parent family with two children, as the 

member from Maple Creek pointed out, that's a significant 

amount of money in a year.  It's enough money to offset the 7 

per cent that they would have paid on restaurant meals; the 7 

per cent that they would have paid on clothing under $300; the 

7 per cent that they would have paid on books, novels, that type 

of thing.  So, Mr. Speaker, obviously there's going to be some 

hardship incurred by people in our society. 

 

And I say again to the Minister of Finance, given what we 

know of the repeal of this synchronization, and the lack of 

income that's going to be derived, given the budgetary 

pressures that are upon Saskatchewan, given the fact that most 

of our primary production in this province at this time cannot 

sustain a higher tax load -- i.e., the farming public, our resource 

industries -- where in the world is the minister going to get 

taxation moneys that will be as fair or fairer than what you had 

with a broadly applied consumer tax such as you had with the 

E&H harmonization, with the GST? 

 

(1915) 

 

And I don't believe the minister has that answer yet or perhaps 

he would have told the House.  Because one thing is obviously 

clear to me and to the constituents that I represent. The middle 

class in this country is overtaxed at present; the ability to have 

entrepreneurship right now with the amount of disposable 

income that is available to our middle class is really tough.  

People are feeling that there is no advantage out there today in 

going forward and investing their money, their family's money 

into continuing or expanding an operation that is going to 

provide more employment, more economic opportunity, in that 

particular community.  The middle class in this country of ours 

today feel that they have been taken advantage of. 

 

And I think it's one reason, Mr. Speaker, that you saw such a 

reaction throughout our society to the introduction of the GST 

and then to the expansion of the E&H tax to items that had 

never been included in that list before.  And I think people said, 

I have, as a middle class person in this country, paid my fair 

share. 

 

We have some of the highest per capita costs as far as health 

and education and social services of any province in Canada.  

We also have one of the best systems and we've been able to 

convince people in our society over the last 30 or 40 years that 

it is in their best interest to make those sizeable tax 

contributions in order to have 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 451 

that first-class system.  But we see even with those very large 

contributions by the average taxpayer, Mr. Speaker, we have 

seen a further erosion of some of those basic things in life that 

we have taken for granted. 

 

We see increasing pressures in the health care system and the 

education system.  We know that we either have to change the 

way we do things or we're going to have to come up with more 

money.  Something will have to give.  And the middle class 

doesn't feel that it has any more to give. 

 

Given that that is the scenario, Mr. Speaker, then what you 

have to have is some fair way of redistributing income.  And 

without closing down entire sectors in the province, you're 

going to have to have some type of broad-based tax which is 

seen fair to all and which has the ability built within it to not 

take advantage of people at the bottom end of our 

socio-economic scales. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when one adds up all of the choices and one 

looks at all the alternatives, clearly the tax credit was the most 

credible alternative.  To have the tax credit in place, you also 

had to have the rest of that particular type of taxation system.  

Because it is very difficult, Mr. Speaker, on the present 

side-by-side E&H-GST system, to institute that level of family 

tax credit without knowing that the rest of us in society, the 

middle, the upper middle, the higher income brackets, are 

going to be taxed in a fair way to provide that income. 

 

And as I said before in my comments, Mr. Speaker, the income 

tax system, which has been the traditional method in our 

country, has been found wanting.  Most people find it overly 

complicated.  They find that the brackets are either too narrow 

or too broad.  And if, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, you have 

the wherewithal, you have been traditionally been able to find 

loopholes in that tax system that have allowed you to take 

advantage of the system. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to either have to 

overcome the method that income tax is collected upon so that 

people don't feel that they have worked over half of the year 

simply to satisfy the tax system, that they are only being taxed 

that way because they are in that middle category, or else, sir, 

we are going to have to come up with a new scheme, a new 

idea that will be considered fair. 

 

And when one only looks around the world and look at how 

other jurisdictions have addressed this problem, it becomes 

very self-evident of what most of them have decided. 

 

The entire European community of over 300 million people 

have decided that, as the price of membership in that particular 

community, that you must have a broadly based consumer type 

of tax system in place.  And, Mr. Speaker, that broadly based 

type of consumer tax system in Europe can vary anywhere 

from the teens up to the low thirties as a percentage of what 

every last person pays on goods and services. 

 

And I'm sure countries like Greece and Spain, as they came 

into the European community, went through many 

of the same debates that we have in this country over the last 

couple of years. 

 

But that community has shown its strength and resilience.  It 

has beat us up in the agricultural sector for years and years and 

years because they have been able to harness the power of the 

consumer, the power of spending -- albeit discretionary 

spending -- and they have been able to develop those systems 

that allow them to subsidize their farmers far more than we do.  

They have been able to subsidize many of the systems, 

industrial systems, within their countries because of the power 

of that value added tax. 

 

And certainly I think, Mr. Speaker, people at the lower end of 

the scale in the European community have faced many of the 

same problems that we do here in North America, and 

particularly Canada, and in Saskatchewan.  And it would seem 

to me, Mr. Speaker, that if others in the world today who 

basically are at the same level economically, industrially, as 

technologically advanced as we are, that you would look at 

those systems and say, if they're working here, perhaps they 

have some application in our society in North America. 

 

And I would venture to guess, Mr. Speaker, and I may be 

proven wrong, that Canada's largest trading partner, which is 

the United States of America, at some point in time will go to a 

broadly based consumer type of tax system, because that would 

be the fairest way in that country, for instance, to integrate a 

medicare system in the United States. 

 

They're finding as many problems with their system as what we 

have.  They're finding a lot of people at the lower ends of the 

economic scales not having the wherewithal to fit into the 

medical and educational systems.  If they are about to bring 

those people more fairly into society, they are going to have to 

have some means of a broadly based taxation system. 

 

My guess is that the family tax credit, which the Minister of 

Finance is doing away with in this legislature, will make 

eminent sense in that jurisdiction, as it has in many other 

jurisdictions around the world, as it has been recommended by 

the Parliament of Canada by an all-party committee. 

 

And it really makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the minister in 

his reasoning and his thought in deharmonizing our taxes and 

taking away the child tax credit for all of those people below 

24,500 is doing it for sound economic reasons or if he has got 

himself caught in a political conundrum that he doesn't quite 

know how to get out of. 

 

And as my colleagues pointed out, Mr. Speaker, all through the 

debate on the previous Bill and again on this one, that many 

members of the New Democratic Party until very recently said 

that this was the proper way to go, that the two tax systems 

should be put together for simplicity, that the two tax systems 

should be put together because of their ability to tax all people 

in our society more fairly, and that they should be put together 

so that people on the lower end of the economic scales could 

have the family tax credit system. 

  



452 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

And the member from Churchill Downs was recorded over and 

over and over again, Mr. Speaker, both in this legislature and in 

the media across this province, as recommending that.  He said, 

we don't like the way the Tories do it; we would do it at a lower 

rate.  Well that's fine, Mr. Speaker.  If you can do it at a lower 

rate and be revenue neutral and come up with that income in 

some other way, fair ball. 

 

But the principles involved in synchronization of those systems 

and the principles involved in the redistribution of wealth in 

our society were agreed wholeheartedly to by members of the 

New Democratic Party for over a two-year span. 

 

And it was only in that brief period of time, Mr. Speaker, prior 

to the election when the thirst and the hunger for political 

power in this province grabbed a hold of the member from 

Riversdale, that we all of a sudden saw a shift in that political 

party.  And that political party said, in order to achieve political 

power in this province, we are willing to gamble with the 

economic well-being of not only society in a whole because of 

the large deficit that would be created by deharmonizing, but 

they would be willing to play with the economic lives of those 

on the lower end of the economic scale, because along with 

that you had to cancel family tax credits, child tax credits.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I find that just a bit reprehensible, because 

this is a party that has stood over and over and over again and 

said that, we are for the people that are most disadvantaged in 

our society. 

 

And yet, who will be hurt the most?  Who, when they go out to 

a store in Regina tonight and they're buying toys for their 

children, will be hurt the most? 

 

Because, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, that 7 per cent tax is 

there, whether is was there with the old E&H, or with the one 

that we will see come after this particular piece of legislation is 

passed by the governing majority.  Those people will be paying 

that 7 per cent on that toy irregardless, but they will not have 

access to those child tax credits, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My family can afford to pay that 7 per cent.  Most of the people 

that I know can afford to pay that 7 per cent so that others can 

have those advantages. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be really interested to hear members 

of the government stand in their place and tell us where the 

income will come to replace those tax credits for people on the 

lower end of the income scale, what changes will occur that 

will make sure that those people feel comfortable with the 

changes that are going to occur in the next few months, 

taxation-wise. 

 

What are the moves that are going to happen so that people in 

our society know that income is being redistributed as fairly as 

possible?  And it's always a situation, it seems, Mr. Speaker, in 

this session, where the New Democrats have the cart before the 

horse.  They come in here and think nothing of changing the 

rules and regulations and precedents of this legislature in order 

to do what they wish.  They come in here and they talk about 

changing the very constitutional rights of our citizens for 

access to the courts, because it fits their political agenda even 

though their leader is known as someone who championed the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms some 10 years ago. 

 

And they now come in here and say, taxation-wise we are 

going to take money away from those who can least afford to 

give it up, and we are not going to tell those same people how 

we are either going to replace it or ensure that somewhere in 

the future their lot will be bettered in life. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, with that I will take my seat but say, 

and challenge the members of the government to stand in their 

places and tell members of this opposition how that will be 

done so that we may feel comfortable when their majority 

carries the day in this legislature on this particular Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to discuss a 

little bit some of the same aspects, some other aspects of this 

Bill as it relates to the $200 child tax credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a number of things that really 

concern me as it relates to the kinds of things that this was 

intended to do, and now will be taken away from those people 

who have been receiving the $200 tax credit. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that when the federal 

government decided that they were going to run a tax on goods 

and services, they said that there is a need for individuals to 

receive some benefits that would not have accrued to them on 

the basis of the fact that they were paying for some of those 

goods and services, that the tax would be offset with a child tax 

credit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the child tax credit was provided as a result of 

discussion that related to an all-party committee in Ottawa.  

And the child tax credit came about as a part of that all-party 

committee talking about the things that needed to be done.  

Child tax credit is an interesting way of providing income to 

offset the purchases made by individuals who have low income 

and cannot afford, as well as the high income, the requirements 

that they need to live, the requirements that they need to exist 

on as a part of society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in dealing with this I thought about it as it related 

to a family of four, and it was particularly of interest to me on 

the basis that it applied to my sister's family.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that I want to bring forward is the 

point that with her four children, she is receiving an $800 child 

tax credit annually for the offset on the goods and services tax 

that she pays in relation to the . . . or due to the fact that she has 

a low income. 

 

In this case, Mr. Speaker, the $800 from the federal 

government is equivalent to that individual with four children 

buying $11,400 worth of goods and services.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, on a normal basis, $11,000 worth of purchases, of 

goods and services that were an increase in the volume, is far 

and above if you added it up and split off 



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

where the goods and services taxes were increasing and what 

was in existence there, the individual who gets the child tax 

credit will in fact have a significant discretionary income on 

the basis of the fact that the child tax credit gives him the 

equivalent in buying of about $11,500 because of that $800 

child tax credit, with a family of four. 

 

Now one of the things that we wanted to do with harmonization 

is we wanted to blend that together so that not only would that 

individual receive a federal tax credit, that family would 

receive that provincial tax credit as well.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why we allowed that to happen.  I want 

to point out as I did earlier . . . but in the context of this Bill 

that the member from Churchill Downs who stood over here, as 

I said earlier, and advocated that this was a good idea. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is where the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

came from for a number of years.  They said if you want to do 

anything, what you need to do is you to make it simple as you 

possibly can.  And I agree with that.  It came from the member 

from Churchill Downs.  It had to be as cost-effective as 

possible in the collection and dealing with it from that 

perspective.  All of those measures had to be a part of a reason 

why we should -- as at that time we were the government -- we 

should be considering and determining whether we should 

harmonize, blend our tax with the federal government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, as we work through the process together 

with the Department of Finance in Saskatchewan, together with 

the Department of Finance in Ottawa, it was brought more and 

more to our attention that it was the proper thing to do. 

 

Now in dealing with where you provide an initiative to an 

individual family as it relates to the benefits that would accrue, 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that based on . . . The size of the family 

is an important thing.  I know that for years, the baby bonus has 

been paid on the basis of a child.  I see where that is even at 

risk for going to this method of paying for the individual's 

families who have children, who have low incomes. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I think that this 

should be a good process to follow.  Family allowances have 

been in existence for a long, long time.  And as I saw an article 

in the Leader-Post the other day, the family allowance focus is 

changing its emphasis to the fact that maybe a child tax credit 

is of more value than allowing a family allowance to go to a 

family that earns a 100 or $200,000.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

why the people in the federal government said this was not a 

bad idea of allowing that kind of child tax credit to be the 

function of providing a benefit to lower incomes.  And that's 

why I would say that in our discussion here today and in my 

opinion, the view of the minister responsible for Social 

Services would have been a good view to have heard, on the 

basis of whether she thinks that this a good idea or a bad idea. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that in time, when the 

whole agenda comes to focus, that these people opposite that 

are now the government want to provide benefits to certain 

individual groups, are they going to use 

this process?  Or what are they going to do to develop the 

function of supplying some income for the lower income that 

would benefit these young men and women who have families 

who would be specifically benefitting from a child tax credit?  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why I think it's an important part of 

why it should be included in the discussion. 

 

I feel that time is going to show that they're likely going to get 

involved with this program.  And I would suspect that down 

the road they're going to get involved with this type of a way of 

providing income assistance to low income people, based on 

child tax credits.  And I think that that's an important thing to 

think about.  I also think that they're going to do that sooner 

than later.  And now they have destroyed the opportunity of 

getting it done.  Twenty-four thousand people are going to get 

this benefit reduced in this next year. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker, have they paid out for this last quarter, 

the amount that they were supposed to pay out?  Have they 

already done that?  Or are they going to hold that until this Bill 

is passed so that these people are not going to get the benefit 

that they should have had in the last quarter?  That's a question 

I'm going to be asking in committee. 

 

Is the opportunity for this 200 going to be made available in 

some other fashion in the new year?  I believe that it should be.  

And I'm so glad that the member from Churchill Downs is 

listening to the observations that we make as I point them out 

to him.  The kinds of discussion that he had from his position 

when we were in Committee of Finance dealt specifically with 

these issues.  And I would challenge the member from 

Churchill Downs to get up and say what he said in this House 

earlier on.  It's important for the rest of his colleagues -- all 54 

of them -- to hear what he had to say in this Assembly not 

once, not twice, but many times. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that as he sits on the government 

side of the House anticipating promotion to not only the front 

bench but to a position in cabinet, that he would be interested 

in promoting an idea that would be a positive thing in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that he should stand here and tell the people of this 

Assembly what he said as the critic for the Department of 

Finance earlier on this past year and before that.  He said, 

harmonize -- he said it over and over again -- and then give a 

tax credit to the family that really is the lower income.  Give 

that.  And he said it.  As a matter of fact, he was sitting right 

here, or standing right here, when he said that -- or one bench 

over.  And that's where the information came from, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why I think they have turned themselves 

inside out based on a political promise that was not well 

thought out. 

 

And I could just bring a comparison in here.  It has something 

to do with the same kind of promise you made to freeze the 

mortgage repossession process by a moratorium.  And you 

promised that during the election and now you're reneging on 

that. 

 

But for $200 a child on a tax credit, you're not prepared to 

stand here for defending the lower income families in this 

  



454 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

province.  You go around and say, I'm for the little guy -- and 

here you are standing and saying, I'm not for the little guy.  

Why don't you become involved in the kinds of things that 

would give you a benefit to the . . . or give a benefit to the 

lower income people in this province?  Why take it away from 

the children?  That's the question.  Why take it away from the 

children?  I believe that you're doing it wrong.  You're doing it 

absolutely, totally wrong.  And that's why I think that each 

individual one of you should examine the motive in why you 

make this Bill as a part of the presentation that you're doing.  

Because you're taking away the opportunity for this family to 

have discretionary income again, which is exactly what you did 

in harmonization for all of the reasons that I discussed earlier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that that's wrong for the NDP government 

to be doing that.  I don't think it's right.  I don't think it's the 

right thing for them to do.  Mr. Speaker, they've put themselves 

in a position where they had no alternative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance could have paid for 

this if he would have left harmonization in place as it was 

before, blending the taxes together.  If he wanted to have a 

lower rate, fine.  But allow that to happen so that the 

individuals who are receiving the tax credit could still get the 

benefit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say to this Assembly that within a year 

my assessment of it will be this:  that the NDP Party will have 

exactly this kind of a functioning process for providing 

incomes for lower income families in this way.  And mark my 

words that when you do that I'll be here to tell you that you 

should have left it on in the first place. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is why I'm challenging the members 

opposite not to do this.  Two hundred dollars a family -- and 

this I believe has been paid three times already this year.  I 

believe that you need to think about that very seriously.  It was 

paid in the second quarter; it was paid in the third quarter; and 

it was paid in the fourth quarter.  Well we'll find out whether 

it's been paid in the fourth quarter when we come to Committee 

of the Whole or Committee of Finance, if we ever get there.  

That is what we're going to ask, Mr. Speaker, because we want 

to know how much of this has really been spent. 

 

I suppose that one of the things that bothers me . . . Or there's a 

number of things that I want to say before I get to the things 

that bother me.  One of the things is this, Mr. Speaker.  The 

European Economic Community is touted by many people as 

being the engine that is driving international trade.  It's driving 

international economic . . . it's the engine that drives things in 

Europe. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite that 

in Europe they have a value added tax that has significant 

impact in benefitting certain area.  And I'll tell you something 

about it. And it deals with how we function as a part of society.  

In Europe they have a value added tax.  Some commodities it's 

10 per cent, some it's 20 per cent; in the fur business it's as high 

as 40 per cent.  That's the tax on that value of that product. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, flows into a general revenue that is 

measured back out to society.  And where does it go?  It goes 

to a number of places.  It goes to families, it goes to businesses, 

it goes to agriculture.  And that is measured out in various 

proportions. 

 

Just as an example, agriculture gets 10 per cent of all of those 

taxes received in Europe.  And what has that done for the 

European Economic Community?  It's taken it from a net 

importer of food products which they were from the 1930s and 

on, to now where it is a major exporter in the international 

trade. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is done by the way that they put 

together the tax on a value added basis.  Now that, Mr. 

Speaker, is what functions to drive that economic engine in 

Europe. 

 

I sat down in my room here earlier on this year, Mr. Speaker, 

and I was visiting with the ambassador from Austria.  Austria 

is not a part of the Economic Community as of today.  I asked 

him, I said:  what's your concern with blending the taxes 

together so that you have these kinds of opportunities to deliver 

tax credits, to deliver benefits in rebates on various 

commodities.  He said the people of Austria want it to happen. 

 

(1945) 

 

People of Austria want it to happen.  Why?  They were 

willingly . . . they voted in favour of putting it on.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is why I say why not become involved in doing 

the same thing because I think it benefits the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan to get it done.  In this case the $200 

a child tax credit is going to cause a lot of concern on the part 

of parents.  And I believe that the individuals here would 

benefit by going to some of the rural families who are going to 

directly be impacted by this child tax credit being withdrawn. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was looking through the list of provinces that 

have the greatest amount of children in families who are in the 

poverty area, and Saskatchewan had 50,000 of them.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, those 50,000 in my view would probably be, in some 

way, be able to be eligible for the child tax credit.  Now those 

50,000 aren't in downtown Regina.  They aren't only in 

downtown Saskatoon or downtown Prince Albert.  They're out 

in rural Saskatchewan, the reason being that rural 

Saskatchewan has had a low income. 

 

Now what you're going to in effect do is take the child tax 

credit away from the majority of them . . . will be in rural 

Saskatchewan because the majority of the ones, as the member 

from Rosetown-Elrose said in a question period today . . . the 

seriousness of the agriculture plight is a part of the reason why 

these people need those dollars to have the benefit that would 

give them.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's why I believe that this Bill 

should be defeated.  I really do. 

 

I don't know whether the members understand all of the 

implications of what this can do.  But $200 for every child in 

rural Saskatchewan is going to have a significant impact.  It's 

going to have a significant impact for the low income in the 

cities too.  And I'm not excluding them, but I want to point out 

to the people in this Assembly and to those that are listening 

that it's important for the people  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

who have children, who have low incomes, who are supporting 

them on very little. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I was responsible for the 

Department of Agriculture, and we had a small branch in there 

was called counselling and assistance for farmers.  And when I 

visited with the counsellors that went around and talked to 

these people, they were struck at the variance in incomes that 

they allocated for their homes.  But there were many people 

who had less than $10,000 of discretionary income to provide 

for this function of providing food for their children.  As a 

matter of fact, some of them had as low as 4 or $5,000.  They 

did not believe that a family could exist on that little. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why this is important for those 

families.  Those families need this money.  A family of three is 

$600, 600 from the federal government, 600 from the province.  

Do you think that isn't significant in a value of discretionary 

income of $5,000?  Mr. Speaker, it's 25 per cent of that family's 

income.  And I don't think it's anything to just glibly pass over 

for this Assembly.  I think it's an important part of what we 

have to think about. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to be supporting this 

motion because I think you are going to be back in this 

Assembly with something very similar to that later on in the 

spring.  And I believe that that is what you . . . You don't think 

you're going to, but I would challenge you to think of 

something different that would be better, because your 

counterparts in Ottawa agreed that this was one of the best 

ways to do it. 

 

The division bells rang from 7:50 p.m. until 7:58 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Koenker 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Johnson 

Teichrob Trew 

Koskie Draper 

Shillington Serby 

Anguish Whitmore 

Goulet Flavel 

Solomon Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Crofford 

Mitchell Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Hagel Langford 

Bradley Jess 

-- 40 

Nays 

Muirhead Martens 

Neudorf Britton 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 8 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- May I have leave to introduce a guest? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I 

would like to introduce a guest from my constituency this 

evening.  Mr. Mitch Ozeroff who is sitting in the Speaker's 

gallery.  Mr. Ozeroff is also a director of Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, District 13.  And we welcome him here this evening. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 11 -- An Act to 

amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2) be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With reference to 

Bill 11, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is basically the result of the 

processes of the previous government in trying to exercise 

restraint. 

 

I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that as a reeve, I had a good 

deal of problem accepting this proposition from the former 

government.  And I want, Mr. Speaker, to go into that just a 

little bit further because I felt as a reeve at the time that this 

Bill was introduced, or a facsimile thereof last spring, that it 

placed municipalities in a rather difficult situation. 

 

The problem being of course at that time that we had mostly 

drawn up our budgets for the year because that's done through 

the winter months.  And when we got the information that this 

proposal was coming forth, it left some municipalities in rather 

a difficult position to be able to complete their year's work and 

still come out with a balanced budget. 

 

Now fortunately for us in our municipality, we were not 

planning any very major road construction projects, so we were 

able to come through the year.  And it does appear that we will 

have pretty close to a balanced budget.  Unfortunately for some 

others, that wasn't the case. 

 

But I guess being a reeve, I have to be prejudiced in that 

direction in that time period.  And because I'm still an acting 

reeve, I still have to feel that same prejudiced feeling toward 

municipalities and the taxpayers back home who depend on 

municipal governments not being down-loaded upon.  And this 

is a form of down-loading. 

  



456 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

And having had the opportunity to find out that in retrospect 

and looking back that there was a problem in the country 

bigger than anybody had previously thought that there would 

be, it seems to me that the government of this particular time 

might have taken a look at this cut-back and said, well this is 

going to be an undue hardship for a lot of municipalities. 

 

The recession is on in the countryside yet.  The money is 

tighter than we had expected it to be in the farm sector.  And 

maybe we should ease up on this one a little bit and not go 

ahead with it.  And I think that would have been a reasonable 

consideration for the members in the government at this 

particular time because hindsight is better than foresight. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I will not accept this from this 

government.  And I particularly will not accept it from this 

particular minister.  Mr. Speaker, this minister should truly be 

embarrassed to bring forward a Bill to cut revenue sharing to 

rural municipalities by apparently 16 per cent.  And she should 

be embarrassed, Mr. Speaker, because she promised the 

opposite.  Her seat-mate, the Minister of Rural Development, 

promised the opposite. 

 

The NDP visited many rural municipalities and RM (rural 

municipality) councils.  And believe me, I know that they 

promised that revenue sharing would be increased and 

enhanced under an NDP government.  And, Mr. Speaker, they 

said that they would not down-load onto the taxpayers of rural 

Saskatchewan and urban Saskatchewan.  Reeves took you at 

your word, Madam Minister. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough for this minister now 

to say that the cupboard is bare because that argument just 

won't hold.  It is not good enough because she was told that at 

the same time as I was told that as a reeve.  And when we were 

told by the previous government that the cupboard was bare, 

the NDP members told us not to take that at face value. 

 

They told us that it was only a matter of spending priorities.  

They told us that they would get the money by cutting back 

advertising and government travel and the size of cabinet.  

That's what they told us, and the media will remember that.  

And the Leader of the NDP said that these things, and the 

previous government said that it would never be enough.  And 

they said, and I repeat, that it would never be enough and the 

NDP said they'd make up the difference by rearranging the 

priorities.  They would make up the difference and there would 

be more money for rural municipalities and that is what we 

were told. 

 

So don't now, Madam Minister, expect the reeves of this 

province to be like little children with a short memory span.  

You cannot now say that you were mistaken, that advertising 

and the size of the cabinet and the government travel isn't 

enough.  We went around that loop with you, so don't expect us 

to let you get away with it now. 

 

Speaking of government travel, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how 

much more money would be provided for in this Bill 

if the government would not have used the first month of its 

term to see the world.  Add up the cost and figure out how 

much more could have been put into this Bill.  Perhaps only 10 

per cent decrease instead of the 16 per cent decrease that is 

now appearing to be coming through in the process of this Bill.  

Just add it up. 

 

The Leader of the NDP flew off to Ottawa with 100 people and 

so far has refused to release the details, so we don't know how 

much that particular trip cost and how much it could have 

contributed to this Bill to reduce the percentage that 

municipalities are going to be faced with having to make up. 

 

The Minister of Finance flew to New York, and we still don't 

know how much that would have added to the RM budgets.  

But it was a cost and somehow the taxes will have to pay for 

those things that are shortfalls.  And it'll all have to be made up 

somewhere. 

 

The member from Elphinstone, he flew off to Ottawa and 

Montreal and he hasn't told us how much that could have put 

into the percentages in Bill No. 11.  The member from 

Elphinstone has also told us he is sending a crew to the United 

States to talk about our clear skies.  We have no information 

about the cost of that and the potential it would have for 

improving RM budgets, at least by a little bit.  And I think in 

these very difficult times even a little would be important. 

 

They've been flying here and there and everywhere at 

taxpayers' expense and the minister brings this Bill to the 

House and says: well, cutting government travel wasn't enough 

to keep our promises to the RMs for more money in revenue 

sharing. 

 

Besides the travelling spree, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

already found money for an annualized salary of more than 

$120,000 for Donald Gass to investigate whether or not there is 

any money.  Think of that.  It's downright silly.  The man is 

getting $10,000 each month to do the NDP's dirty work. 

 

Here they present a Bill that says that we have to cut back the 

municipalities in the province.  And that's not just going to be 

the rural municipalities, that's also going to be urban 

municipalities, so city folk ought to pay some attention to this 

as well.  Their taxes are going to start to go up just the same as 

the taxes in the country when these kinds of bills are passed, 

because that kind of down-loading has only one affect--either 

you cut back services at the local government level or else . . . 

you cut back services or increase taxes, one or the other. 

 

Do you think the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, believe 

that Donald Gass should be getting $10,000 a month while the 

RMs provide services directly and get slashed back? 

 

Now the government has found money to hire what secret 

memos have called investigators in the Property Management 

Corporation, but they can't find money for RMs. 

 

The government has found enough money to bring back their 

old political friends like Garry Beatty, but they can't 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

find a dime for the municipalities. 

 

They found several hundreds of thousands of dollars to employ 

the Premier's buddies from his law firm, so much so that the 

firm has had to change it's name.  Imagine that -- they've hired 

so many of the Premier's law partners that the firm has had to 

change it's name because none of the same people work there 

any more. 

 

Money for the Premier's friends, but this Bill says nothing for 

municipalities.  And this government, Mr. Speaker, has found a 

huge sum of money for committees and reviews.  Ask the 

minister a question about any program or any policy, the 

answer always is, it's under review. 

 

Well these reviews cost money, Mr. Speaker.  And they are 

spending the resources of the taxpayers to keep all the little 

NDP workers busy and on salary.  And then they say to the 

municipalities, there's no more money for you. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that is unacceptable and because of this 

poor performance, this breaking of faith with the people of 

rural Saskatchewan, I will be asking the members to vote 

against this Bill. 

 

The tax relief on property is important at this particular time, 

and we're not seeing tax relief to property owners through this 

Bill.  We are seeing a down-loading of taxation from the 

province to rural and urban municipalities. Both SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) have 

had conventions where people have been asking for assistance 

so that they can get into some kind of a plan where they would 

reduce taxes on businesses and on farms and on ranches, and 

this down-loading becomes a big problem because now they 

can't do that. 

 

And they're going to be forced not only to maintain taxation at 

its present level, but in all probability they will have to increase 

taxes to the very people that can afford to pay them the least at 

this particular time -- cash strapped farmers, cash strapped 

ranchers and certainly recession-ridden urban business people.  

And I would encourage you all to reconsider this and vote 

against this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon, Ms. Carson that Bill No. 12 -- An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Essentially, Mr. Speaker, we have a 

few concerns with this Bill.  It is cutting back the funding to 

SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency) for a 

cut-back of 10 per cent, and we're wondering a few things 

about this Bill.  But we're wondering if the government gave 

any thought to 

consulting with those folks, and will it result in any lay-offs of 

any . . . or if there isn't going to be lay-offs, what else are they 

planning on cutting back? 

 

Other than that, most of the concerns we'll prefer to raise them 

in committee then. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, having been involved with rural 

municipal work for some years, I happen to have been on 

municipal council and at various SARM conventions while the 

process went on for the funding and jurisdiction of SAMA to 

pass from government into the process that it's in now.  And at 

that time, there was grave concern that there would be a 

down-loading of costs onto municipalities in this process. 

 

We were assured, of course -- as we always are at that time -- 

we were assured that that wouldn't happen, that the government 

wouldn't do that to us.  But of course, I could probably repeat 

the same arguments I used in the last question, and they would 

follow through fairly closely to the same situation that we're in 

here with this Bill with SAMA.  We're finding that 

municipalities are being down-loaded on by the provincial 

government. 

 

And there is absolutely no way that you can cancel the work of 

SAMA.  It's absolutely essential that you have assessments 

done in the province, and it's an ongoing process.  It always has 

been, and it always has to be because times and conditions 

change. 

 

And the reality of life, Mr. Speaker, is that there is going to be 

an increasing in costs, and we tried to explain that at that time 

to the folks involved.  We said that inflation is a factor of life 

that we don't see turning around.  And granted it's not as fast 

now as it used to be, but it's still a factor.  And that factor alone 

meant that eventually there's going to be more costs with the 

process of assessment than what we had before. 

 

So what we said at that time and we repeat now, is that it was 

going to be costing more, and the government should take their 

responsibility.  And instead of cutting the revenues to that 

particular program, they should be increasing at the rate that 

inflation eats up the availabilities of money to operate on. 

 

And I say with all due respect, Mr. Speaker, that I think this 

government is going the wrong direction when they down-load 

taxes onto rural and urban municipalities at any time, but more 

especially during a recession and during a time when farmers 

and ranchers don't have any cash flow to speak of at all. 

 

And I really and sincerely hope that you'll consider the 

direction that you seem to be setting when you pass these kinds 

of pieces of legislation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 

referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 

  



458 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 13 -- An Act 

respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 

Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana 

Centre Authority be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to make a 

few comments on this particular Bill in regards to the 

Wakamow Valley Authority which, for the information of 

members that don't know what it is, it is a river park in the city 

of Moose Jaw very similar to what the Wascana Authority is 

here in the city of Regina, and the Meewasin Valley Authority 

is to Saskatoon.  And there is a similar park, I believe, in the 

city of Swift Current and one being developed in the city of 

Weyburn. 

 

The Wakamow Valley Authority was set up by an act of this 

legislature under the previous NDP government in the 1970s.  

It is very similar to the Wascana and Meewasin Authorities, 

except for one fact, that its statutory funding by the province of 

Saskatchewan was set at a level that was half of what the other 

ones were. 

 

Wakamow, Mr. Speaker, has had a very proud history in its 10 

years of existence.  It has taken a river valley which had gone 

into a great state of disuse and misuse, a river park that at one 

time was famous in Moose Jaw's history, Mr. Speaker, and 

through a great deal of effort, primarily by volunteers, has 

turned that particular river valley into a tremendous asset for 

Moose Jaw and district.  Along with the city of Moose Jaw and 

the senior level of government, there are also two RMs 

involved in it -- the RM of Moose Jaw and the RM of Baildon.  

The RM of Baildon is the RM in which I reside, Mr. Speaker, 

and our rate payers have been proud to make a contribution to 

the Wakamow Valley Authority.  And indeed there are a 

representative of the board from the two RMs, besides the city 

representatives, and citizens at large, and the provincial reps on 

the board of directors. 

 

Wakamow is facing a very serious crisis in its history, Mr. 

Speaker, because it has been so utterly successful in its 

mandate.  Wakamow has in its first 10 years achieved more 

than anyone ever would have expected.  They've been very 

successful in raising funds financing over and above the 

statutory amounts granted to them by the various levels of 

government.  Their private fund raising has touched people like 

the Devonian Trust.  They have gone to many major 

corporations in order to take our river park and turn it back into 

a real jewel for Moose Jaw and area. 

 

And because of that, because they have developed so many of 

their capital projects so successfully in a short period of time, 

they are really up against the crunch of operating capital today. 

 

One of the things that has always bothered me is that because 

Wakamow is lumped in to the same bag, if you will, as places 

like Wascana, which being in the capital city and having many 

of the advantages that go with the seat of government, that 

Wakamow has come out on the short end of the stick. 

 

We have a cairn at the entrance to our Wakamow park in 

Moose Jaw with a list of donors on it.  These are people in our 

community that have given a thousand dollars out of their 

pocket in order to ensure that Wakamow is gone ahead.  And I 

don't think that any of the other urban parks around our 

province have had that kind of dedication, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of the ways that the previous government . . . Although 

they didn't change the statutory amount either and in fact were 

faced with some of the same difficult financial situations that 

the present government is, they very successfully were able to 

use other government programs to offset some of their 

operating needs. 

 

And two that were very successful in the operation of 

Wakamow were Sask Works and the New Careers Corporation.  

We were able to use these two particular entities to do things 

like bank stabilization, to take people in our community that 

had been on social services for a great number of years and by 

employing them in Wakamow and development projects, these 

people were able to operate heavy equipment.  They were able 

to learn skills such as surveying.  They were able to learn 

carpentry skills.  They were able to learn many skills that have 

benefitted not only our park, but our community as a whole, 

because almost all of those people that went through these 

programs while working on Wakamow have gone on to hold 

down permanent employment in other sectors. 

 

And it really disturbs me, Mr. Speaker, that once again I see a 

situation of the cart before the horse.  We have the Minister of 

Social Services canning the Saskatchewan Works program 

outright when it was one of the vehicles that Wakamow could 

use to continue on with their programs, to help people in the 

community, and make up for that lack of funding which was 

statutory by this legislature, and still be able to fulfil their 

mandate and their function.  And the same goes with the New 

Careers Corporation.  They've had a very successful 

relationship over the years where Wakamow was able to use 

these other entities of government to make up for the shortfall. 

 

And we see Saskatchewan Works canned, its budget stripped 

and put into other areas.  We don't know what the fate of the 

New Careers Corporation will be as yet, Mr. Speaker.  Various 

ministers on the other side have varying opinions on it, whether 

it's moving or not moving, and whether it will grow or it will 

shrink.  We simply don't know.  But if entities like Wakamow, 

and Wakamow in particular, are stripped of their ability to use 

other entities of government in order to fulfil their mandate, it 

then comes back on the local citizenry, the city of Moose Jaw, 

the RMs involved, and the hundreds and thousands of hours of 

volunteer labour.  Our Kiwanis club, our Kinsmen club, almost 

every service club in our city, fund-raises on a continuing basis 

to supply moneys to this venture which is really a part of our 

heritage and is truly something that we can all be proud of, and 

everyone in this province can be proud of. 

 

So I would like some assurances, I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

other areas of government will not be denied to entities like 

Wakamow, entities that are built on the concept of 

volunteerism; that the drive which drives service clubs in our 

community to go out there and do that extra work, to 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

go out on the Saturdays and the Sundays and trim trees, and 

mow grass, and do lots of manual labour to make sure that our 

community continues to build on this jewel that we have in the 

river valley -- and not, Mr. Speaker, see it disappear because 

we have taken the initiative and the will away from people. 

 

And I think it's things like Wakamow that make people want to 

stay and live in our communities and in our province.  I really 

do believe, sir, that in comparison to the two larger cities, that 

by showing this kind of effort, Wakamow deserves better in 

life than what they've been getting.  It isn't very often that the 

city of Regina and the Wascana Authority ask for something 

and they don't receive. 

 

And I can only think back, Mr. Speaker, to my time in 

government when the question of the MacKenzie Art Gallery 

came up and the pressures that came out of the capital city to 

have a world class art gallery, as included, because we have 

Wakamow and the legislative grounds, and we all know the 

pressures that come with those situations.  And usually our two 

larger cities win out in almost every respect. 

 

And this particular Bill -- although it does freeze the statutory 

amounts at where they were in the previous year -- because the 

other components have been stripped and taken away, means 

that Wakamow's ability to fulfil its mandate will be lessened. 

 

And I don't think anyone in our city would say that these two 

particular programs, Saskatchewan Works and New Careers, 

have been a discredit to our city, to our province, and to the 

people that were employed working in our Wakamow Valley 

Authority.  And I say the employment record from the people 

that went through those programs is ample evidence that those 

two programs work.  And they work very good when they're 

tied to the community spirit and the volunteerism that people in 

our community have exhibited over the last 10 years. 

 

And I would say to the government, please reconsider some of 

these moves because they impact on so many other areas of our 

society.  And Wakamow is a classic example of something that 

is tremendously good and may not be able to continue its 

mandate without those tools, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(2030) 

Bill No. 18 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 18 -- An Act to 

Provide for the Public Disclosure of Crown Employment 

Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in Crown Employment 

Contracts governing Payments and Benefits in Termination or 

Expiration of those Contracts, to Void Provisions in those 

Contracts respecting those matters and to Extinguish any Right 

of Action and Right to Compensation for any Loss or Damage 

resulting from the Enactment or Application of this Act be now 

read a second time. 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can't 

say it's with a great deal of pleasure that I rise in this House 

tonight to discuss this particular Bill. 

 

What we have before us, Mr. Speaker, as was said yesterday, is 

a Bill unprecedented in its nature; a Bill which strikes at the 

very heart of what we as Canadians consider to be fairness; 

what we consider to be the individual rights which we have 

garnered over the years as we have moved through things such 

as the Diefenbaker bill of rights and into the repatriation of our 

constitution, Mr. Speaker, where the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms was passed and brought back into our country some 

10 years ago, a charter which the now Premier had a great deal 

of input in, in designing. 

 

It was felt by many people across the land at that time, Mr. 

Speaker, that we had to change the ways in which we viewed 

our individual rights.  And that we needed to enshrine those 

rights in some way that they would be above reproach.  That 

those rights could not be arbitrarily taken away by the whim of 

politicians.  That everyone would basically, Mr. Speaker, have 

their day in court. 

 

And I think this particular Bill, which I believe to a great extent 

is politically motivated -- and I will explain why I believe it is 

politically motivated, Mr. Speaker -- that this Bill along with 

ones that we've seen of similar ilk where we've had the 

Minister of Finance come into this House and set aside all of 

the rules and precedents which have been developed here over 

a great number of years in order to do political work. 

 

We have the same situation now, sir, with the rights of 

individuals; individuals who happen to be people that have 

worked in the public service, have worked for government.  

And, Mr. Speaker, these people had contracts, some of which 

may or may not be proper in the public mind.  In other words, 

are they the proper amount of remuneration for the services 

given.  But I believe, Mr. Speaker, the proper place to 

determine whether they were paid and severed properly is in 

the court of Canada, in the courts of our province. 

 

And what I see before us is a Bill that uses the heavy-hand of 

this legislature to determine how people will have access to 

that system.  I see a Bill that allows defamation.  I see a Bill 

that allows mental anguish.  I see a Bill that takes some of the 

things that people have fought and died for in two world wars 

taken away from them.  Mr. Speaker, these people that we're 

talking about, and so far there are 50, 60 of them, Mr. Speaker, 

there could literally be hundreds of them. 

 

I took the opportunity over the supper hour to glance through 

the government directory, the government phone directory.  

And I looked at the number of people that are out of scope that 

work for the Government of Saskatchewan.  I wondered about 

the number of people that, for instance, are crop insurance 

agents around the province.  The number of people that have 

contractual services with the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I look at this Bill which has no sunset clause in it, which 

says that this government, using their massive 

  



460 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

majority, shoving a piece of legislation through this House, is 

going to deal with the contractual arrangements of people with 

their government in a way that is unprecedented in Canadian or 

Saskatchewan history. 

 

And I'm wondering why it has to be this New Democratic 

Government of Saskatchewan that breaks these precedents.  

And I say to you, sir, that it is because I have never seen a more 

politically vindictive party anywhere in existence in Canada 

because there is no other reason, Mr. Speaker, for this 

particular piece of legislation to come forward. 

 

Have we seen any indication that the people that are being 

referred to -- each and every day in the press, by the way -- 

people who are being let go, some of them with a lot of 

publicity and some with none at all . . . and I suggest to you, 

sir, that that is politically motivated. 

 

I suggest to you that we are seeing these people talked about in 

a derogatory manner.  And I would suggest to you, sir, that not 

one of them, not one of them has been negotiated with.  Not 

one of them has been given the opportunity to sit down with 

the government and say, I would like to settle my contractual 

problem which you the government have identified in a 

reasonable manner. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that in the Department of Justice 

there are reasonable and fair-minded people because they settle 

labour disputes, they settle contractual disputes in this province 

almost on a monthly basis.  It is a Canadian tradition, Mr. 

Speaker, to negotiate, not to come into the Legislative 

Assembly and use the heavy hand of the majority. 

 

It is almost a tradition, Mr. Speaker, that a last step in any 

dispute is to call the Parliament of Canada or a legislature 

together and vote to put people back to work.  It is something 

that we avoid at all costs in this country -- to use the heavy 

hand of the legislative process to interfere with the bargaining 

rights of people. 

 

And yet I say to you sir, unless this government has some 

evidence otherwise, that not one of these people have been 

negotiated with.  And the reason that they have not, sir, the 

reason that they have not, is because this government has a 

political agenda driven by some of the members of the New 

Democratic Party that they wish to satisfy.  And they are out to 

trample on the rights of individuals by using this Assembly and 

the overwhelming majority they hold in it to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of these people, if their name were 

raised in the newspapers of this province, probably would not 

be recognized by more than a handful of people.  Many of 

these people came to this province and entered into contractual 

arrangements because they saw, one, opportunities for 

themselves and their family.  They saw opportunities in their 

field of endeavour to come here and build a better society.  

They saw opportunities to use what they have learned in 

university and in the private sector to come here and build and 

create and do new things.  And, sir, those people entered into 

contractual arrangements. 

 

And now we have the situation.  We have several dozen at 

present.  We potentially could have several hundred, Mr. 

Speaker, in the same position, perhaps people that have at some 

point in their lives run afoul of someone in the New 

Democratic Party, someone who has a politically vindictive 

nature. 

 

And now we have this Premier who, as the attorney general of 

this province, saw fit to work through the night in Ottawa some 

10 years ago -- work through the night in order to come to an 

arrangement that would guarantee the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms for Canadian citizens -- now, in one of his first acts 

as Premier, bring in a piece of legislation that in fact does just 

the opposite. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is utterly reprehensible.  This man 

knows the negotiating process that we as Canadians value and 

hold dear.  This man knows as the attorney general, a former 

attorney general of this province, the reluctance to bring this 

legislature together to impose a settlement on people, and yet 

would use his huge majority to come in and basically, because 

I can see no other reason, Mr. Speaker, except to seek some 

type of political retribution being pushed upon him by 

members of his party. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, I think everyone, given the attention that 

this item has drawn, realizes that there will be court action. 

 

Now the minister said in introducing the Bill that they are 

going to save 2 to $3 million by introducing this piece of 

legislation.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know the costs of 

lawyers and litigation today in Canadian society. 

 

And I will wager with the Premier that before this thing is said 

and done that there will be tens of thousands of dollars spent on 

litigation.  And some of these people that we're talking about, 

Mr. Speaker -- some of these people that this Bill is intended to 

fix -- some of these people are not particularly wealthy people. 

They're upper middle income earners.  And I'm not so sure, Mr. 

Speaker, that some of these people will have the wherewithal to 

hire the best lawyers in the land; that some of these people will 

not have the wherewithal to go to the Supreme Court of Canada 

to challenge this particular piece of legislation brought in by 

this Premier and this government. 

 

So in the end, Mr. Speaker, the will of the majority in this 

Assembly will probably use its heavy hand on those individuals 

because they will say yes, my rights have been trod upon but I 

don't have the financial wherewithal to protect my rights 

because the Premier and his government have access to the 

public purse.  They have access to the taxpayer of 

Saskatchewan to do their work.  They can bring their 

heavy-handed legislation in and then they can pick from the 

pockets of every person in this legislature, from the pockets of 

every one of my constituents, the wherewithal to fight in court 

any litigation brought forward by any of these individuals.  

And you can say, Mr. Speaker, in this country that we're all 

equal under the law, but unfortunately that sometimes isn't 

totally true because we know that the ability to pay many times 

affects the ultimate outcome of a litigated process in this 

country. 

 

So we not only have the heavy hand of the majority in this 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

legislature. We will have the heavy hand of government 

dipping into each and every one of our pockets to fight the 

court battles that will ensue out of this particular legislation and 

they will use that to take away those rights. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am not standing here in this legislature 

tonight in defending the case that the government trotted out in 

their early days, in a day or two before the New Democratic 

Party convention.  Now I'm not saying that was done on 

purpose, Mr. Speaker, it perhaps was a coincidence.  But the 

very fact that that individual's case was thrown out as a raison 

dtre, the raison d'tre that we must change how things are 

done in this province when all of the rest, Mr. Speaker, are 

nowhere close -- and the members of the government know 

that.  Many of those contractual arrangements are at present 

very similar to what you would find in the private sector. 

 

And I know the Attorney General says we are simply wanting 

to use the common law of the country to set these standards; 

that we want to divide the way in which public servants garner 

their severance; what we aren't going to allow them to sort of 

bank income as part of their agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I didn't design those particular contracts.  Most of 

them I know nothing about.  But I do know many of the 

individuals involved and I can tell you that most of these 

individuals are very competent people.  They are the kind of 

people that have worked very hard for their province.  They are 

the kind of people that can put deals together that both the 

former government . . . that both the former government and 

the present one can live with. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there never has been a question of 

competence -- that these people did not do a good job where 

they were employed, that they did not garner for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers good results.  But these people in most cases have 

been judged to be politically incompatible with the new 

administration. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, all across Canada for a long, long 

time that when governments change, people change; that 

people in government like to have people of the same 

philosophical bent close to them doing their business. 

 

(2045) 

 

It's an issue that is much in dispute today, Mr. Speaker, in our 

country.  It is an issue that the Reform Party of Canada talk 

about a lot.  It is an issue that people of all political stripes talk 

about a lot.  As we go into this next century, perhaps we as 

Canadians should be thinking about doing things differently in 

that regard so that we don't have the situation occur; when we 

have a transition of government, we have these problems 

occurring with people being fired because of their political 

affiliation. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, these people by and large have been fired 

without cause, which means no one takes issue with their job.  

And at the same time, we are now going to have this legislature 

ask to pass a Bill that will negate those contractual obligations 

entered into by the government -- in many cases, I would 

suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, 

entered into under very well-meaning terms.  And these people 

are not being given the opportunity to use binding arbitration as 

we would expect. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The noise in the legislature is much, 

much too high.  If members have something that they wish to 

discuss that takes fairly high volume, I would ask the members 

to excuse themselves from the Assembly so we can carry on 

with the public business. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

noticed in this particular Bill that people that belong to a 

collective bargaining unit have been excluded from any parts of 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, binding arbitration has been a fact of life when 

dealing with people under collective bargaining contracts in 

our country.  It has been ordered by courts.  It has been ordered 

by legislatures.  At no point did this government even make the 

offer of an independent panel, commission, tribunal, which 

could use binding arbitration to settle these matters without the 

heavy hand of this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have had no negotiating process, which is 

a fundamental part of our history.  We haven't had the 

opportunity to use binding arbitration.  What we are faced with 

is a legislative Act that denies the basic rights of individuals to 

recourse in the courts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I've heard members opposite say that is not 

right, that right is in there.  And yet members of the official 

opposition have sought opinions; I know members of the 

Liberal Party have sought opinions; and, Mr. Speaker, those 

opinions are many and varied. 

 

And that tells me, Mr. Speaker, that because those opinions are 

many and varied and they come from across Canada, that 

means that there is some doubt in the minds of individuals that 

understand and know our constitutional process as to whether 

this is right or wrong.  That tells me, Mr. Speaker, that this 

situation will end up in the courts of Canada.  And it will put 

significant financial pressures on people who might not have 

the ability to pay those pressures. 

 

And that brings me back to an earlier point, Mr. Speaker.  If 

you don't want to use the negotiating process, if you don't want 

to use some type of third party binding arbitration, and you 

want to use the heavy hand, then there is only one reason, Mr. 

Speaker, to use it, and that is purely political.  There can be 

possibly no other reason why you would wish to attempt to 

solve the problem through this legislature other than a political 

solution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am now going to move a motion . . . No?  Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill 18 . . . I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker.  I 

received a piece of advice from one of my colleagues and we 

got mixed up on the interpretation. 
 

The official opposition will be presenting amendments to this 

particular Bill during Committee of the Whole.  They are 

amendments, Mr. Speaker, that have been researched with 

some diligence.  They are amendments that have sought 

outside legal opinion.  And I hope that when we get into 

committee that the Minister of Justice gives these  



462 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

amendments their due consideration.  Because obviously the 

fact that people felt confident about drafting the amendment -- 

people from the legal community -- means that there is some 

argument as to the validity of the Bill that's brought forward. 

 

I think yesterday, Mr. Speaker, when members opposite were 

initially discussing this particular piece of legislation, they 

brought forward a proposition to this House that makes a great 

deal of sense to me, and in people that I've talked to across the 

piece makes a great deal of sense to them. 

 

The official opposition proposed to this House that there be a 

referral to the Court of Appeal for an opinion on the 

constitutional validity of this particular Bill pursuant to the 

provisions of the constitutional questions asked.  I know it is a 

provision, Mr. Speaker, that was used in this House previously.  

I can remember one instance where the former attorney 

general, the former member from Lumsden, asked for a referral 

on a particular matter.  The then members of the opposition had 

no problem with that particular referral.  I think it was a matter 

of substance. 

 

And I would think, Mr. Speaker, if the government were so 

absolutely sure, so absolutely sure on their direction and the 

advice that they have been given, obviously from legal counsel 

both probably in and out of government, that they would not 

fear this reference.  Because while this reference is taking 

place, the opportunity to negotiate is very much alive.  The 

opportunity to sit down and come to some kind of amicable 

agreement with some of these people would occur.  Because 

they are fair- and reasonable-minded people, I would suggest, 

in most cases, Mr. Speaker.  They are as fair as any bargaining 

unit which occurs in this country, which goes into a negotiation 

at here and ends up with a settlement with management 

somewhere down here in the middle. 

 

And while this reference was being sought -- and it may take, I 

admit, Mr. Speaker, a couple of months -- it would allow the 

negotiating process to take place that people would come to 

agreements; that the government would be saved litigation 

costs; the taxpayer, each and every one of us who will be asked 

to help pay those litigation costs, would not have to; and that 

perhaps 90 per cent of the problem, Mr. Speaker, if this 

government is true and honest in what they're saying as their 

objective, that 90 per cent of the problem that these people 

have identified could perhaps be rectified by the time that this 

particular reference is brought back. 

 

And if the government has done its homework, Mr. Speaker, 

then their particular piece of legislation will be upheld.  And 

then I would think, Mr. Speaker, that this Legislative Assembly 

would have no choice but to say that particular piece of 

legislation has passed all the hurdles, it is right and proper, and 

yes, government, we will stand aside and let it go through. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when that particular amendment was 

proposed to this large, huge NDP majority, they said, no, we 

will use the power of our majority and we will ram it down the 

throats of whoever it may affect in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  We are not worried about the Court of Appeal 

or the highest court in the land.  We will simply do 

it and we will ram it down your throat.  And, Mr. Speaker, this 

from the member from Riversdale who had a integral part in 

bringing back the Constitution of Canada from Great Britain, 

who sat up through the night to get the work done. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, given what I have said, if the decision of 

this government is not to allow that process to take place, if the 

decision of the government is that we will deal with all of these 

individuals with the heaviest hand possible, then one has to 

come back to the beginning premiss, Mr. Speaker, and it is that 

this whole exercise is motivated strictly by politics -- that this 

whole exercise is motivated by the desire of people within the 

New Democratic Party for some type of political revenge to 

people who worked for the previous administration.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this from a Premier and a government who have said, 

we are going to be different; we are going to be fair; we are 

going to be non-partisan; we are going to set the new 

precedents that government in Canada will look up to. 

 

But sadly, sadly, Mr. Speaker, the evidence before us of this 

new government is entirely different.  As I have said many 

times before in this legislature, what I've seen before me are 

closed doors.  I have seen the Gass tribunal operating behind 

closed doors so that people in our society don't know whether 

its deliberations are fair.  I have seen the Minister of Finance 

walk into this legislature and say that, I will set aside the rules 

of this legislature to do my bidding on a supply motion. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately, despite the public 

pronouncements of the member from Riversdale, despite his 

run up to the premiership of this province, and all the things 

that he told the people about being new and different and 

non-partisan, the evidence . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I am not 

unlike many people in our society who, when they see the 

weight of evidence before them, can only come to the 

conclusion that members of the opposition have come to on 

this particular piece of legislation -- and that is that it is 

politically motivated.  Because otherwise, Mr. Speaker, why 

would a new government want to enter into such a 

heavy-handed transaction? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that when we get into debate of this Bill 

in committee, there are going to be many questions asked.  

There are going to be many areas that need to be clarified.  We 

have to know at a very early date how far this Premier, this 

Minister of Justice, and this large government -- how far are 

they going to go in this process of denying the rights of people 

in our society. 

 

How far through government is the broad brush of the New 

Democratic Party going to sweep?  Who are the people on the 

list that this legislation is going to affect?  Because there is no 

sunset clause, Mr. Speaker, simply to deal with the 57. One 

only has to assume that there are other people that they've got 

in mind.  One only has to assume, Mr. Speaker, in looking at 

this Bill, that that broad sweep of the brush is intended to cut 

through many areas of government. 

 

And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, and the people in my 

constituency want to know, because there are people out 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

there that work for government.  The moms and dads of people 

that work for government live there.  The people that have 

relatives and people might aspire to work for government live 

in the constituency of Thunder Creek.  And I'm sure they're 

going to want to know how far this legislation is going to go.  

How long is it going to last?  And who is it going to aim at? 

 

(2100) 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, we as a province continually need good, 

educated, far-sighted people to survive.  We are a province that 

exports to live by.  We are a province that must manufacture 

and value add if we are to prosper.  And, Mr. Speaker, to 

achieve those ends you have to have good, talented people who 

are willing to come to this province and build their careers, 

bring their families here, and set their sights on the future. 

 

And if this legislation that we have before us, Mr. Speaker, 

says to those people, I dare not take the challenge of coming to 

this province, or I dare not take the challenge of staying in this 

province and raising my family because I fear that I might 

offend someone in the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, we 

will not grow and prosper.  We will not attract the kind of 

people that we need to build this province.  We will not have 

the ability to go into the investment community of the world 

and say to them, we are a good and stable and fair jurisdiction 

for you to come and invest in, because the principle of 

retroactivity has been established. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we had a taste of that in the 1970s.  We had 

a taste of that in the nationalization legislation piloted through 

this legislature by the member from Riversdale.  And we saw 

people come to this province and make investments of 

hundreds of millions of dollars and retroactively have that 

investment taken away. 

 

We saw this government, the previous NDP government, say 

that, we will take a 50 per cent share in every uranium mine 

discovered in this province because that is our right; and it is 

retroactive, and you have no recourse under the law. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we've heard for years the member from 

Riversdale and other members of the governing party say, we 

aren't like that any more.  We've changed, we've grown up.  

The world has changed.  We're in a global economy.  We no 

longer believe in nationalization.  We're a kinder, gentler party.  

But it doesn't look that way, Mr. Speaker.  It doesn't look that 

way. 

 

It doesn't look that way because at its first opportunity it 

introduces a piece of legislation which harkens back to those 

days in the 1970s when that government was so bent upon 

taking from people who had made investments in our province 

and say, we don't want you here any more. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this piece of legislation says to 

individuals -- individuals in Saskatchewan, individuals in 

Canada, individuals around the world, who would come and 

use their expertise to build this province -- that no, that is not 

the kind of place I want to 

be because this government can step in and use its big majority 

in this legislature to take away my constitutional rights as an 

individual and a citizen. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, from the phone calls that I have been 

getting, and members of my caucus have been getting, and the 

people in my constituency have been getting, says that many 

people feel that in their heart, Mr. Speaker.  That people that 

have looked beyond the narrow political agenda which the 

government has trotted out for us with the former president of 

SaskPower, when people look beyond that narrow political 

agenda they see that this legislation is onerous; that this 

legislation has the ability to attack the individual such as none 

as we have ever seen in this province before. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it is absolutely incumbent that 

members of the government -- this Premier who took part in 

repatriating our Constitution -- but also this Premier that did 

pilot through the nationalization process back in the '70s, that 

this Premier stand in this Assembly and define for people who 

this legislation is going to impact on, how long it is going to 

last.  When will it stop, or will it go each and every day that the 

member from Riversdale is Premier of this province?  Will it 

go on and on and on, until he has satisfied the political whims 

of his party?  Will it go on and on and on, until this need for 

political retribution by members of the New Democratic Party 

have been satisfied? 

 

Those are the things that we in the opposition need to know, 

Mr. Speaker.  Those are things that people in our society need 

to know.  And if they are not willing to say when it end, who it 

will affect, then we can only surmise, Mr. Speaker, that the 

heavy hand will continue to operate and chop its way through 

the Government of Saskatchewan and our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I never dreamt that one of the very first pieces of 

legislation that this government would introduce -- after having 

listened to the member from Riversdale in this House for the 

last five years, and from the time leading up to the last election 

campaign -- would be to come in here and strip away the 

human rights of people in our society.  This member, this 

Premier, has been on record time ad infinitum, Mr. Speaker, 

as saying his party and his administration would never be like 

that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan tonight, 

there is an obvious contradiction at work in this Assembly, an 

obvious contradiction at work.  And one can look at newspaper 

articles, and remember the TV, and know that that 

contradiction is at work.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, until the 

members of this opposition and the people that we represent 

have been satisfied that there is no contradiction, that the rights 

of individuals in our society will be upheld to the fullest, that 

people will have recourse in the courts of our land, will we rest 

on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I feel a 

tremendous responsibility today as I speak about this 

legislation.  And I feel strongly that I represent the middle 

ground, that I am the only one who can speak with 

  



464 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

credibility from this side of the House because the re-elected 

members of the official opposition must shoulder the blame for 

the very introduction of this legislation. 

 

If there were any Bill to be introduced at all, Mr. Speaker, it 

should be a Bill about fairness and justice.  After all, half of the 

people of this province made a decision to elect 55 individuals 

from the New Democratic Party in order to restore some 

semblance of decency to Saskatchewan. 

 

Yes, 55 individuals, Mr. Speaker, 55 people with minds of their 

own;  55 people who carry the trust of the voters in their 

constituency that they will do the right thing for Saskatchewan, 

for all of its people, 55 supposedly free-thinking individuals 

who are charged with the responsibility of seeing justice done. 

 

We have but to watch with open eyes to see that this is not a 

fair and just world, Mr. Speaker.  But it is the role of 

government to make it more fair and more just. 

 

That is what disturbs me most about this legislation.  The Bill 

presented before this House by the province's Minister of 

Justice brings to Saskatchewan legislation that will bring a 

form of justice for some people but not for others.  And this is 

hardly fair or just. 

 

In the past election, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province 

voted against a government which blatantly abused its power 

and the spending of our tax dollars.  It's no secret that the 

Conservative government did hire its friends and paid 

outlandish severance packages.  And the Conservative 

government had not thumbed its nose at the civil service by 

creating special positions, special contracts and outrageous 

severance packages in those contracts for its pals, this NDP 

government would never be able to introduce such equally 

extreme and outrageous legislation that is before us today. 

 

There is no doubt in my mind that there are dozens of contracts 

which should be cancelled because they're ludicrous wastes of 

taxpayers' dollars, Mr. Speaker. I've called for an end to the 

misuse of tax dollars for some time.  And although I agree that 

serious measures must be implemented to terminate 

unreasonable agreements, I argue that there must be a far more 

non-partisan approach to what is considered reasonable by fair 

market standards in the civil services of other provinces and in 

the private sector. 

 

To that end, I have called upon the government to follow 

through on its own resolution of a few years ago: to appoint an 

independent committee to review all appointments in question, 

one by one, and to recommend what is fair and reasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat disillusioning that there are 

members of this House that are going to be voting on this 

legislation, and they are choosing to so frivolously listen to 

anyone's comments.  I am very disturbed to see that the NDP 

government has not taken an open and fair approach to this.  

Rather it has used obvious examples of patronage and gross 

abuses of tax dollars to justify the introduction of this 

broad-ranging legislation which can end careers, terminate 

legal contracts, and not allow 

individuals who were legitimate members of our professional 

civil service any recourse whatsoever. 

 

The NDP knows full well that a labourer cannot be fired 

without just cause, or the individual can turn to the Labour 

Standards Board for assistance.  Unions fight tooth and nail to 

ensure that their employees' contracts are honoured.  Who is to 

defend the legitimate members of our civil service from this 

legislation such as this, Mr. Speaker?  The responsibility that I 

feel here today is to provide a credible argument on behalf of 

those citizens in our province who will find themselves at the 

mercy of this legislation and this government, as well as 

speaking to the people of our province who are being led to 

believe by this government that all civil servants are just like 

the privileged previous head of the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation. 

 

This is absolutely and undeniably ridiculous, Mr. Speaker.  

Many of these individuals have been long-time employees of 

the professional civil service.  Most are people with specialized 

education, training and experience, who have devoted their 

careers in whole or in part to the betterment of Saskatchewan. 

 

Most are people who have worked under more than one 

government administration, who have kept their politics to 

themselves for fear of recrimination by whatever government is 

in power at the time.  Many are people who have moved their 

families to Saskatchewan, purchased homes here, and have 

become parts of our communities. 

 

And now they're at the mercy of a government which wishes to 

purge itself of Conservative patronage, and is willing to adopt a 

take-all mentality so as to not miss anyone hidden beneath the 

layers of bureaucracy.  And for that I say shame. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, is the same group of people 

who were horrified at the idea of government employees being 

uprooted from their jobs with no choice during the recent Fair 

Share scare in the SGEU (Saskatchewan Government 

Employees' Union).  Look at what it will do to families, they 

said.  What will people who are wanting to do business in 

Saskatchewan government think, they asked.  What utter 

hypocrisy that they could ask those questions of one group of 

people and be disinterested in another. 

 

And now look at what this New Democratic government is 

empowering itself to do to the lives and families of another 

group of people, top line civil servants.  The government has 

made our professional civil servants into sitting ducks because 

they are top end wage earners in a struggling economy.  If the 

issue is salaries, or severances, or separation pay, Mr. Speaker, 

then let us collectively decide what is fair and competitive in 

the job market for people of this calibre and make some 

adjustments.  If the issue is patronage, Mr. Speaker, let us 

develop a far more precise instrument, more focused legislation 

to deal with this issue.  And let us implement legislation such 

as this apologetically, with the understanding that it is directed 

at specific abuses of tax dollars and is not designed to authorize 

big brother behaviour. 

 

(2115) 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

Mr. Speaker, when legislation is used to alter the terms of 

existing contracts it must only be done in extreme 

circumstances.  We must think of what message this sends 

beyond our borders.  In essence it says Saskatchewan wants 

you to do business with us, but well, come on in anyway, sign a 

deal, and then let's hope that Saskatchewan doesn't change 

governments, or that the government of the day doesn't change 

its mind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice is telling people that we 

can just tear up contracts, tear up agreements, and send you 

home empty-handed.  What more valuable precedent could this 

government use to prove a point than its people. 

 

No private employer could get away with this, sir.  Why should 

government?  Not only is this Act uncaring on the part of 

government, it is completely inconsistent with what is expected 

of any other sector that employs people.  In actual fact a 

business person could fire a bartender and be obligated to 

provide more notice and more severance under The Labour 

Standards Act than this legislation provides for our civil 

servants. 

 

It puts this government on a level which is above the law.  

Outside of regular contractual obligations on the part of the 

employer, this Act supersedes The Labour Standards Act.  The 

message that this sends to people, not only to those prospective 

employees of the government or those entering a contract with 

this province for the delivery of goods and services, the 

message, Mr. Speaker, is that the government of this province 

can squirm out of its obligations by passing laws in this House 

to suit its own agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Assembly is charged with creating legislation 

which should serve as a model for the people.  And I am truly 

saddened by the model that they are setting for employers who 

consider employees to be without rights.  No private employer 

could or should get away with this.  Why should government? 

 

This NDP government feels that it has a point to prove.  And 

who does the NDP government use to prove a point to the 

former government?  It uses people.  This is a government 

which sells itself on how much it cares about people.  But 

which people does it really care about?  Every individual?  

Does every person count in Saskatchewan or only those who 

are politically expedient to care about? 

 

Surely there is another way to approach this without ploughing 

the crop under to kill a few weeds.  And that is what this Bill 

does, Mr. Speaker.  It effectively takes the heart and the 

motivation out of the civil service of Saskatchewan just to 

clean up a few rotten apples. 

 

I'm not here to argue which of the appointments were political, 

or which settlements were too rich, or which were acceptable.  

The fact is, not even the Premier knows how many contracts 

are out there which will be covered by this legislation.  I could 

support a motion which called for the filing of contracts so that 

an independent board could review them.  I support the public 

scrutiny of contracts.  I said before that all three parties and a 

representative body from the private sector should 

appoint members to a panel to review all contracts. 

 

What I take issue with in this Bill is the government's broad 

brush approach to the people in our civil service.  I refer to 

section 3, paragraph 2, subsection A on page 3 of the Bill and I 

shan't read it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What this says, in effect, is that those people already protected 

by their unions have nothing to fear from this legislation, but 

those individuals who are not part of a union -- individuals who 

do work at the top so to speak for government -- are being told 

that a deal is a deal with a union employee but not with you.  

They are basically being told, Mr. Speaker, that their rights 

under the Charter do not apply in Saskatchewan because they 

have no right of reproach. 

 

Is that what you really want this Bill to say?  How can the 

members opposite be proud of this?   Have those of you who 

will no doubt follow the party line like sheep as you always do 

stopped to consider this and what it will mean to any person or 

corporation planning to do business with our government? 

 

Well let me tell you what it means for those of you who 

probably won't bother to read the Bill before you vote on it.  It 

means that people will be suspicious of Saskatchewan 

contracts.  They will fear that some other legislation like this 

will rear its ugly head and cancel their deals mid-stream.  And 

it will mean that people will start building money into their 

tenders, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that they get their costs up 

front because they'll always wonder about the trustworthiness 

of this NDP government, question the validity of their 

contractual agreements. 

 

But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, people are going to think 

twice before coming to this province.  People with talent will 

think more than twice before coming to this province, and 

before staying in this province.  Many of our top-quality civil 

servants, those who have not already fled the persecution of the 

Conservatives, will have little reason to stay when their 

contracts become virtually worthless. 

 

What needs to be introduced here is watch-dog legislation that 

scrutinizes deals before they are signed, and recommends them 

or sends them for re-negotiation if they're outside the 

guide-lines established by an independent board.  There is a big 

difference between re-negotiation of contracts and unilateral 

revocation of contracts through legislation.  A big difference, 

Mr. Speaker, between re-working a deal because circumstances 

have changed and expropriation without compensation. 

 

This government is offering no assurance to the people who 

live in this province, or the people who sign deals with 

Saskatchewan, that we will honour its contracts or respect its 

agreements in the future. 

 

I think it is most unfortunate that we have in official opposition 

a group of individuals, the re-elected members who are unable 

to stand and really express legitimate concerns about this Bill, 

because to many people in the province they lack credibility.  

Any why is 

  



466 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

that, Mr. Speaker?  It's because it was the previous government 

-- to my right -- who destroyed the people's trust in 

government, and who, as a result, now lack credibility. 

 

This is a group of individuals representative of a much larger 

group who took the power of government to the other extreme.  

They negotiated contracts, some of which were deceitful, 

designed to make party faithful rich for years to come.  But just 

as we cannot assume that everyone who did business with the 

previous government got rich, nor can we assume that every 

civil servant deserves to be punished at the hands of this Bill. 

 

When the official opposition has no credibility, often the 

government not only wins the vote, they not only win the vote, 

but wins the public support on the issue by default.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, this is one issue where the people must try to remain 

objective despite their bitterness towards the abuses that 

characterized the last nine years.  To throw out one government 

which had lost respect for the laws and the statutes of this 

province, that did whatever it felt necessary to accomplish its 

own political goals; to throw out a government like that, Mr. 

Speaker, should not give its replacement a mandate to embark 

on the same course. 

 

I conclude my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by appealing to all of the 

new members of this Assembly.  We were sent here as 

individuals, real people with real feelings, with a capacity to 

think for ourselves and make decisions based on full 

knowledge.  We were not sent here to simply be yes-men and 

yes-women for our respective political parties. 

 

But I have watched as government members in this House 

simply vote with their party because they were tutored on their 

government's point of view.  They vote without even having 

listened to members' points.  They vote after having spent their 

time heckling and jeering rather that being thoughtful and 

considerate -- vote, in fact, without even being present for 

debate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are none so blind as those who will not see.  

I say to all new members through you, Mr. Speaker, that you 

cannot care about some people and not others.  You cannot 

have justice for some and not for others.  Is there one 

government member with enough courage, individual fortitude, 

and commitment to human rights to vote against Bill 18?  I 

truly hope so, Mr. Speaker, but I doubt it. 

 

I am politically and ethically opposed to this proposed 

legislation.  Further, on a personal level, I feel that there could 

be a perceived conflict of interest in my voting upon this 

motion. 

 

Therefore I hereby end on a point of order pursuant to Rule 37 

that I will be withdrawing from the vote. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what 

we're discussing here today is a Bill that, when passed, will 

allow the government to change employment contracts that it 

finds unacceptable.  What we have here today is a Bill which 

will allow the government to change the law.  What we have 

here is a government who is omnipotent, or at the very least has 

the illusions of being all-powerful. 

 

First they change the laws of the legislature.  And now we have 

them changing the laws of the land or attempting to.  

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the members across the way share 

with the member from Regina Albert South's opinion that the 

individual is not as important as the system. 

 

And that is why we have them today debating a Bill that will 

use this legislature to target individual citizens.  That is why we 

have them using the powers of the legislation to conduct a 

witch-hunt. 

 

If what they are proposing with this legislation is right, Mr. 

Speaker, they would extend it to include private sector 

contracts.  But we don't see them doing that, Mr. Speaker.  And 

a question I ask is, why?  I would like to ask them why but, Mr. 

Speaker, they have also stripped me of the opportunity to ask 

questions other than in question period. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill goes far beyond reducing severance 

packages, as the NDP would have the public believe.  This Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, suspends fundamental principles of law.  I do not 

and I cannot believe that the Minister of Justice truly approves 

of this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe I know that member well enough to 

know that he's an honourable person.  And I do not believe that 

he wants to be known for ever after in the law schools as the 

individual who introduced this law, the individual who set a 

precedent of this calibre.  Mr. Speaker, I'm sure he does not 

want our future lawyers to examine and study a law that hangs 

individuals out to dry and strips them of their rightful 

severance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that our Justice officials agree 

with what this Bill encompasses.  This Bill does not require 

that all Crown employment contracts be made public.  It does 

nothing of the sort, Mr. Speaker.  What this Bill does is 

provides a method for the NDP to make public only contracts 

of the previous government.  What this Bill does is provides 

the NDP a method in which to maintain a cloak of secrecy 

around all future employment arrangements.  What this Bill 

does is legalize slander, libel and persecution.  And in so far as 

civil remedies are concerned, Mr. Speaker, this Bill creates a 

clever environment exempting the NDP from all scrutiny. 

 

And I know that members over there are catcalling, Mr. 

Speaker, and I don't believe they've read the Bill.  I don't think 

they understand it.  They don't believe.  Mr. Speaker, we have 

had legal advice from, I think, legal people just as qualified as 

the member that keeps chirping at me, Mr. Speaker.  He was 

never able to make his living as a lawyer; he had to get into 

government.  And he chirps . . . 

 

(2130) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We are not to get into the 

personalized and personal vendettas against members of this 

Assembly, and I ask the member to get back on the principle of 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank you for  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

the . . . for correcting me there.  As I said, Mr. Speaker, I don't 

believe that the authorities that we are using are any less 

capable than those who seem to be disagreeing with me 

tonight, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill, as I said before, creates an 

environment which allows the NDP to hide from scrutiny, 

including, Mr. Speaker, scrutiny of severance payments, by 

limiting the effect of the Bill to those agencies with boards of 

directors appointed 90 per cent by the cabinet. 

 

Just as the Minister of Finance's Bill suspends constitutional 

guarantees of the legislature, and the rules and procedures of 

the Assembly itself, so does this Bill suspend . . . so does Bill 

18 suspend the application of law for an narrowly defined 

group of individuals.  This government is arbitrarily changing 

rules and laws at their leisure.  They are abusing their majority 

in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to an extent that I don't think 

we have saw before, not in the short time I've been here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my opinion they are caught up in revenge.  It's 

pent up anger of having had to wait for 10 years to gain control 

of this province.  And they are persecuting innocents with no 

political affiliations, Mr. Speaker.  The question we have to ask 

is: how soon will the thirst for blood be quenched -- the thirst 

for blue blood, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I cannot believe there is any other reason for this Bill than get 

even -- get even, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP government so wants 

to defame the Conservatives that they have lost sight of where 

they are and what they should be doing. 

 

And why, Mr. Speaker, are they here?  I don't believe they 

were elected to hunt . . . to go on a witch-hunt and destroy a 

few Tories out there, Mr. Speaker.  They were elected to 

govern this province.  They are not here, Mr. Speaker, to 

condemn a party who you feel has cheated you out of power.  

They are here to govern a province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members across the floor are not even 

considering what is good for the province.  They are too busy 

hunting down wherever they perceive as Tory loyalists -- spill 

some more blue blood. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask the question: do you think you gain 

votes by firing civil servants and denying their severance pay?  

I don't think so, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think they were elected to 

do that.  As the Leader of the Liberal Party just said a few 

moments ago, Mr. Speaker, we have people of all political 

persuasions as civil servants.  You and I and all the members 

here worked with them, and we found them honourable.  We 

found them professional enough to rise above their political 

beliefs and do the job properly. 

 

I also agree with the Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Speaker, 

that there are only a few in comparison that are capable of 

taking on the job as civil servants and doing it properly, and 

they should be paid and well paid.  And I'm not here, Mr. 

Speaker, to argue the numbers involved here. 

 

I agree with our member from Thunder Creek.  If there is to be 

negotiations and some of those severances do not appear to be 

reasonable, then let's negotiate with those 

people.  I don't think, Mr. Speaker, you can take one or two 

packages and condemn a whole civil service, four or five 

hundred people, because one or two were able to negotiate a 

severance package that would seem to be exorbitant.  I don't 

believe that.  I don't think that's what this was put there for, Mr. 

Speaker.  I don't think that's what we're after here.  I think we're 

after Tory blood at any cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a question I would ask: why doesn't this 

government put their energies to good use?  Why doesn't the 

government have their various departments devise constructive 

legislation rather than destructive legislation?  Why are we 

standing here tonight, Mr. Speaker, debating a Bill that is 

totally reprehensible?  It is not even, Mr. Speaker, in any way 

that I can see.  I have looked at the Bill and there's some 

clauses I want to come to a little later in my speech, Mr. 

Speaker, that I can't believe that the member, the Justice 

minister, can believe this Bill. 

 

I don't think he created it, Mr. Speaker.  I think he was done by 

other people and I just can't believe that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . The feeling is mutual. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said, Mr. Speaker, why are we not talking 

about constructive legislation?  The farmers out there in my 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, are waiting for assistance from this 

government.  Why doesn't the government introduce some farm 

aid legislation here in the legislature?  I don't know, will the 

farmers benefit from this Bill, from this legislation?  Well I 

don't think so.  Will the farmers benefit from a witch-hunt? 

 

Does the government understand, Mr. Speaker, that some of 

the people that they are out to destroy could very well be 

farmers, the very people that they have said have first priority?  

When they were on the election trail they said, that's our first 

priority -- to our farmers.  I don't see too much in this Bill that's 

going to help farmers, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Civil servants that the NDP are denying severance pay could 

very well be farmers.  Many farmers that I know have taken a 

second job, trying to save the farm. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the cartoon that you see now and again depicting 

a farmer with a straw hat with a hole in it and the 3-tine 

pitchfork over his shoulder, bib overalls -- Mr. Speaker, that is 

not a farmer today.  Many farmers are quite capable of leaving 

the farm and taking a job with government and doing a good 

job.  They could very well be the people that this Bill will 

destroy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many farmers do have income positions.  And 

who is to say that this Bill is not hurting those very ones this 

government have said to us, you're very important to us.  

Where is the NDP pledge that agriculture will be number one 

priority?  This Bill certainly isn't it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can't just make statements and never do 

anything about it.  Mr. Speaker, you cannot just fly to Ottawa 

and then say, yes, that should hold them; let's get the Tories.  

And that, it seems to me, is what's happening here, Mr. 

Speaker.  It doesn't matter who it hurts, as long as we spill blue 

blood.  How deep is it going to cut? 

  



468 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, the question I would ask, why doesn't this 

government stop wasting time on vengeful legislation?  When 

is the thirst going to be quenched?  Why do the members 

opposite want to spend millions of dollars defending and 

depending on this legislation, Mr. Speaker?  Why do you want 

to spend a whole bunch of money defending this in court when 

a little bit of consultation . . . All you have to do is bring those 

people together. 

 

And I don't think I'm prepared to listen to one or two bad deals 

as a reason to wipe out everyone.  Let's talk about those bad 

deals.  Let's talk to those people.  And spending millions of 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we'll be doing.  And I 

would say, don't kid yourself.  Don't kid yourself that this 

legislation won't be challenged in court. 

 

We have . . . as I said, when we first saw this Bill we were 

disturbed by it.  We were disturbed enough to search out legal 

advice.  Mr. Speaker, I'm not a lawyer.  I don't know a lot about 

it.  But there are people that we can ask.  People who we trust 

for their opinion.  And they tell us, Mr. Speaker, there will be 

many, many challenges of this Bill in court. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what makes this Bill really, really bad, there are 

some people who may not have the financial resources to carry 

this Bill to court themselves.  They may have to take class 

action in order to get recourse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government is going to go to court 

defending this -- this Bill that they are trying to ram down our 

throat.  You're trying to ram it down our throat.  There you go. 

I hit a nerve.  I hit a nerve.  Even the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order!  Order!  This House . . . Could 

I have order please.  This House may be much better off if a 

few people absented themselves from the House so that the rest 

of us could carry on with the public's business.  If some of you 

aren't going to do that, I'll assist you very shortly. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  If I 

offended the Chair, sir, I apologize. 

 

As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, why do the members opposite 

want to spend millions of dollars defending this legislation in 

court?  It doesn't have to go to court, and that's what we'll be 

doing.  And make no mistake, make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP government is going to go to court defending this Bill 

that they're trying to ram down our throat.  We've seen 

evidence of this, Mr. Speaker, many times before.  The Leader-

Post reported on it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, is not the real motive behind this legislation 

purely political?  As the member from Thunder Creek pointed 

out many times, there is no other interpretation to put on this 

Bill.  The public is busy.  They are involved in the holiday 

season and they're not watching what the NDP do, Mr. 

Speaker.  What a good time to push a Bill like this through the 

House.  Political expediency, that's the only interpretation that I 

can put on this Bill. 

They are not being closely watched and the NDP are slowing 

down and makes room for their patronage appointments -- the 

things that they were never going to do.  No, no, I'm different.  

Oh yes, the Premier said, oh I'm different.  I'm not the old 

socialist any more.  I'm the good guy.  I'm the white-haired boy 

for Saskatchewan.  Trust me.  Trust me.  So they did.  They 

trusted him, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House, and the 

first thing they do is put a Bill like this through. 

 

Well it's not up to me to tell them what to do, I guess.  The 

public will judge.  The public will judge.  Those bureaucrats as 

they're called, Mr. Speaker, they will judge.  Yes, patronage 

appointments, Mr. Speaker -- they claim they were not going to 

do that any more . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right.  

And I can't help but repeating it.  They said there would be no 

more patronage.  Time after time.  I'm clean.  I'm new.  I'm the 

new guy.  Well, open and honest -- they are neither open, nor 

do I find very honest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government resumed this sitting claiming 

they would be out of here in two weeks.  That in itself is 

arrogant, Mr. Speaker.  That's very arrogant.  They decided 

before the House resumed that we'd be only here two weeks.  

How do you expect stuff like this to go through the House in 

two weeks?  Then why does this government insist on 

introducing legislation that is so complex, so devious that we 

cannot possibly let it pass without scrutiny? 

 

I would not be doing my job -- the job that I went to the doors 

and asked for -- if I was to let something like this go through, 

Mr. Speaker, without at least voicing my opposition to it.  And 

I see laughter and I see hoots and hollers because maybe I'm 

not the world's best orator, but, Mr. Speaker, I believe in what 

I'm saying tonight; this is a bad Bill.  And if the Minister of 

Justice is going to tell me that this is his Bill -- this is the Bill 

that he wants to be remembered for -- then I have misjudged 

that person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think all of us sitting here tonight would much 

rather be home celebrating the season with our family.  Why 

are we here?  Mr. Speaker, we are not here to obstruct; we are 

here to be heard.  We are here because, Mr. Speaker, in other 

Bills before this Assembly we cannot be heard.  In this Bill, 

Mr. Speaker, we insist that we will be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also know unless we can convince those 

people to listen, this Bill will go through.  That's right.  

Because of our system, because of our system, Mr. Speaker, 

those people who have the majority rule.  That's right. 

 

Now I seem to hit a nerve with the Premier.  He is not very 

comfortable over there.  He is slinking deeper and deeper into 

his chair because he don't want to be seen . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, it's so close to Christmas I 

don't mind a chorus.  So let him go ahead.  He's only defeating 

himself.  He's not hurting me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my family would like me to be home tonight.  

They are not unlike the members opposite.  I'm sure their 

families are the same.  I think all of us who have 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

children, who work, find that at the Christmas season that their 

holiday time is limited.  We know that.  Why am I here tonight, 

Mr. Speaker?  Because I feel that I have to be here and defend 

the people who I represent that will not like this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- My family is no different than their family, not 

a bit.  They do not want their season disrupted.  Mr. Speaker, I 

cannot allow legislation such as this Bill before us passed 

through without a fight -- without a fight, Mr. Speaker.  I 

cannot let the NDP pick and choose who in the civil servant 

will go without what is rightfully theirs.  My conscience, Mr. 

Speaker, would not allow that. 

 

And I will stand here, Mr. Speaker, and I will be ridiculed.  Let 

me say to the Premier, let me say this, Mr. Speaker, I would 

sooner be insulted than ignored.  So let them carry on, let them 

carry on.  The Premier wants to insult me, Mr. Speaker -- fine.  

That's better than being ignored.  It maybe tells us something 

about that person. 

 

Mr. Speaker, why should I be at home enjoying this festive 

season when so many others would be spending it in fear of 

losing their jobs and their severance?  I can't go home and 

enjoy my Christmas season, Mr. Speaker, when there are 

people who may lose -- not the George Hills, I don't have to 

defend him, he'll defend himself.  I'm not talking about him.  

I'm talking about the other innocent people they're trying to 

destroy here. 

 

I agree with the leader of the Liberal Party.  Why, why do you 

condemn all people because there's one or two packages that 

look a little bit lucrative.  Why, why do you want to get 

everybody, because there's maybe a little bit of blue blood. 

 

Why should these people be forced to sit through this season in 

fear, in fear of the NDP?  Why?  Those very people told us, 

Mr. Speaker, when we were promoting the Fair Share program, 

you're destroying families, you're destroying people.  They 

don't know whether they're going to move or not.  These people 

don't know who's next on their hit list. 

 

This legislation legalized open hunting season on civil servants, 

Mr. Speaker.  That's what it does, it opens the season.  And in 

all respect, Mr. Speaker, I ask government, reconsider your 

actions.  You can still ask for arbitration.  You can still bring 

these people in and discuss with them, and if there's a few that 

you can't satisfy yourself about, all right, pick on those, but 

don't stake everybody.  Why everybody? 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no need.  There is no need in the province 

of Saskatchewan, in the country of Canada, for this kind of 

legislation -- no need whatsoever. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- You have heard me, Mr. Speaker, stand in my 

place many times.  And never have you heard me say that there 

was anything wrong with a union negotiating fair labour 

practices, fair wages.  Mr. Speaker, those same people could do 

the same with this.  Why, why do you 

have to do it in this manner?  I don't know.  That's why I'm 

here.  I want to find out. 

 

I asked the Minister of Finance to reflect on the ramifications 

of this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  Why was it introduced?  Well, he 

says it's going to save 2 or $3 million.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, 

if he's going to save 2 or $3 million dollars.  I would ask him to 

allow his principles to guide his actions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One of my colleagues says, maybe they are.  Well I don't know.  

I'm not here to cast aspersions on his character but I wonder 

about his judgement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do not let these people push this through, this 

legislation.  I ask the minister, talk to your colleagues.  I talk to 

the Minister of Justice.  Do you want your name tagged to this 

piece of legislation for evermore?  Is this the piece of 

legislation you want young lawyers to look at in the future and 

say that you guided this through into law?  Is that what you 

want?  You want to be remembered for that?  No one else, Mr. 

Justice Minister, can be specifically tied to this Bill but 

yourself. 

 

It will be the Bill known as the NDP Bill endorsed by the 

member from Saskatoon Fairview for ever.  Now you want to 

go down in history, that's fine and dandy with me, but is that 

the kind of the way you want to do it?  Mr Justice Minister, 

don't allow your colleagues to sully your good name. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not approve of this Bill before us.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to draw your attention to section 9 which gives 

me a lot of trouble, claim for loss or damage, no recourse.  No 

recourse.  Mr. Speaker, unjust dismissal, no recourse.  No 

recourse.  The minister says wrong.  Then I suggest to you, sir, 

we better get you and some other legal people together and tell 

us.  They say there is no recourse.  That's all we're asking.  Mr. 

Speaker, breach of contract.  Breach of contract.  No recourse.  

No recourse of breach of contract, Mr. Speaker.  Inducing . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Will the member permit a question? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Will the member permit a 

question? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, in all respect, I suggest to the 

Minister I probably am not capable of answering it . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- The reason I say that . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Right, come on.  Because, Mr. Speaker, I am 

not a lawyer.  But I will say to the Minister, I will sit down 

with you, sir, with a lawyer of my choosing and go through this 

with you, sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I just want a copy of the legal opinions, 

that's all. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I don't have that on my desk.  But I say to you: 

I respect you, sir, I respect your ability, but I also 

  



470 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

respect the ability of other lawyers who have . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Okay.  And I want to go on. 

 

Interference with, mental distress.  If the members over there, 

Mr. Speaker, are telling me I'm wrong, if they say I'm out, then 

why do they not go . . . why don't we hold a conference with 

these people?  Why do you push it through against the opinion 

of other lawyers?  Are you right?  Totally? 

 

Take it to the Appeal Court.  No, of course not because I 

believe, sir, you know it won't stand up.  That's your problem.  

Mental distress, Mr. Speaker -- no recourse, no recourse.  Loss 

of reputation, loss of reputation.  No recourse. 

 

Mr. Speaker, defamation -- defamation of character.  No 

recourse.  Mr. Speaker, "or any other cause."  It's in section 9.  

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I'd like to introduce 

some people that are in your gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, there are some some members of 

my family in the gallery, who after I realized that we may be 

sitting here over the weekend, I phoned home and gave them 

an opportunity to come down to the city. 

 

So the family is up in the gallery and I'd like to introduce them 

to you and have the members of the House welcome them to 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 


