





























































Hansard: May 17, 1991


 

 

May 17/91 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present a 
petition to the Assembly on behalf of a number of Saskatchewan residents.  
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners are of the view that the provincial government 
does not have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to impose the major 
tax increase which results from the provincial GST (goods and services 
tax), Mr. Speaker.  These petitioners are opposed to the provincial GST, 
and they would like to have the opportunity to pass judgement on this tax 
in a general election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm very pleased to present these petitions . . . this 
petition on behalf of my own constituents from the neighbourhoods of 
Grosvenor Park and Greystone Heights in Saskatoon University constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I have here a petition 
from residents of Star City and from La Ronge.  Mr. Speaker, these 
petitioners are concerned about the major tax increase that the provincial 
GST represents, and are asking that the tax not proceed at this time.  On 
behalf of these petitioners, I am pleased to present this petition to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, residents of Colonsay and Aberdeen and North 
Battleford and Davidson have given me a petition which they've asked me to 
present to the Assembly, and pursuant to rule 11, I'm pleased to present 
this petition, on their behalf, asking that a provincial election be held 
before any decision is made on the imposition of the provincial GST.  And 
on behalf of these residents . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- I am pleased to present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from residents on the west side of Saskatoon 
who have asked me on their behalf to present to this Assembly their 
expressed opposition to the major tax increase that the provincial GST 
represents in this province.  And on their behalf I am pleased to present 
this petition to the Assembly. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from residents of White Fox, 
Saskatchewan and North Battleford, Saskatchewan, praying that the 
Legislative Assembly might take into account their wish that the provincial 
GST be stopped, at least until such time as the residents of Saskatchewan 
have had an opportunity to pass judgement on the tax during a provincial 
election campaign. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of residents of east College Park in 
Saskatoon, I'm pleased to present this petition to the Legislative 
Assembly, sir. 
 
The undersigned petitioners ask that the provincial government not impose 
the major tax increase represented by the provincial GST, and express 
concern about essential consumer items being taxed.  And on their behalf, 
sir, I'm pleased to present this petition to the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- And finally, on behalf of residents in Brevoort Park in 
Saskatoon, I am pleased to present a petition to the provincial legislature 
asking that the provincial GST be stopped until an election campaign has 
been conducted, and the residents of the province have had an opportunity 
to pass judgement on whether or not they want to support a government that 
is prepared to bring down such a major tax increase. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: -- Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these residents, I'm very pleased 
to present this last petition to the Legislative Assembly.  Thank you very 
much, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd ask leave of the Assembly to introduce some 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Muller: -- I'd like to thank all members of the legislature for 
allowing me to introduce a grade 12 class from Shellbrook. 
 
It's quite a long drive in here -- have to get up pretty early in the 
morning to come in from that beautiful north-central part of Saskatchewan, 
where we have all those beautiful lakes and golf courses, all those good 
hockey players.  And certainly we're recognized all across the province for 
the things we've done in hockey in the last few years with our senior team 



 

 

and our bantams and midgets. 
 
Anyway we have 31 students, Mr. Speaker, and the teacher is Colin Neudorf.  
And I would like all members to welcome this grade 12 class to Regina, and 
certainly I'll be meeting with them for pictures and drinks about 11 
o'clock.  Please welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would ask leave of the 
Assembly to introduce some guests. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  It seems that perhaps hon. members are anxious to 
introduce guests.  Perhaps at this time I might ask if hon. members will 
grant leave to any hon. member who so wishes to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the members of the Assembly.  
Today, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery we have from Kerrobert, Elizabeth 
School in . . . Kindersley, pardon me . . . 35 grade 7 students.  And I 
would like to have the Assembly help me welcome these people.  The teacher 
is Dave Burkell; and the chaperons is Susan Fuhrman, Peggy Baker; and the 
bus driver is Jim Baker. 
 
I will be meeting these students after question period, Mr. Speaker, and 
have some photos, and try to answer any questions they might have.  And I 
would ask the Assembly to help me welcome these.  This is a long ways from 
here, as the member from Shellbrook said.  It's quite a long ways.  And 
we're really pleased to have them get down to Regina once in awhile.  And 
I'd ask you to help me . . . 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Schmidt: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to introduce to 
you, and through you to this Assembly, a group of senior citizens from the 
Melville pensioners and senior citizens' association in Melville, seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of them are still arriving.  They just bused in from Melville this 
morning.  Our seniors don't mind getting up early, so they left at eight 
this morning from Melville and they're just arriving here to visit us.  And 
I will be meeting with them at 11 o'clock for pictures.  I would ask that 
the members welcome them here -- in particular, Lucy Muzyka, who organized 
their tour. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lautermilch: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join with the 
member from Shellbrook-Torch River in welcoming the grade 12 students from 
Shellbrook.  On behalf of my colleague from the riding of Prince Albert and 
the rest of my colleagues on this side of the House, we welcome you to the 
Assembly. 



 

 

 
I would have to say that on occasion the member from Shellbrook-Torch River 
and I don't agree, but on his description of our area of this province I 
can only concur with everything he's had to say.  It's a great place, a 
great place to live.  Welcome, and have a safe trip home. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present some 
petitions to the legislature today on behalf of a number of residents of 
Saskatchewan who have expressed their concern about the implementation of 
the education and health tax, the increase or expansion of the tax.  These 
petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about the effect it will have on 
their standard of living, and they've asked me on their behalf to present 
their petition to the legislature today.  The citizens that I have on the 
list today come from the city of Prince Albert, and on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to present the petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here from a number of 
residents of my own city, the city of Saskatoon.  And not a day goes by, 
Mr. Speaker, where we are not asked by some people in the city of Saskatoon 
to express their concern.  And they have put their name to the paper that I 
have before you, their concern about the tax that is before . . . the tax 
Bill that is before the legislature today.  They are concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, about the effect that this tax is going to have on their standard 
of living also.  And on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to 
present the petition from the people of the city of Saskatoon, and by the 
way, mostly from the constituency that I represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition here from a number of 
people from the city of Regina and from the city of Estevan and also from 
Hyas, Saskatchewan.  These people, Mr. Speaker, have expressed their 
concern by putting their name to this petition. 
 
They're concerned about the implementation of the provincial GST.  They 
find that it's a tax that will certainly affect their lives and they are 
very concerned about what it will do not only to themselves but to their 
children.  And they have asked me on their behalf to make their views known 
to the government, in the hope that the government will reconsider the tax. 
 
On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I will present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I also have here a petition from another part 
of the city of Saskatoon.  This is not from my constituency but it is from 



 

 

the area of Sutherland in Saskatoon. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, are also voicing their opposition to Bill 61, 
the expansion of the health and education tax, the provincial GST tax which 
is before the legislature.  And they are asking me on their behalf to voice 
their concerns to this legislature in the hope that the government will 
reconsider the Bill, and will withdraw it from the order paper. 
 
On their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I am presenting the petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, it is not just the city of Saskatoon and 
Regina, for which I have presented petitions, but there are people from all 
over Saskatchewan.  And pursuant to rule 11, I rise for the people in other 
parts of Saskatchewan who have put their name to the petition in opposition 
to the provincial goods and services tax. 
 
The petitioners that I have here today come from such places as Grenfell, 
Broadview, Southey, Raymore, Edenwold, Moose Jaw, Kelliher, and also from 
the city of Regina. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these people also are concerned about the adverse effect 
that this tax may have and are hoping that the government will reconsider, 
and are asking me to present the petition on their behalf, which I am doing 
at this particular time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise for some other 
people in the . . . residents of the province of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the additional tax that Bill 61 will create for them, and 
have asked me to present on their behalf their names on this petition, in 
the hope again that the government will reconsider. 
 
These people come from places like Bradwell; Young, Saskatchewan.  They do 
come again from Saskatoon.  They also come from places like Allan, and 
Clavet, Saskatchewan.  And on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 
present the petition to the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise for a number of 
people from other parts of Saskatchewan who are also very concerned about 
Bill 61, a Bill to increase the education and health tax, to implement a 
provincial GST.  They are very concerned about the effects it will have on 
them and on their families. 
 
These people, Mr. Speaker, come from areas like Pense; they also come from 
Regina, Indian Head, Bienfait in the south-east area of the province, again 
from Moose Jaw, and also from Vibank, Saskatchewan.  On their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, I am very pleased to present this petition. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, I rise in this legislature 
for a number of other constituents who have expressed their concern about 
Bill 61, a Bill that will expand the education and health tax, and also for 
the first time -- or for a long time, at least -- put a tax on food and 
children's clothing.  They know what effect it will have on them and people 
from Holdfast, people from Moose Jaw, people from Regina.  I am very proud 
and pleased to be able to present this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one last petition that I want to 
present.  And again these people have expressed their concern about the 
provincial GST tax which will be implemented if Bill 61 passes this 
legislature.  These people come from areas like Mortlach, Saskatchewan; 
from Regina, Kinistino, and from Moose Jaw.  And on their behalf I am very, 
very pleased to present the petition today in the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rolfes: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And my comment to the 
Minister of Social Services is no, on behalf of the people I am very proud 
to . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to 
table in the Legislative Assembly a petition indicating that the provincial 
government does not have a mandate from the people of Saskatchewan to 
impose the major tax increase which would result from its proposed 
provincial goods and services tax. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, has been signed by people from Lumsden and 
Pilot Butte, and a number of people from Regina.  And I therefore present 
this on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, that I want to file 
pursuant to rule 11, which indicates that these people are urging the 
government not to impose the provincial goods and services tax, because 
quite obviously they are aware about the impact of that tax on their 
communities and their families. 
 
And this petition has been signed from a number of people who live in Moose 
Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very proud on behalf of these people to table this 
petition in the legislature today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Ms. Simard: -- I have a petition here, Mr. Speaker, from people in Regina 
and people from Craven, Mr. Speaker, who are urging the government not to 
impose the legislation dealing with their major tax increase, the 
provincial goods and services tax, Mr. Speaker, that is going to be on not 
only on goods but on services throughout this province.  They are urging 
the government to withdraw this because of the harmful effect it's going to 
have on our economy, on our communities, and on families in Saskatchewan.  
I therefore take great pride in presenting this petition to the House 
today, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of these individuals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Yesterday I was moved to invoke a parliamentary 
usage of the House of Commons which allows hon. members to rise once each 
day to present petitions.  The reason, as you recall, I invoked that usage 
of the House of Commons was because I felt that hon. members were rising 
over and over presenting the same petition.  And by doing so, they were 
unduly using up the time of the House. 
 
 DToday, while hon. members, it is true, are rising once, they are once 
more presenting the same petition over and over -- like petitions.  I have 
listened to two members who have presented the same petition, like prayers, 
over and over.  And the third member is now, after having listened to two 
of hers, seems to be doing the same thing. 
 
Therefore I'm asking members to do the following: that they present all 
like, all like petitions at one time -- all like petitions.  If they have 
the same prayer, to present them all at one time.  If you have a petition 
with a different subject matter, that's another issue.  But if all like 
petitions, I'm asking you to present at one time. 
 
My judgement, from what I have heard, for the member from Saskatoon 
University and the member from Saskatoon South, and up to this point from 
the member for Regina Lakeview -- they have been like petitions. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've taken the opportunity 
pursuant to yesterday's ruling, Mr. Speaker -- and we accept your ruling 
from yesterday -- I took the opportunity to look at the background of the 
House of Commons debates, Mr. Speaker, and I'd like to have you bear with 
me for just a brief moment.  As I say, we respect the ruling that you made. 
 
And when the Speaker in the House of Commons made that ruling . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  The hon. member has risen on 
a point of order to discuss a ruling which I have made.  He, as a member of 
this Assembly, knows that that is out of order.  And I will not accept it. 
 
He mentioned . . .  Order, order.  Order.  Order.  I allow . . . The rule . 
. . Order, order.  The rules of the House clearly indicate that Speaker's 
rulings are not to be challenged. 
 



 

 

Now these rules were made by hon. members.  These rules are made by hon. 
members.  And it is that rule which I am simply invoking -- that Speaker's 
rulings are not to be challenged or debated.  That is the rule. 
 
Mr. Anguish: -- I was in no way challenging your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  In 
fact I prefaced my remarks by saying that I accepted your ruling, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would, however, on my point of order, Mr. Speaker, like to refer to the 
House of Commons.  And that's what I want to refer to, if you will hear me 
out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 7 of 1986 the Speaker rose in the House of Commons 
when he had been referring to a ruling that had been placed there that 
members would be only recognized once to present petitions.  He stated very 
clearly . . . and I quote from November 7, 1986, page 1190 of the House of 
Commons debates and proceedings.  Mr. Speaker, I quote: 
 

 The process in the House has been that under the presentation of petitions 
during Routine Proceedings a Member who rises and is recognized by the 
Chair . . . 

 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order, order, order.  I would like you 
to put your point of order, place your point of order clearly.  There's no 
challenge to my ruling.  I interpreted what you are saying, sir, as a 
debate on my ruling, and your point of order is out of order. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have clearly indicated to you, sir, my 
ruling.  And I don't expect to accept any more point of orders from you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 
regret that I was out of the Assembly when you made your ruling, and that's 
unfortunate but it's the case. 
 
I therefore have a question of your ruling, Mr. Speaker.  The background to 
the question is, if Mr. Speaker is citing a well-established precedent 
that's been followed before, and for which there's either Speaker's rulings 
or comments in Beauchesne's, that's one thing.  If, however, it's your 
interpretation of a rule, a matter which is up for the first time, I think 
that's different in that we ought to have the right to present arguments 
before such a decision is made. 
 
My question is, is there precedent . . . did you cite precedent for your 
ruling, because I can cite past practice where this has been done during 
the 16 years I have been a member of this Assembly.  If you've got a 
precedent for it, I would like to hear it because it is contrary to 
practice. 
 
The Speaker: -- I have read my Speaker's statement yesterday on two 
occasions.  The reasons for my ruling are clearly expressed in that 
statement -- clearly expressed.  And I stand by that ruling and I do not 



 

 

debate the ruling.  I've listened to your point, I've listened to your 
point and I have made a statement yesterday.  I have based my statement on 
reasons which I have expressed.  And that is the ruling that I stand on.  
That is the ruling that I stand on. 
 
I believe, sir, that you are entering into debate.  Yes, I believe you are 
entering into debate on the ruling.  There is no question.  There is no 
question, sir, that you are entering debate and I cannot accept that. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I must confess I don't know whether I'm rising 
on a point of order or a point of privilege.  I'll be very brief.  I do not 
want to be argumentative, but I would like to beg your indulgence to allow 
me to state the case. 
 
Yesterday you ruled after an hour and a half that the methodology of the 
presentation of the petitions amounted to obstruction, which I interpreted 
at that time, sir, to be a precedent, that on an hour and a half on the way 
that the petitions were being presented, was obstructive.  I will not get 
into the questions of how you decided that or on what authority.  That's 
your ruling.  I accept it. 
 
Today the opposition advances petitions in an entirely different way and 
for less than a half an hour and we have now a new ruling on a new time 
frame. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my point is -- and I'm going to sit down on this -- for 
clarification, under what circumstances and what firm guide-lines can I 
carry out my responsibilities as an elected member of the legislature, if 
on one day it's an hour and a half, on another day it's 20 minutes, on one 
day we can't rotate, on another day we can't get up and collectively 
advance them. 
 
Surely, sir, there must be some broad parameters and guide-lines, and that 
is what I'm asking of you -- to clarify in order for us to do our job on 
behalf of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member does not have the point of order, but he is 
the Leader of the Opposition and I respect his position.  And therefore I 
would like to just take the time to refer him back to yesterday's ruling, 
which says clearly in the second last paragraph: 
 

 Members may still present their petitions to the Table under rule 11(1), 
or they may present all like petitions at one time, or they may present 
their petitions on other sitting days. 

 
That was clearly indicated yesterday. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the further clarification, but 
what I would like to ask, sir, again -- not to challenge but for 
clarification for the somewhat orderly conduct of business here -- in the 
light of that ruling, what is the basis of the objection of what the 



 

 

opposition is doing today?  Because as I see it, my colleagues are 
advancing all at one time -- once, nobody has got up a second time -- a 
series of petitions which we felt was in pursuit of your memorandum, in 
pursuit of your decision.  What's the basis of the objection today, sir?  I 
ask for clarification, not for dispute, today. 
 
The Speaker: -- With all due respect to the Leader of the Opposition, with 
all due respect, in my earlier remarks I clearly gave the basis.  I clearly 
gave it and, as I say, don't intend to enter into debate, but I appreciate 
your view. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to table here 
in the legislature a number of petitions.  These people want to express to 
the government, and more importantly to the Assembly -- to all members of 
the Assembly, government and opposition -- that they are upset with the 
fact that the government is bringing in what they see to be a unfair tax -- 
is being brought in well ahead of the legislation being implemented here in 
the House. 
 
And they are also telling us that they would very much like this tax not to 
come into being.  Mr. Speaker, these people . . . and I would like to take 
just a moment to indicate from which communities they come, because I think 
part of the right of petitioning here is that we allow the individuals who 
signed these petitions to let the public know where they are coming from. 
 
I have here from my own constituency of Elphinstone, from the Forget 
Street, a number of people who are petitioning the government to stop the 
GST -- the provincial GST -- from coming into being. 
 
Another petition from Saskatoon and Regina -- these people too are 
interested in stopping the GST; another petition from P.A., Shellbrook, 
Paddockwood, and La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have here yet another petition which add to the thousands, I say tens of 
thousands of people, who have now petitioned this legislature and you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this petition be put before the Assembly and that this Bill 
be withdrawn. 
 
I have another petition, most of the names from Prince Albert.  These 
people in northern Saskatchewan who represent their families -- not only 
themselves but I would imagine their families -- also want to petition the 
legislature and the members here, who come here to do the work of the 
people.  And the large, overwhelming number will want the tax . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  The hon. member is entering 
into debate and making remarks that provoke debate.  I realize that he 
realizes that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and I'll try to do 
this even a little bit quicker than I have been.  But I do want to take 
just a moment or two of the House, and I'm sure in light of the fact that 
this is what we're being paid to be here for -- to represent the people -- 
that I'll be allowed to do that. 



 

 

 
These names are from Prince Albert, St. Louis, Tuxford, as well as 
Sylvania. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here yet another petition.  I say again many of . . . 
thousands from Spruce Home, Prince Albert, Holbein, and Shellbrook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can indulge the House, I have a couple of more petitions.  
And I don't want to take a long time, but just a couple of moments to 
present petitions from Domremy, Belbutte, and Prince Albert. 
 
I have another petition here from people, Mr. Speaker, who want to petition 
the House to put an end to the provincial GST, from Prince Albert, Candle 
Lake, and White Star. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here names of people from the towns of -- or the 
communities, I guess -- Christopher Lake, Prince Albert, and Hague. 
 
And I just have a couple more here from Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Birch 
Hills, Debden, Canwood, and St. Louis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here another part of this petition.  These people are 
from Radisson, Prince Albert, Paddockwood.  They too would like to petition 
the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have here a couple of more, and it will just take me a few 
seconds to finish this up.  These people also want to petition the members 
of the legislature and you, Mr. Speaker, to put an end to this unfair tax.  
They are from Holbein, Shellbrook, Debden, and North Battleford.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, this gives an indication of how widespread the opposition to this 
Bill is. 
 
I have three more here, and I'll just take a moment.  These are from 
Shellbrook, and Debden, Prince Albert, and Saskatoon.  And under the same 
rule, Mr. Speaker, rule 11, these people as well would like to petition the 
members of the legislature. 
 
I just have a couple left here, two left.  These are also petitioning the 
legislature and members of the legislature.  And the members opposite, from 
the area represented in St. Louis, and Spruce Home, would be interested 
that people in their constituency are asking members of the opposition -- 
even though they're represented by their people -- that they come here and 
petition this legislature, and through this legislature their members in 
the area, that this tax be not put forward at this time. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, from the communities of Smeaton, White Fox, 
Shipman, and Saskatoon, another group of people who would like to petition 
the legislature to stop this tax from being implemented. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1045) 
 



 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too rise to 
present a petition from a variety of addresses in Saskatchewan.  I'll deal 
with that in a moment, where they're from. 
 
In summary, the petition states that the government doesn't have a mandate 
to impose the 7 per cent PST, that they cannot afford to pay it, and that 
the economy cannot bear it.  They therefore pray that the government stop 
the provincial GST until they, the public, have had an opportunity to pass 
judgement on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people come from virtually all four corners of the 
province.  Members opposite will recognize some of their constituencies in 
these communities.  One signs this from Rosemont.  The public who are 
watching it may not recognize a community by the name of Rosemont.  People 
who live in the Rosemont area of Regina often use that. 
 
Another one comes from north end; similarly I assume, without being told, 
that that is north end Regina.  There are then five signatories from the 
city of Regina, followed by two from Riceton who have . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I think hon. members should attempt to adhere 
closely to proper practices.  Let me read to you two previous statements 
regarding petitions: to keep your remarks extremely brief . . . This is 
from May 29, 1990.  To keep your remarks extremely brief, speaking directly 
to the petition and not raising any issues which may be construed as 
debate. 
 
Speculation on where people may live or not live is not a valid part of a 
presentation -- again to state only the essence of the petition, which 
means the prayer and then you present it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I may have been a touch thorough in my approach to the 
last one, Mr. Speaker.  I'll conclude this therefore by saying there are 
another eight signatories from Regina, one from Balgonie, and then followed 
by a couple more from Regina. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Another petition of people who 
asked the government to seek a mandate before taking this step -- again 
they come from a wide variety of different communities -- one in Regina, 
Redman Avenue; another from Success.  That's a fair distance from Regina.  
Three more from Regina, one from Lebret, another from Regina, another from 
Montmartre -- I think it is fair to say that all of these are from 
different constituencies so far. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to once more draw to your attention a statement 
made on presenting petitions.  And it says here to keep your remarks 
extremely brief -- brief -- speaking directly to the petition and not 
raising any issues which may be construed as debate.  And again to state 
only the essence of the petition, which means the prayer and then you 
present it. 
 



 

 

But I'm asking the hon. member to heed the direction which states clearly 
to keep your remarks extremely brief, and speaking directly to the petition 
and then presenting it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- No sense arguing with your ruling.  My summary of the 
petition was confined to a single sentence and then I was giving the 
addresses with no elaboration.  So I'll certainly comply with Mr. Speaker's 
ruling. 
 
Another from Pilot Butte, another from Melville -- two from Melville -- 
another from Pilot Butte, one from Bengough, way down in the south country; 
one from Regina, and one from Fillmore, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Yet another petition from yet another corner of the 
province entirely.  Again the essence of the petition, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the people who sign this, who believe that this government does not have a 
mandate to pass the tax at this juncture in its legislative term . . . and 
they urge the government to stop the provincial GST until the public have 
had an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 
 
Some of these addresses I wouldn't recognize, although I think the first 
one is Prince Albert.  Indeed I think the six . . . indeed there are six 
from Prince Albert; one who did not leave an address; another one from 
Spruce Home, north of Prince Albert; three more from Prince Albert; one 
from Chelan.  Another seven from Prince Albert -- I would assume the city 
of Prince Albert itself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, another petition by people from quite a 
variety of communities in quite a variety of places in the province.  These 
people . . . the  
 Dessence of this petition is that these people state that this government 
does not have a mandate to pass the tax in the latter stages of its 
legislative mandate. 
 
They therefore, as a consequence of that view, they therefore urge the 
provincial government to stop the provincial GST until the public have had 
an opportunity to pass judgement upon it.  A variety of different 
communities: the first one on the list, Mr. Speaker, is Carlyle, 
Saskatchewan; the second is from Regina; third is from Regina -- different 
names, so I assume it's not a single household.  Fourth one -- some members 
might recognize this community -- from Strasbourg.  And there are eight 
from Regina, one from Pasqua -- I'm not sure what that refers to.  The next 
one is from Saskatoon; two more from Regina; one from Pilot Butte; four 
more from Regina. 
 
The pen's gone dry, Mr. Speaker.  I'll ask the page to fetch another.  I'll 
perhaps go on to a different petition while I'm waiting for the page to 
return with a pen. 
 



 

 

I thank the Clerk for his timely assistance. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The member from Weyburn asks for . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The hon. member is 
purposefully, in my opinion -- because he has been in the House a long time 
and I know he knows the rules of the House as well as anybody -- is 
provoking debate and referring to the presence of a member.  And I have 
reminded the hon. member of not referring to the presence of a member.  
Therefore I know he must know that's breeching the rules. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I think that's a fair comment.  I apologize for that, 
Mr. Speaker.  I've only got a couple left, sort of coming around the home 
stretch. 
 
This is a further petition from the . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I have noted to the hon. members that they may read the 
prayer only once and then present the petitions.  Now the hon. member must 
abide by that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I genuinely misunderstood you.  I thought that since 
each is signed separately, I thought we were supposed to give the essence 
of each one. 
 
These petitions, the essence of which then is the same as the ones which 
have already been tabled by myself earlier this day, these are from again 
different communities.  First one gives his residence as Assiniboia; nine 
from Regina - 
_ one whose address isn't given; one from Balcarres; another from 
Qu'Appelle; two more from Regina; one from Stoughton.  These are different 
communities to be sure.  Two from Pense, and the last two, Mr. Speaker, are 
from Regina. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is -- while on the same subject matter, I see 
now that I have it -- this petition is a different comment about the same 
subject so I presume I should go through it more so than the last couple.  
I just read this I guess, since it's a new petition -- read the prayer, 
yes. 
 

 To the Honorable The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Legislature 
assembled: 

 The Petition of the undersigned Petitioners of the Province of 
Saskatchewan humbly Sheweth: 

 That we oppose the Provincial Government's proposed inforcement of the 
seven percent p.s.t. beyond that which has been previously levied.  
Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays that your Honour Assembly (typo 
there, I guess) . . . your (honourable) Assembly may be pleased to refuse 
to extend the P.S.T. to goods and services which have not previously been 



 

 

subject to tax. (and then of course concludes with the concluding prayer) 
And as in duty bound, you Petitioner will ever pray. 

 
Again these are . . . I recognize these addresses because in fact I grew up 
in Moose Jaw.  There are some from north Moose Jaw and some from south 
Moose Jaw.  And I suppose if one goes on the new map some of these would 
actually be in Thunder Creek; some from Coronach, three actually from 
Coronach. The rest I think are from Moose Jaw. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1100) 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- The next petition is in the same form, Mr. Speaker.  By 
that now, we've now presented two different kinds of petitions.  By that I 
mean that . . . when I say it's in the same form, I mean it's in the same 
form as the last petition.  Thus they're protesting the tax. 
 
Those who signed it . . . it helps that I grew up in this district.  One is 
from Eyebrow.  Yes there's a fair number of people in Thunder Creek who are 
upset . . . from Moose Jaw, and I recognize some of these names, and 
they're actually from Thunder Creek; they're in the Moose Jaw district. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Make your comments brief.  The matter 
. . . the debate on where they may or may not live is not legitimate.  And 
I know the hon. member realizes that.  Make your comments brief and present 
the petition. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Okay.  I wasn't . . . debate where they're coming from.  
It's not easy sometimes -- it's not clear.  These I think are all from 
Moose Jaw -- about half from Moose Jaw and about half, I would think, from 
the Thunder Creek riding which is in effect the district of Moose Jaw, the 
farming district of Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  I ask all hon. members 
to simply allow the member on his feet to make his presentation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- I have another petition, Mr. Speaker.  As was the case 
with the previous two petitions, while I might be concerned about the 
government's passing this after the mandate's running out, that's not what 
they say. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member said that it's a petition 
similar to the previous two.  I remind you that I've asked you to read the 
prayer only once. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Okay, I'm wrapping up, Mr. Speaker.  I only have three 
left. 
 
Those who signed come from actually four different ridings.  There are some 
from Moose Jaw -- actually some from Moose Jaw North and Moose Jaw South.  
There are others from Thunder Creek riding; they just live in the district 
in Moose Jaw.  There is one from Assiniboia and one from Rockglen. 



 

 

 
I have, Mr. Speaker, a further petition addressed to this Legislative 
Assembly, in the same form as the latter few which I have presented, which 
state that the tax is damaging. 
 
The Speaker: -- Now I've reminded the hon. member two or three times, if he 
refuses to abide by my request I will simply go to the next member.  Now if 
they refer to the same prayer again, you're going to repeat the same prayer 
again, I'm going to go to the next member.  I'm telling you this, sir. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  These petitioners 
come from Moose Jaw, both the north and south side of Moose Jaw.  They come 
from Rockglen, obviously a rural person; post office box something of Moose 
Jaw, obviously a rural person.  The rest are from Moose Jaw. 
 
I think this is the last petition, Mr. Speaker.  Again . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Or the last one you might have. 
 
Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the last one which I will present today. 
 
These signatories are from -- just give me a second, I'll do this as 
quickly as I can -- district of Moose Jaw, live in the area south of Moose 
Jaw.  I think all the rest are from the city of Moose Jaw -- no they 
aren't, there are some others from Thunder Creek.  So they're partially 
divided between Moose Jaw and the district around Moose Jaw. 
 
I thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 11, 
I rise to present today a series of petitions, and I'll do my best to stick 
within your guide-lines, sir. 
 
The first petition which I have here in part is directed as follows: 
 

 To the Honourable The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the Province of Saskatchewan 
humbly Sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 
And those people who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from, on 
this particular petition, from Regina exclusively. 
 
The second petition which I have . . . oh, I guess I should table it now, 
do I? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Table it and sign it. 
 



 

 

Mr. Romanow: -- Okay, I'm sorry about that.  Thank you. 
 
The second petition, Mr. Speaker, talks about the same issue, and it is 
made up of petitioners from Broadview, Regina Beach, and there is one other 
name which I cannot read.  But they're basically Broadview . . . a 
substantial number from Broadview and Regina Beach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this third petition which I have on this issue of the mandate 
or the lack of mandate by the government opposite is signed by people who I 
believe in this case are from Pilot Butte and Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next petition which I have, also protesting the lack of 
mandate from the government opposite, comes from a number of signatories 
who are located in Danbury, Saskatchewan; Sturgis, Saskatchewan; 
Preeceville, Saskatchewan; Endeavour, Saskatchewan; Sturgis -- oh, I'm 
sorry, I mentioned Sturgis -- Tisdale, Saskatchewan; a very wide-ranging 
representation of communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this next petition, Mr. Speaker, deals with the question of the 
mandate, and as it well . . . as well, I'm sorry, it asks for a prayer of 
relief, which I'll just very briefly read.  It says: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government (opposite) to stop the 
provincial GST until the people of the province have an opportunity to 
pass judgement on it in a provincial election. 

 
 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by the people from the communities of 
Prince Albert, Buffalo Narrows, La Ronge, Birch Hills.  There are several 
from each of these communities, and they protest the mandate and urge delay 
until the voters decide.  I am going to sign it and table this.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next one is in the same direction as the previous, 
objecting to the lack of mandate and urging the judgement of the people 
first in a . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order, sir.  Order, sir.  Order, 
sir.  I must also remind you, hon. sir, to abide by the ruling that the 
prayer be read only once. 
 
(1115) 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was not reading the prayer; I 
was just simply identifying this petition to be the same as the others on 
the issue of mandate and an election -- but I'm not reading the prayer.  
And if you want me to shorten that up, I'll try my best to do so. 
 
These petitioners are from Prairie River, Tisdale, Carrot River, 
Archerwill, Arborfield, and several others from Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to read the preamble or make a speech, just 



 

 

simply to identify that this petition also concerns itself with the lack of 
mandate and urges an election first.  And the signatories are from Tisdale, 
Bjorkdale, Shaunavon, Star City, Mistatim, and Prairie River. 
 
This next petition, Mr. Speaker, is the same.  And it represents the names 
and contains the names of signatories from Saskatoon -- from Melfort and 
Saskatoon. 
 
This petition is the same in essence as the previous ones -- the lack of 
mandate and the election first.  And the signatories here seem to come, Mr. 
Speaker, from what I can see, the community of Saskatoon in total. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this next petition deals with the issue which has been the 
subject of the petitions so far.  And these are names of people from Regina 
and from Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again I have just two more to table here.  This one deals as 
well with the lack of mandate and urging the province to have an 
opportunity to pass judgement in an election.  The petitioners here come 
from Mistatim -- all of them. 
 
And the final one that I have, Mr. Speaker, for today, is a petition which 
again has the same prayer about mandate and the matter of an election.  The 
petitioners here, sir, come from Saskatoon, and all of them have their home 
addresses.  I'm not positive but I think that they're all from Saskatoon, 
sir.  Yes, they are all from Saskatoon, so I'll just sign this as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I too rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 
petitions under the fundamental right of freedom of expression which is so 
important in our democratic system.  The petitions that I present here 
today, Mr. Speaker, urge the provincial government to stop this provincial 
GST. 
 
The people who pray in this petition for the legislature and the government 
in particular to do that are saying that this tax is a tax they should not 
have to pay, for the government's waste and mismanagement.  They are saying 
in this petition, Mr. Speaker, that this tax is an unfair burden on people 
who are least able to pay.  And finally, Mr. Speaker, the people are saying 
that this tax, which the government is trying to force through the House, 
will be very destructive for the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of these people therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am honoured as a member 
of this legislature representing the Regina constituency of Regina North 
East, to present these petitions so that these people may be heard, as it 
is their right to be heard, in this Assembly. 
 
The first I have here, Mr. Speaker, all of the names that are signatories 
to this particular petition are from the city of Regina, many of them from 
the constituency of Regina North East.  And they are from places like 849 



 

 

McTavish Street, 906 Argyle Street, 2247 McDonald Street, 2668 McAra 
Street, 2608 Edgar Street, 870 McTavish Street, 1855 Quebec Street, 1147 
Garnet Street, and 808 McTavish Street, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have further names, Mr. Speaker, of people who are saying to the 
government opposite that this Bill deserves a debate in the legislature so 
that their voices could be heard and their names are . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to have to strictly ask the hon. members that 
after referring to the prayer, the initial reference, that they simply 
present the petition without any further references to the prayer which is 
tantamount to repeating the prayer. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I understand, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you for that.  I will 
on behalf of these people therefore go ahead to present the petition.  
These petitions are presented from communities such as Bengough, Weyburn, 
Ogema.  There's Parry Park and the largest number is from Bengough and I am 
honoured on their behalf, Mr. Speaker, to present this petition at this 
time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to present on behalf of a large number of 
people who also have signed the petition as I have outlined earlier.  They 
are from, in this case, all from the city of Regina, from 1215 Argyle 
Street, 1343 Pasqua Street, 1688 Sangster Boulevard, 1205 Argyle Street, 
1113 Gladmer Park, and 4818 Dewdney Avenue. 
 
Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I have other petitions which I'm honoured to 
present.  They are in large part from the city of Moose Jaw, but there are 
also others from Coderre, from Pense.  There's a petition here from 
Chaplin, Saskatchewan, as I sign, Mr. Speaker, presenting this on behalf of 
the people who have signed this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I present several more -- and I will be concluding soon -- 
more petitions.  These petitions are from Regina as well as other 
communities.  In Regina it's from 1333 Montague Street, from 205 Greer 
Court, from 6914 - 1st Avenue North. 
 
There are also signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, from people who 
are living in the rural community of Lebret, from the city of Weyburn, from 
Pilot Butte, and one of the signatures here is from my own constituency of 
3306 Jenkins Drive East. 
 
I also am honoured, Mr. Speaker, to present these petitions on behalf of 
people from yet different communities.  There is petitions from Moose Jaw, 
but also from Tugaske, places in Moose Jaw such as number 105 23 Woodley, 
923 Alder Avenue, Box 1503, Moose Jaw -- obviously people who live in the 
rural community and RM (rural municipality) around the city of Moose Jaw, 
so that they have a box number.  I am honoured on their behalf, Mr. 
Speaker, to exercise their democratic right to be heard in this Legislative 
Assembly, and I at this time present this petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again I present these petitions.  They are on behalf of 
people who are residents of 914 Caribou Street West in Moose Jaw; 902 



 

 

Montgomery Street West in Moose Jaw; 82 Andre Avenue in Regina.  Mr. 
Speaker, also from a resident in Tugaske, as well as the community of 
Briercrest. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I present petitions on behalf of constituents who live 
in my constituency of Regina North East on 42 Fines Drive, here in the city 
of Regina, as well as people who live at Swift Current, the community of 
Shaunavon, and the city of Moose Jaw.  Thank you. 
 
I present also these petitions, Mr. Speaker, from communities which I have 
yet not mentioned.  There are signatories here from the city of Saskatoon, 
from Grenfell, from Regina, and several other communities, who are saying 
that they are wanting that this tax not proceed, because the government 
does not have the mandate to proceed at this time in the dying days of its 
term, especially when it is not allowing a debate on this legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, and trying to force closure of such an important tax measure, 
which is going to be the biggest tax grab in the history of Saskatchewan -- 
unnecessary because its main and only purpose is to make the people of 
Saskatchewan pay for the government's waste and mismanagement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1130) 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I present here, Mr. Speaker, once again . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker now, a petition on behalf of communities which I have not 
mentioned prior to this.  The people on this petition are from Tuxford, 
from Mortlach, from the city of Yorkton, and also from Moose Jaw. 
 
I've only got about two or three to present, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then I 
will pass on to someone else who may want to present petitions.  The 
petitions I have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from several people from the 
city of Saskatoon.  There are people here from the town of Bienfait, from 
Bengough, Mr. Speaker, from Cabri, from Khedive, from Regina, as well as 
Moose Jaw. 
 
I have two more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and then I will be complete.  The 
petitions I present here now are from 1623 Hastings Street in Moose Jaw, 
527 Rink Avenue in Regina, from 1120 Chestnut Avenue in Moose Jaw, and 
several other communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
And my last petitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and I thank you for your 
indulgence -- is here.  I am honoured to present on behalf of people from 
Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan; from Mortlach, from Cabri, Saskatchewan; from the 
city of Swift Current, from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the opportunity to present these 
petitions on behalf of these citizens of Saskatchewan who are objecting to 
the provincial GST. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise pursuant to rule 11 to present 



 

 

petitions to the Assembly on behalf of residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan.  These petitioners, in their petition, state that the 
provincial government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed GST.  And in their petition they pray that this Assembly may be 
pleased to urge the provincial government to stop the provincial GST, until 
the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on it in a 
provincial election. 
 
Now I have a petition in my hand, Mr. Speaker, that is signed by residents, 
for the most part, by residents of Moose Jaw.  I assume it's . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I assume that they are from the city of Moose Jaw rather 
than environs, but also included in this petition are petitioners from 
Marquis, and from the city of Regina; and so I would like to file this 
petition on their behalf, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And also presenting a petition in the same terms, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
petitioners from a number of Saskatchewan communities including Watrous, 
Kamsack, Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert.  And the point has often been 
made, Mr. Speaker, about the effect of the tax on the tourism industry and 
we have here a petitioner . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  There's no debate in the presentation 
of petitions. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I accept your point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I did want to 
refer to the petitioner from Cincinnati so I needed a context for that, 
which is why I mentioned it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  There's no debate during the presentation of 
petitions.  I'd ask the member to refrain from it. I'd asked the member 
from Regina Centre to be quiet while the Speaker's on his feet also. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- You probably couldn't hear me over the noise, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I was acknowledging your point.  And I . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- I asked the member to present his petitions. 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to present this petition 
on behalf of the people who come from the communities that I have already 
mentioned. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And a group of petitioners have also petitioned this 
Assembly in the same terms as I mentioned earlier.  These are from a 
number, a large number of communities in the province of Saskatchewan 
including Saskatoon, again, Allan, Preeceville, my own home community of 
Sturgis, and they have . . . it is my honour to present this petition on 
behalf of these petitioners. 



 

 

 
And I also have the honour to present a further petition in the same terms 
as I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks.  This petition, signed from 
again, by residents of the province from a number of communities including 
Melfort and Kenaston, Prince Albert.  And most of the signatures, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are from Saskatoon and most of them from the College Park 
area of Saskatoon including, if I may say so, Mitchell Street, in 
Saskatoon.  On their behalf, I'd like to present this petition with the 
comment that the street was not named after me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a further 
petition which was signed by residents, for the most part, from the 
Lakeview area of Saskatoon although also including people from the Eastview 
area of Saskatoon.  And I would like to submit this petition to the 
Assembly on their behalf. 
 
I have a further petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again from the city of 
Saskatoon, and this petition is signed almost entirely by people who live 
on Ewart Avenue in Saskatoon, the 1900 to the 2300 block, as well as a 
petitioner from Cumberland Avenue.  And I take special . . . I used to live 
on Ewart Avenue and I take pleasure in introducing their petition to this 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I have for submission to the legislature, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a further petition.  This one is in the same terms as the previous 
ones that I have tabled with the legislature.  And the petitioners who have 
subscribed their names to this petition are for the most part from 
Shellbrook, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well as from Mayview and Canwood.  And I 
want to submit on behalf of those petitioners to this legislature the 
petition from the people from Shellbrook. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I also have a petition to submit on behalf of petitioners 
from a number of Saskatchewan communities.  These are communities in the 
south-west part of the province or in the Swift Current area, Mr. Speaker, 
and I'll just quickly mention them.  They are Ponteix, Hodgeville, Admiral, 
Wymark, as well as the city of Swift Current itself.  And I would like to 
submit to this Legislative Assembly this petition on their behalf. 
 
I now would like to submit a petition.  And this one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
this petition is in the same terms as the ones that I've tabled just a few 
moments ago, over the last several moments.  These petitioners live on the 
east side of Saskatoon on Eastview Avenue, which naturally is in the 
Eastview subdivision, as well as on Adelaide Avenue and Waterloo Crescent 
and Assiniboine Drive.  There is also a petitioner from Bruno.  And I am 
honoured to be able to . . . to have been asked to present this petition to 
this Legislative Assembly on their behalf. 
 



 

 

And I have a further petition, Mr. Speaker, which is in exactly the same 
terms as the one that I have just filed with the Clerk of the Assembly.  
This is signed by residents of the town of Bengough and it is my honour to 
file this petition with this Assembly on their behalf. 
 
I also have a petition . . . and this one, Mr. Speaker, is in substantially 
the same terms as the previous ones although it is not precisely the same 
terms.  But I think I should just identify where they're from rather than 
to repeat the petition, even though it is somewhat different.  These 
petitioners are without exception from various addresses within the city of 
Moose Jaw and from both of the Moose Jaw constituencies.  And it is my 
honour to file this petition on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1145) 
 
Mr. Mitchell: -- I'm near the end of my presentation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I thank you for your patience.  The petition that I now seek to file is 
in the same terms as the previous documents which I have filed.  And the 
petitioners, who present this petition to this Legislative Assembly, are 
all from Saskatoon and are residents of the 600 block in Louise Place with 
only one exception, a woman who lives on Ball Crescent.  And I present this 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Now I have a petition from the city of Regina which I take special pleasure 
in introducing on two grounds. I have not previously had the opportunity to 
present on behalf of the people in Regina, and most of them are from Angus 
Street, Mr. Speaker, which is the street on which I lived for a time when I 
was a resident of the city of Regina.  So it is my pleasure to introduce 
this petition on their behalf. 
 
Now I just have two left, Mr. Speaker.  This next petition is in the same 
form as most of the petitions that I've filed today.  They ask the 
legislature . . . petition the legislature in the same terms.  These 
petitioners are from Outlook and from Saskatoon, and the addresses that are 
given in Saskatoon indicate that they are from the west side of Saskatoon.  
And it is my honour, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to submit this petition to this 
Assembly on their behalf. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I present a petition on behalf of a number of 
residents of Saskatchewan.  This petition is in the same terms as the ones 
I've previously filed, and the petitioners are from a number of centres, as 
I said earlier.  They are from Chamberlain, Coderre, Moose Jaw, and Regina.  
And they are petitioning this legislature in the terms indicated, and I 
take pleasure in filing it with this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you for your patience in allowing me to present those 
petitions on behalf of the various people who have signed them from various 
Saskatchewan communities and from Cincinnati.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 



 

 

 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I didn't know if the member 
for Weyburn wanted to speak or not, Mr. Speaker, but I'll carry on -- I'll 
carry on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise pursuant to rule 11, Mr. Speaker, to present petitions to this 
Assembly on behalf of many, many people.  These people are very upset with 
the tactics used by the government upon implementing the new provincial 
goods and services tax -- in fact implementing is a kind word -- thrusting 
and jamming and ramming this tax through. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: --  Order.  No debate on the petition.  I'd ask the 
member to present his petitions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I was trying to do is 
express their feelings.  So I carry on. 
 
These people, and I'll just read the last part of the prayer as they 
intended to have it put forward: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the provincial government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of this province have an opportunity to pass judgement, 
(I find those words rather interesting) in a provincial election. 

 
Now these people come from many areas of the province.  On this particular 
petition the people from Prince Albert have signed.  In fact it appears 
that most of the people are from one street in Prince Albert.  They have 
asked us to present this petition because they feel so strongly about this 
tax, and I will do that on their behalf right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, protesting the same government 
actions.  These people come from Sherwood Estates.  Is that in Regina? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I beg your pardon? 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Sherwood Estates? 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- In Regina.  And one from Moose Jaw.  One from Moose Jaw, 
Mr. Speaker.  And I guess the rest of the people would . . . no, one from 
Glencairn.  These people too . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member for Regina Centre, 
Regina Wascana, and Meadow Lake, I'd ask them to allow the member from 
Humboldt to present his petitions. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  As I was saying, these 
people, by signing these petitions, have asked us to place them on the 
Table on their behalf in order that they might have their democratic voice 
heard in the procedure to stop this unfair provincial action by 
implementing this tax. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have further petitioners who have asked to have their 
protest registered by submission of these petitions to the Assembly in this 
province.  These people are too from the . . . most of them are from the 
city of Prince Albert.  I see there's one from Mistatim, one from Domremy, 
and one from La Ronge who have asked us on their behalf to register their 
complaints against the government for trying to implement this unfair tax.  
So I will do that now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by signing this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have several petitioners who 
have asked us to present the legislature with their protest to this 
provincial GST.  They have signed this petition exercising their democratic 
rights.  They have given it to us to present.  And these people are from, I 
presume it's Regina, yes Regina.  In fact they're all from Regina, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and from one part of Regina it would appear.  So on behalf 
of these people I am pleased to present this petition to the Assembly in 
order that they may have their voices heard in a democracy. 
 
(1200) 
 
Okay, thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I here have another . . . I don't know if 
you can hear me, Mr. Speaker, but I can hardly hear myself. 
 
I have a petition that is in not the same form as the previous petitions I 
have been presenting.  And in order to make sure that I present the wishes 
of the people accurately I will go through the new prayer because I suppose 
it's just right that they signed it, and I'm going to present it the way 
they had signed it. And it's different from the other ones, so I will 
proceed to do that now: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in the 
legislature assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned petitioners of the province of 
Saskatchewan humbly sheweth: 

 That we oppose the provincial government's proposed inforcement of the 7 
per cent PST beyond that which has been previously levied. 

 Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your honour Assembly may be 
pleased to refuse to extend the PST to goods and services which have not 
previously been subject to tax. 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners we ever pray. 
 

Again that is very close along the same lines what the other petition said, 
Mr. Speaker.  But in order to ensure that the people who signed this 
petition got the wording put forward as they signed it, I had to repeat 
that.  And again all they're saying is this government should not put ahead 
this tax in such a heavy-handed manner -- in fact shouldn't put it forward 
at all. 
 
The people here are from Moose Jaw, Lumsden.  I guess they're all from 
Moose Jaw except for one who is from Lumsden.  So on behalf of these people 
from Moose Jaw and Lumsden I want to present to the legislature their 



 

 

protest against this heavy-handed tactic and tax this government has 
inflicted upon the people of this province. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is the same as the last petition I presented, 
so I will not go through the prayer.  These people too are asking that we 
present to this Legislative Assembly their concern about this new 
provincial PST and ask us to present this petition in order that the 
government may stop proceeding with the Bill on the new tax. 
 
These people are from Moose Jaw.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, all these people 
are from . . . no there's one from Brownlee.  But all except for one are 
from Moose Jaw.  On behalf of these people I am very pleased to have their 
democratic rights carried out by presenting to the Assembly this petition 
protesting their grave concern about the tactics of this government 
imposing this new tax. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in the same form as the previous two.  
These petitioners are exercising their rights through petitioning the 
government in the legislature.  These people are from Findlater, Crane 
Valley, Assiniboia, Moose Jaw, Wilcox, and Limerick.  These people have 
asked us to present through this Legislative Assembly to the government a 
petition showing that they oppose the government's tactics of imposing this 
new tax.  And by presenting this petition, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to 
bring forward the wishes of these petitioners to the government to show 
just how important it is to them that they stop the tax. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I again have a petition signed by several people 
from the province of Saskatchewan who also have asked that we present this 
petition on their behalf . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order. I have indicated earlier that the prayer to the 
petition be read once and then the petition presented.  Therefore I remind 
the hon. member of that request and ask him to adhere to it. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Certainly, Mr. Speaker.  The prayer on this petition is the 
same as the last one, and I am just pleased to present it on behalf of 
people from Moose Jaw, Glendale, and I guess the rest of them are from the 
city of Moose Jaw. 
 
I am pleased to present this petition to the legislature on behalf of these 
people, Mr. Speaker, who are using their democratic right through petition 
to voice their opinions. 
 
This next petition, Mr. Speaker, is in the form of one of the earlier 
petitions, but not the last few that I have presented.  This petition again 
says that the people who are below signed -- and I won't read the prayer -- 
are asking the government to stop the provincial GST.  As I stated 
previously when presenting a petition of this type to the Assembly, these 
people feel it's unfair and therefore they have exercised their democratic 
right to petition the government through the legislature. 
 
And I am pleased to present on behalf of these people from . . . again I 
believe all these people are from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker; in fact many of 



 

 

them are from the same street.  So on behalf of these people, I am pleased 
to put forward their names to the legislature so that they may have their 
voice heard by the government who is imposing this very heavy-handed and 
unfair tax. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here from the many people in the 
province of Saskatchewan who have asked that their voice be heard.  I will 
present this petition proudly on their behalf in order that the rules and 
procedures of the Assembly are upheld. 
 
(1215) 
 
These people are from Moose Jaw again.  Yes I believe they are all from 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker.  And these people are asking that the provincial 
government stop this provincial GST.  They're asking that because they feel 
they have no mandate to do so.  They are writing on this petition because 
they feel it is very unfair that in this province, this government has any 
right to put forward a tax at this time. 
 
So I will proudly on behalf of these people present this petition to let 
them put their names forward to join with the others to petition the 
government to stop this tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from many people from the province of 
Saskatchewan.  This time these people are from Prince Albert; I believe 
they are all from Prince Albert.  They have presented this petition to us 
to present to this legislature, thereby exercising their rights to have 
their voice heard in a democracy. 
 
And I'm very pleased on behalf of these people who are protesting this huge 
tax increase, to aid them in their attempt to be heard.  And I will present 
this petition to the legislature now on their behalf. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I wish to bring to the hon. member's attention rule 
no. 11(4) which states that: 
 

 Members presenting petitions shall be answerable that they do not contain 
impertinent or improper matter. 

 
They are responsible that the petitions are in order when they get here 
with the petitions.  The members do not have the right to use large amounts 
of time signing petitions, don't have the right to do that.  You have the 
right to present them.  You don't have the right to use large amounts of 
time as you have been doing signing each petition.  If the hon. member 
persists, I'm going to have to move to another member. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, I was simply putting the 
wording in the proper language of the legislature, I believe.  And I 
appreciate your ruling and I will certainly try to comply with that because 
I know how important it is for the rules of this House to be maintained and 
I will continue. 
 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is from many people from the province of 



 

 

Saskatchewan.  Again I believe they are all from Prince Albert, most of 
them from one section of Prince Albert.  These people have presented their 
petitions to us so that we could present it to the Assembly in order that 
their voice might be heard protesting an action by the government. 
 
I am very pleased and proud, Mr. Speaker, to on behalf of these people 
present this petition in order that their democratic voice might be heard 
in the province of Saskatchewan, hopefully making some adjustments to 
what's going on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- I assume that's fast enough to sign it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to make it clear to the hon. member that I will 
not give him any further time to stand and sign petitions.  It is the hon. 
member's responsibility to make certain that the petition he brings into 
the House is in order. 
 
And there is no provision in the rules for hon. members to use up 
inordinate amounts of time signing petitions.  They must make . . .  The 
rule (4) here indicates what they must be.  They must know that the 
petition is in order when they bring it to the House. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- When did it come into practice?  It's for two and a half 
hours; now it's a new rule. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member for Elphinstone from his 
chair says it's a new rule.  It's not a new rule.  It's rule 11(4) of our 
standing orders. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  That's the rule.  And I recognize the 
hon. member from Humboldt but I will not give him the opportunity to sign 
petition after petition after petition and use up large amounts of the 
House's time.  I'm telling you that now, sir. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: -- There is no point of order . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- It's not on the issue that you ruled. 
 
The Speaker: -- If it's not on the issue of the ruling, then you cannot ask 
a point of order until some intervening procedure has taken place. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- I have a question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: -- There is no point of order, as I have indicated to the hon. 
member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have another petition here that 



 

 

again is in a different form, I believe.  Yes it is a different form than 
the other petitions.  Mr. Speaker, okay, I have another petition here that 
is in . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let us allow the hon. member for Humboldt to 
proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition here, Mr. Speaker, 
that is again in different language than the previous . . . I've already 
presented two different languages.  So in order that I am sure that I am 
presenting the petition as the petitioners signed it, I will just read 
through the prayer because it's a different one.  I believe that was the 
ruling earlier. 
 
So on behalf of these people, it says: 
 

 To the Honorable The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Legislature 
assembled: 

 The Petition of the undersigned Petitioners of the Province of 
Saskatchewan humbly Sheweth: 

 That we oppose the Provincial Governments proposed enforcement of the 
seven per cent p.s.t. beyond that which has been previously levied. 

 Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays that your (Honourable) Assembly may 
be pleased to refuse to extend the P.S.T. to goods and services which have 
not previously been subject to (the) tax. 

 As in duty bound, you petitioner will ever pray. 
 

So I just say that, Mr. Speaker, in order that I am relaying the message 
that these people signed to this Assembly in the proper manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people protesting this tax are from Keeler, Moose Jaw, 
North Battleford . . . Moose Jaw, yes, Keeler, Moose Jaw, North Battleford.  
So on behalf of these people, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to present 
their signatures to this legislature in order that they too may have their 
voice heard in the democracy in which we live.  Now I've signed it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you for allowing me to present these 
petitions on behalf of these petitioners, and in order that this Assembly 
may serve the public of Saskatchewan in this manner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to rise pursuant to 
rule 11 to present petitions to the Assembly on behalf of residents of 
Saskatchewan.  And all of these petitioners are urging the government to 
reverse its decision to impose the 7 per cent GST.  I want to read the 
prayer at the heading of the petition, Mr. Speaker, that I am going to 
present, and the prayer goes like this.  I quote: 
 



 

 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature 
assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the Provincial Government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST. 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the Provincial Government to stop the provincial GST 
until the people of (Saskatchewan) have an opportunity to pass judgement 
on it in a provincial election. 

 
 DSome Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- And the final sentence in the prayer says: 
 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that these petitions are drawn up in the form 
as required. 
 
The first petition that I will be presenting, Mr. Speaker, was signed by 
residents in the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency.  There are three or 
four of them that come from rural Prince Albert.  There's one, two, two of 
them had come from Canwood, one from Shellbrook, one or two from 
Christopher Lake.  There's a signature here from a person in Albertville.  
There's a signature here from Foxford, one from Meath Park, one from 
Smeaton, and two from Paddockwood.  I'm going to then present this petition 
on behalf of these people in the Shellbrook-Torch River constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
(1230) 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm going to ask the hon. member to present his 
petitions.  He may sign the petitions at any location he wants, but I will 
not use up the time of this House any further with hon. members signing 
petitions. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will expedite the signature to 
the best of my ability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with the same prayer as the petition 
previous.  This petition then is also signed by people who are opposed to 
the provincial GST.  This petition comes from residents of Regina and most 
of them in this case come from Argyle Street.  In fact when I look at the 
numbers, it appears that everybody on that street signed this petition.  So 
I will be presenting this petition. 
 
This next petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by 11 people directly from the 
city of Prince Albert and one from the rural area of Prince Albert.  And 
they are all signing the petition which asks the government not to impose 



 

 

the provincial GST. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to once more remind the hon. member that as I 
have just noted a moment ago, that I will not permit the hon. members using 
up the time of the House signing petitions when they have ample opportunity 
to sign petitions at any time. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- You won't accept them otherwise. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  It's the member's responsibility when 
he comes to the House to make sure that petitions are in order. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- But we can't change that in the middle of a 
presentation. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  Order.  It's up to 
the hon. members when they enter the Chambers that the petitions are in 
order. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think I'll be able to handle 
it.  I was able to sign a couple of them while you were making your ruling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition that I'm presenting is in the same format as the 
petitions previous.  All of these residents who have signed this petition 
are asking and urging the provincial government to stop the provincial GST. 
 
And the residents who have signed this petition come from northern 
Saskatchewan, most of them from the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River.  
There are two signatures here from the Buckland area north of Prince 
Albert, one from Canwood -- I make an error here.  There's one from Hague, 
which is just north of Saskatoon, four directly from . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That's from the Rosthern constituency.  Four from 
Prince Albert and two from Shell Lake.  So I hereby present this petition, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- That's all right.  You can change the rules all you 
want, interpret them whatever way you want, to the best advantage of the 
government.  Stomp on the opposition; that's the rule. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The hon. member from Regina Elphinstone is 
accusing the Chair of siding with the government.  Those were his exact 
words.  Now the hon. member -- I will ask the hon. member to rise and 
apologize for that statement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I apologize. 
 
The Speaker: -- Also I should also like to make a further statement.  It is 
not appreciated. Those types of remarks are not appreciated, not at all, 
and they're totally baseless and incorrect. 
 
Let me read this short statement.  In this business of parliamentary 
tactics, a balance must be maintained.  I as Speaker have a difficult 
responsibility to pay due regard to this balance.  And for the benefit of 



 

 

members, I think it would be worthwhile for me to quote Josef Redlich, a 
renowned parliamentary authority, who wrote on how a Speaker is to serve 
both the minority and the majority.  And I quote: 
 

 By maintaining the rules and the usage of centuries and by taking care 
that both the majority and minority are not impeded in the use of the 
forces and weapons which the order of business provides for strong and 
weak, protection of the majority against obstruction and protection of a 
minority against oppression are both alike functions of the Chair. 

 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And thank you for the 
clarification. 
 
I have an additional petition that I wish to present to the legislature.  I 
have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This petition is of the same 
format as the petitions that I've signed . . . presented previously.  This 
petition is signed by residents of Christopher Lake, Paddockwood.  There 
are two people from Montreal Lake as well, from the reserve in Montreal 
Lake, that have signed this petition.  But all of these come from the 
constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River and I hereby present this petition. 
 
The next petition that I have to present, Mr. Speaker, is in this similar 
format, exactly the same format as the previous ones, all of them being 
opposed and requesting that the petition be presented because they are 
opposed to the implementation of the 7 per cent GST. 
 
All of the citizens on this particular petition are from the town of 
Albertville. 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Where is that? 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Immediately north of Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker.  All of 
them, Albertville being in the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, and 
I'm proud to present this petition on behalf of these residents of the town 
of Albertville. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, the next petition that I have to present is a 
petition which was signed by residents of Moose Jaw.  They are urging that 
the provincial government stop the implementation of the provincial GST.  
And these residents, Mr. Speaker, have come from I believe the constituency 
of Moose Jaw South.  So I hereby present this petition to the legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- This next petition, Mr. Speaker, was signed by people who 
were walking into a mall in Regina . . . 
 



 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  That information is totally 
extraneous to the petition and I ask you to not continue with it. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- This petition was signed by residents of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, and they all urge the provincial government to stop the provincial 
GST. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order.  Now I have reminded hon. members that they are not 
to keep repeating the prayer.  I am going to inform the hon. member for 
Prince Albert that if he persists in doing this, I'll move to the next 
member. 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- I appreciate your ruling, Mr. Speaker, and I will try to . 
. . I will abide by it, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased and honoured, Mr. 
Speaker, to present this petition on behalf of these residents, these 12 
residents of Regina who are against the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- We could have had those done by . . . if we hadn't had 
so many interruptions. 
 
The Speaker: -- My friend, the hon. member for Regina Centre, is 
complaining about interruptions.  Unfortunately he's the most guilty, and I 
would like to ask him not to interfere. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kowalsky: -- So I'm proud, Mr. Speaker, to present this petition on 
their behalf. 
 
The next petition that I have to present, Mr. Speaker, is written in the 
same format.  It's been signed by people from the constituencies of . . . I 
think almost all of them of Shellbrook-Torch River.  They are four 
signatures from the town of Canwood.  There's one signature from the city 
of Saskatoon, two from the town of Victoire, two from Debden, and another 
one from Canwood.  I'm proud to present this petition on behalf of these 
citizens who are urging the government to drop the unfair GST. 
 
The Speaker: -- I'm going to move to the next member.  I have informed the 
hon. member that if he persists I'll move to the next member.  Next member. 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise pursuant to rule 11 of this 
Assembly to present a petition on behalf of a number of Saskatchewan 
citizens.  And the prayer of the petition is as follows: 
 

 To the Honourable the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in the 
legislature assembled: 

 The petition of the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
humbly sheweth: 

 That the provincial government does not have a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan to impose the major tax increase which would result from its 
proposed provincial GST (the goods and services tax). 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may 
be pleased to urge the provincial government to stop the provincial GST 



 

 

until the people of the province have an opportunity to pass judgement on 
it in a provincial election. 

 And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the citizens on this petition are from mostly my constituency 
of Regina North West in the neighbourhoods of Lakeridge, Normanview West, 
Westhill, and Maple Ridge.  And, Mr. Speaker, they are people who have come 
to sign this petition in my office and I am very pleased to present this 
petition to the Assembly on behalf of my constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other petitioners who have signed this petition from 
the community of Pense which is located in the Qu'Appelle-Lumsden 
constituency; from Regina Beach which is located in the Qu'Appelle-Lumsden 
constituency; and from the neighbourhood in the constituency of Regina 
North West called Normanview, which is the heart of my riding.  And these 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, have asked me to present this petition on their 
behalf and it is my honour and privilege and joy to do so. 
 
(1245) 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have additional petitioners from my 
constituency, from different neighbourhoods that I've previously outlined.  
These individuals have signed this petition.  They are from the 
neighbourhood of Walsh Acres which is just north of 9th Avenue North.  They 
are from Sherwood Estates and McCarthy Park, two neighbourhoods with very 
young people in them, and the neighbourhood of Lakewood. 
 
And also some petitioners, Mr. Speaker, from the constituency of Regina 
South, from Albert Park South.  I am very pleased to see these people from 
the north end and the south end join in signing this petition, and I'm 
honoured to present it to this Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other petitioners from different communities and 
different parts of the province I'd wish to present to the Assembly this 
moment.  They are from Asquith, Saskatchewan; they are from Marcelin, 
Saskatchewan; they are from Simpson, Saskatchewan.  They are from three or 
four different neighbourhoods in the city of Saskatoon.  And, Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to present this petition on behalf of both the urban 
petitioners and the rural petitioners from the communities that I've just 
mentioned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other petitioners who support the prayer as I read out 
at the beginning.  They are from again the constituency of Regina North 
West.  They come from the neighbourhoods of McCarthy Park, from Walsh 
Acres, from Normanview West, from Lakewood, and from Sherwood Estates.  And 
again, Mr. Speaker, they are joining with the thousands and thousands of 
people across this province and have asked me to present on their behalf, 
and I am honoured to do so, Mr. Speaker, to this Assembly in support of the 
prayer of the petition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition from citizens from a number of 



 

 

locations in Saskatchewan.  I have petitioners who have signed from the 
community of Allan, Saskatchewan; from Watrous; from Dundurn, Saskatchewan, 
which I believe is in the member from Rosthern's constituency; and we have 
them from the Minister of Education's constituency as well. 
 
So we have here, Mr. Speaker, again both rural and urban people signing in 
unity this petition, and I am very honoured to present said petition to 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other petitions, other petitioners from the districts 
in Regina, South Albert Park, which is in the constituency from the 
Conservative member from Regina South.  They have joined with petitioners 
on this petition, Mr. Speaker, from the community of Hillsdale in Regina, 
which is in the south end, with the citizens of Regina Lakeview and again 
citizens from the northern part of the city, which is in my constituency of 
Regina North West, Regent Park neighbourhood, and Walsh Acres 
neighbourhood.  Mr. Speaker, again they have joined from the south end of 
the city and the north end of the city to sign the said petition.  I am 
honoured to present this to Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Not only have the citizens of Regina from north and south signed similar 
petitions, I have others, Mr. Speaker, who have asked me in this Assembly 
to make their views known through this petition.  Citizens from northern 
Saskatchewan, the community of Meadow Lake, which is in the Deputy 
Premier's constituency; the community of Kenaston, which is in the riding 
of Arm River; the community of Hanley and of course the community of 
Saskatoon and two or three parts of Saskatoon. 
 
Again we have both rural and urban citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 
wishing to have their prayer heard in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 
duty and my honour to make this presentation on their behalf in this 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other names on the said petition representing a host of 
different neighbourhoods and communities in the southern part of 
Saskatchewan -- White City, which is located in the riding of 
Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, the Minister of Justice's constituency; from Zehner, 
which is also located in the constituency of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden; from 
Craven, Mr. Speaker, and that's in the riding of Last Mountain-Touchwood; 
and from the neighbourhoods in Regina of Albert Park, of the communities in 
north-west Regina, Normanview, Normanview West, and Lakewood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have joined . . . both rural and urban members have lent 
their name to this petition and have asked me to present it on their 
behalf.  Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and certainly my privilege to place 
this petition on the Table on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other petitioners who have signed the said petition.  
They are from the communities of Regina Beach, which is just north-west of 
Regina, from Balgonie, which is located . . . both those communities are 
located in the constituency of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, from Whitmore Park and 
Albert Park, districts that are represented in this House by the member 
from Regina South who sits on the government side.  Again, Mr. Speaker, 



 

 

both rural and urban individuals and citizens of this province who have 
asked me to make representations on their behalf to this Legislative 
Assembly, and I am privileged to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with signatories on it from Sedley, 
Saskatchewan and from the communities in Regina North, Coronation Park, and 
in my constituency, Regina North West, Normanview.  Again we see a 
combination of rural and urban citizens signing the same petition 
requesting the same prayer as was read out at the commencement of my 
remarks.  I am honoured, Mr. Speaker, to present this to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have further residents of Saskatchewan who have signed this 
said petition.  They are from the community of White City which is located 
in a rural constituency called Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, represented by the 
member, Minister of Justice; and from citizens from the city of Regina, 
both in the north-west and in the central part of the city. 
 
Again we see the joining of rural residents and urban residents who have 
signed this petition in opposition to the item referred to earlier, Mr. 
Speaker.  I am pleased on their behalf to present this petition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, additional residents of Saskatchewan who have 
signed this petition are from the community of Unity, which is in the 
constituency of Wilkie.  The town of Wilkie where I have an aunt living -- 
this is not her signature though.  The community of Esterhazy, the 
communities of Prince Albert and Saskatoon. 
 
And the constituency of Lumsden.  The town of Lumsden again, Mr. Speaker, 
we see a joining of urban residents and rural residents uniting in signing 
this petition which they feel is very important to come before this 
Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to present this petition to the 
Assembly on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have additional signatures of residents from 
the province of Saskatchewan.  There is a consensus from these communities, 
Mr. Speaker, from the communities of Grand Coulee, from Pense and Lumsden, 
which are all three located in the riding of Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, a rural 
district; from South Albert Park, once again; Whitmore Park, Wascana View, 
and the Pilot Butte community from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden; and the 
neighbourhood of Lakewood which is in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, they are co-operating in uniting behind this petition, have asked 
myself to present it to the Assembly on their behalf.  I am pleased and 
honoured to do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another petition signed by a number of residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  They represent the communities of Lashburn, 
which is in the Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency.  They reside in 



 

 

Dundurn, Mr. Speaker, which I believe is in Rosthern; Allan, Saskatchewan; 
they come from Clavet and also from the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These individuals have united in their position with respect to supporting 
this petition.  They have asked our party and our opposition caucus to 
present to the Assembly so that they could be heard, Mr. Speaker.  It is my 
honour, my duty, and my joy once again to present on their behalf, this 
petition.  Thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another . . . additional to what I've 
already indicated, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is worded 
differently.  The prayer is different from the ones I've previously read 
into the record and I, with your co-operation, I would like to read into 
the record if I may, sir. 
 

 To the Honourable The Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in Legislature 
assembled: 

 The Petition of the under signed Petitioners of the Province of 
Saskatchewan humbly Sheweth: 

 That we oppose the Provincial Governments proposed inforcement (I believe 
they spelled enforcement wrong, I'm not sure if that deletes the petition) 
of the seven percent p.s.t. beyond that which has been previous levied. 

 Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays that your Honor Assembly may be 
pleased to refuse to extend the P.S.T. to goods and services which have 
not previously been subject to tax. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners reside in Moose Jaw city in the Moose Jaw 
constituencies.  They reside in the communities of Coderre and in the 
communities of Caron and in the community of Parkbeg.  They come from 
Chamberlain, Mr. Speaker, which is I believe in Arm River.  And they come 
from other communities in and around the city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my honour and my privilege to present to this Assembly 
on behalf of the residents of Saskatchewan who have signed this petition to 
make their intentions in their prayer known to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Mr. Speaker, I have another petition which is worded as was 
the first petition was worded.  It is signed by residents of Regina from 
two districts in Regina.  And they have asked me to present on their behalf 
to present this petition to the Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, it is my honour to 
do so.  These are residents of Regina North West. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- And, Mr. Speaker, finally I have a petition which is signed 
by a number of individuals from the city of Regina.  And it is my honour, 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, to present this on behalf of the residents of Regina -- many 
in my constituency, some from the constituency of Regina South and Regina 
Wascana.  I present this petition on behalf of these people, Mr. Speaker, 
to this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 
 


