




















































Hansard: December 20, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 421 

 December 20, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 

again make a few comments on this Bill. 

 

As I was saying earlier this morning, our constituency has a 

very large and significant oil field out in that area.  And while 

it is very low producing it employs a great number of people.  

The average well out there is about four to five barrels a day.  

The average lease payments to the farmers are about $2,000 per 

well per year.  This accounts for a lot of economic activity in 

our constituency, a great deal. 

 

For example, the RM (rural municipality) that surrounds the 

community of Coleville receives about 60 per cent of its 

revenue from oil companies for its municipal operations.  The 

RM of Kindersley receives about 35 per cent of its revenue 

from oil companies.  That really is quite significant out there.  

About 650 direct jobs are related to the oil industry in the 

Kindersley constituency and countless others indirectly related 

to the oil industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not tell us something that everyone 

is wondering about -- what is the new government's plans to 

recover this revenue shortfall?  I ask the members opposite: 

what is the plan?  How do you plan to replace this revenue?  

Will you raise personal income tax?  Is that the plan?  Will you 

introduce succession taxes or death tax, as some would call it?  

Is that the plan?  Will we see a payroll tax in Saskatchewan?  

Are you going to lower health care transfers?  Are you going to 

lower . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- By leave, to introduce a guest. 
 

Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce a 

friend and former member of the Assembly, Jack Wiebe, who's 

seated in the back of the legislature here.  I want to say that Mr. 

Wiebe was a legislator in the 1970s and had a reputation of 

being a real work-horse and a lot of positive influence here in 

the House. 
 

This being the Christmas season we want to wish you a merry 

Christmas, Jack, and welcome to the Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I too . . . I didn't realize that 

Jack was in the Assembly.  And Jack is my neighbour and also 

a very good friend of mine.  As a matter of fact, his wife Ann 

was on our Consensus Saskatchewan committee, and it was a 

pleasure for us to have her there.  And I acknowledge the work 

that she did and Jack's responsibility in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So Merry Christmas, Jack, and the best to you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I too, Mr. Speaker, would like to 

acknowledge and welcome Mr. Wiebe.  He's been an enormous 

asset to me and has worked very, very hard on the national 

scene as far as agriculture is concerned.  He continues to make 

input, I think very valuable input, as far as different kinds of 

agricultural policies are concerned.  So I'm very, very pleased 

to see him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask for 

leave to introduce a guest in the gallery. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome to the 

legislature Owen Sebastian who is sitting in the west gallery.  

Owen is a teacher and a principal.  He's on leave from his 

teaching profession to pursue his studies at the University of 

Saskatchewan in Saskatoon.  I want to welcome Owen to 

Regina today.  I think he will find the proceedings most 

interesting as we debate our government's decision to amend 

the legislation, doing in the provincial sales tax.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I think I was just 

outlining what everyone in the province's concerns are with the 

removal of the PST, what the government's new plans are to 

introduce to make up the revenue shortfall.  And I think 

everyone is wondering, are the plans to lower educational 

transfers, are they going to raise the provincial E&H tax, are 

they going to raise the gasoline tax?  How is the NDP 

government going to deal with cross-border shopping?  How 

will the NDP government replace the $200 child tax credit? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the synchronization of the E&H tax with the 

federal sales tax not only benefitted the oil industry, it was also 

beneficial to farmers.  Mr. Speaker, there's always been an 

E&H tax in Saskatchewan.  Items such as batteries, tires, 

replacement parts, lumber, all construction-related materials 

were taxed, Mr. Speaker.  With harmonization the farmers of 

Saskatchewan would've received a tax rebate for all of those 

goods that I've just listed. 

  



422 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, that would have provided the farmers of 

Saskatchewan with additional discretionary spending.  

Synchronization and the two taxes would have provided 

significant benefits, I believe, to the agricultural sector. 

 

How does the new government plan on making up those lost 

benefits?  I think that's the question on a lot of people's minds.  

Are they going to significantly raise the oil tax royalty structure 

which will have a very devastating impact in my constituency. 

 

I think what would happen in our constituency, we would see 

sharply lower drilling activity or essentially drive industry out 

of the province as it was once before. 

 

Will the new government impose a productivity tax as one of 

the members has mentioned in the past in this Assembly.  This 

kind of attitude should really increase our competitive position 

around the world, I'll bet.  Our competitors world-wide must be 

really shaking in their boots listening to that kind of attitude.  

The clear message outside of Saskatchewan will be, as soon as 

Saskatchewan people become more competitive their NDP 

government will tax them more.  Good job.  When we become 

more competitive, slap more tax on us.  I think that's . . . is that 

the alternative to these type of tax measures of the PST? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when are we going to hear about the NDP's plans 

for Saskatchewan?  As a member of the legislature I witnessed 

firsthand how little the NDP government has done.  They seem 

to have a preoccupation with bashing the previous 

administration; have not spent any time preparing for anything 

else but that -- Tory bashing.  How long do we have to wait for 

their plan, the plan for agriculture, for example? 

 

Well one of the members opposite has said we lost the election, 

and that's true.  We did -- our party lost the election.  But I 

didn't lose the election.  I won.  I won just like all the rest of the 

members . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- I won just like all the rest of the members of this 

Assembly.  And I might add that the Minister of Agriculture 

offers his congratulations to me, and I accept that 

congratulations considering the fact that the NDP candidate in 

my constituency, I think, was very much in line for your job, 

sir, had he not have been defeated by myself. 

 

The NDP ran third in the constituency of Kindersley, the only 

constituency in all of the province where they ran third. 

 

I think my concerns regarding this Bill can be summed up in 

just one question, Mr. Speaker.  Now that they're doing away 

with the expanded E&H tax, what tax increases can the people 

of Saskatchewan look forward to in the future?  What indeed? 

 

I believe there was significant benefits with the 

synchronization of the E&H tax.  I think I'd like to read a little 

bit from our information that was put together on the E&H tax, 

Mr. Speaker.  And I wonder if you might just 

allow me to do that. 

 

On April 1, 1991 Saskatchewan will begin the process of 

harmonization, the PST with the goods and services tax, the 

GST.  The government's decision will achieve five important 

objectives:  providing the financing for the protection of 

Saskatchewan farmers through programs like GRIP and NISA.  

That's a great deal of the money that was going to be raised so 

the PST was going to go into those farm programs. 

 

Reduced complexity and confusion at the cash register for 

consumers and businesses -- there were some products that 

were taxed, some weren't.  I think that would have taken away 

a lot of that type of confusion. 

 

Reduced duplication overlap in government sales tax 

administration -- it was going to save the province of 

Saskatchewan about $5 million in administrative costs if the 

two taxes were brought under one. 

 

Improve Saskatchewan's competitive position in a changing 

world economy, and continue Saskatchewan's protection of the 

family.  I think the harmonization was going to take place in 

two stages.  The first one, broadening the provincial sales tax to 

include most goods; and the second one was going to take 

place the first of the year coming up in 1992, and services were 

brought into that as well. 

 

I think it had the opportunity to help out in a lot of areas of the 

economy of Saskatchewan.  We see some things that might 

have helped in business, and I'll read a little bit about that now. 

 

The GST is a multi-stage sales tax that affects all businesses 

including retailers.  Over 130,000 Saskatchewan businesses 

must deal with the GST at various stages of the 

production-distribution cycle.  Almost half of the provincial 

businesses affected are farming operations. 

 

Saskatchewan sales tax is remitted by over 35,000 -- almost all 

of which are not federal sales tax collector, prior to the GST 

introduction.  Businesses that are not registered under the 

provincial sales tax are also required to report under the GST. 

 

This complicates the number of businesses' operations 

including pricing, inventory, evaluation and bookkeeping.  

They must keep track of two sets of tax rules and 

interpretation, two tax bases, two reporting and payment 

procedures.  They must deal with two tax administrations. 

 

For consumers, the lack of harmony between the two sales tax 

meant that a large number of goods and services have a 

different tax status under each system.  This complicates the 

application of taxes at the till and leads to confusion for 

consumers.  All 50 countries which levy a GST sales tax have 

abandoned a retail sales tax to avoid the complications of a 

dual tax environment. 

 

Increased costs for businesses -- the structural difference 

between the provincial retail sales tax and the GST require 

business maintain separate reporting and 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 423 

accounting systems for each.  Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business Estimates that the average cost for a 

business to administer a retail sales tax is about $1,380 per 

year, Mr. Speaker.  Since over 35,000 businesses currently 

remit provincial sales tax on behalf of the province, the 

administrative savings from harmonization could be in the tens 

of millions annually. 

 

The expense of operating a dual sales tax environment is 

unproductive and reduces the competitiveness of our economy.  

It is a cost, for example, that could be redirected to the 

productive investment in job creation.  Higher government 

administrative costs result as well.  Two sales taxes operating 

side by side require a duplication of administrative effort.  

Given the current fiscal pressures on both orders of 

government, opportunities to remove the duplication and 

improve administrative efficiency must be restored and 

explored. 

 

For these reasons the Government of Saskatchewan opposed 

the introduction of the GST.  It tried to convince the federal 

government to defer the implementation of the GST and return 

to national sales tax discussions.  Regrettably the federal 

government chose to push ahead and implement a federal only 

sales tax.  I think that is the reason why the former 

administration decided to pursue this avenue of harmonization. 

 

How the sales tax . . . how Saskatchewan's new sales tax would 

have worked, when Saskatchewan's sales tax become fully 

harmonized with the GST on January 1, 1992, it would have 

been a multi-stage tax.  While businesses throughout the 

production-distribution cycle including retailers would charge 

provincial sales tax on their domestic sales, they'll also be able 

to claim a refundable credit known as an input tax credit, for 

any tax paid on the purchases of goods and services used in the 

course of doing business. 

 

Saskatchewan's new sales tax will therefore permit the full 

recovery of sales tax by commercial operations, thereby 

improving their competitiveness domestically and 

internationally. 

 

It also provided for a family tax credit which would have been 

a new support for family.  The family tax credit will provide an 

annual tax saving of $200 per child for lower income families.  

It would have commenced in April and would be paid to 

eligible families in four instalments throughout the year -- 

April, July, October, and January. 

 

The credit would have been modelled after the federal GST 

credit.  The credit would have been phased out at the rate of 

about 5 per cent of family income exceeding $24,355 

threshold.  Families having two dependent children with 

incomes up to $32,355 would have benefitted from this credit.  

The threshold is the same one used by the federal government 

for the GST and would have been indexed annually for 

inflation. 

 

This credit, which was refundable, will be available to over 

104,000 families in the province of Saskatchewan.  It will 

include families on social assistance which do not incur an 

income tax liability. 
 

(1415) 

The economic impact of harmonization, Mr. Speaker -- the 

competitiveness of Saskatchewan businesses.  Saskatchewan's 

economy continues to be largely dependent on primary 

industries which are capital intensive and export oriented.  It is 

subject to the international market forces and relies heavily 

upon investment dollars from sources that reside both within 

and outside provincial borders. 

 

Saskatchewan's current sales tax is levied at the retail level but 

is paid for by both individuals and businesses.  The application 

of the provincial sales tax to the business purchases can result 

in a significant disincentive to prospective investors in 

Saskatchewan and can disadvantage existing provincial 

businesses. 

 

For example, when a Saskatchewan based company purchases 

a computer it will pay approximately $5,000 for that computer; 

it would have paid $350 in provincial sales tax.  The tax paid 

must either be reflected in the price that the business charged 

for this product or it will be absorbed by the business as an 

expense.  This could result in a lower wage, lost job 

opportunities, and reduced investment. 

 

The harmonization benefits -- by harmonizing with the GST 

businesses in Saskatchewan will benefit from having all their 

tax paid on their inputs purchased in Saskatchewan refunded to 

them through the input tax credit mechanism.  They will also 

benefit from reduced compliance costs resulting in a single tax 

administration.  This would create a stronger business sector, a 

more efficient allocation of resources and improved ability to 

attract non-resident investors to Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan's real domestic product is expected to grow by 

1.6 per cent or was expected to, due to harmonization.  This is 

in addition to the expected 2.3 per cent increase in real GDP 

(gross domestic product) due to the effects of the federal sales 

tax reform. 

 

The impact on some of the sectors in Saskatchewan, first of all 

in regard to farmers and agriculture -- although many people 

view the federal GST as being too complex it is now firmly in 

place.  Most farmers have already registered in the GST system 

and have begun to modify their accounting procedures to 

accommodate the tax.  Harmonization of the two taxes 

therefore will not increase the complexity of taxation but will 

reduce it.  A sales tax administration having common rules and 

interpretations and filing periods is simpler than two separate 

tax systems operating side by side. 

 

Farm exemptions remain.  Although farm inputs are eligible for 

farm tax credits, the federal government recognized the views 

of the Government of Saskatchewan and others that major farm 

input should be free of the GST at the time of purchase.  

Therefore under a fully harmonized tax system, many of the 

items on the farm input exemption list of the current provincial 

sales tax will remain tax free. 

 

Some of the major farm input purchases on this list including 

such items as:  tractors, 60 p.t.o. (power take off) horsepower 

or more, swathers, combines, discers,  

  



424 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

cultivators, seeders, grain bins, augers, rock pickers, fertilizers, 

feed of 20 kilograms or more . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'd like to draw members' attention to 

Beauchesne's 5th Edition on paragraph where it . . . I think 

Beauchesne's is very clear that a speech cannot be a lengthy 

quotation and where a member cannot simply read from 

another document and that will be a speech.  And I've listened 

to the member very carefully for the last five or ten minutes, 

and he has read continuously from a particular document, and 

that cannot be the main part of your speech.  If the member 

wishes to continue and use some quotations, fair enough to 

back up your speech.  But the main part of your speech must be 

your own words. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I apologize for that.  I 

think I'm trying to point out some of the concerns that are 

related to the PST that we believe in. 

 

There's a few other items that I preferred . . . I wasn't reading 

page after page; I was selectively quoting. 

 

A few things that I think were important in it was there was a 

transitional period, Mr. Speaker; it would have occurred in two 

stages.  As I said earlier, it becomes . . . 1991 would have been 

a transitional-type year.  There would have been a number of 

things in the early stages of it that would have been applied 

into the PST, things that we're all familiar with, I guess.  There 

was books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers, including 

subscriptions -- purchases of these items -- clothing and 

footwear, including adults' clothing and footwear selling for 

less than $300, and children's clothing and footwear; electricity 

for residential use would have been included; meals including 

prepared foods and beverages sold in a form suitable for 

immediate consumption either where sold or elsewhere; natural 

gas for residential people. 

 

I think those are some of the things that would have been 

included in the first parts of the harmonization.  And the 

second part to begin in January, would have begun on January 

1, 1992, would have been . . . they included the services. 

 

I think in looking at the harmonization there is significant 

amounts of benefit for businesses.  I think there's a few things 

that I think should be pointed out.  There was $126 million that 

would have been raised with the PST would have went to fund 

the programs GRIP and NISA, which have led to $1.3 million 

in farm support for the farmers of Saskatchewan.  It would 

have improved business competitiveness.  Business purchases 

would have been tax free after 1992. 

 

It reduced confusion, reduced overlap, duplication of 

government administrative . . . would have resulted in a $5 

million savings to the government coffers.  It provided for 

protection of the family.  The family tax credit was introduced. 

 

Two stage harmonization, as I said it started . . . I think a lot of 

people were unclear of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about how 

there was two things.  One part of it was introduced early in the 

spring, and the rest of it would have been brought in 1992. 

The current provincial sales tax continues until exemptions . . . 

there was a number of exemptions.  The farmers had a number 

of exemptions, and I think that was important to note as well, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The sales tax is collected at each stage of 

production-distribution cycle.  Each business charges sales tax 

on domestic sales.  Exports are tax free.  Claims input tax 

credits on the inputs, remits differences to government 

collections minus input tax credit.  Businesses receive sales tax 

refund when input tax credit exceed taxes collected.  It had a 

number of cash flow advantages, I believe, for the business 

sector and the agriculture sector in Saskatchewan. 

 

I think there's all kinds of benefits, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

could have resulted in increased economic activity in 

Saskatchewan.  The members opposite don't want me to 

continue reading, so I'll try and wrap up my remarks here now, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that a lot of people in Saskatchewan misunderstood the 

application of this tax, and that's partly why there was a 

rejection in the public's mind of the tax, I believe.  If you look 

at myself as a farmer and a business person, I think it did have 

some opportunities.  We, in my two businesses that I operate, I 

think it would have offered a significant benefit to myself and 

then in turn allowed me to increase employment or at least 

maintain the employment of the people that are working for me 

right now. 

 

So I think it would have helped a great deal. 

 

A lot of the border communities as well were concerned over 

cross-border shopping, particularly as you look at the Alberta 

situation.  As I was saying earlier, my constituency has a lot of 

oil and gas industry in it.  We have a lot of Alberta companies 

that come into Saskatchewan that were tax free. There was no 

sales tax in Alberta, so I think it reduced substantially the 

competitive position of the oil companies that are based out of 

Saskatchewan.  And that had a real strong impact on what was 

happening with the oil companies in our area.  I think it would 

have helped in the long-term provincial economy as well. 

 

So while the members opposite don't support the PST, I think 

there was a number of us in this caucus that had felt there was 

some real benefit.  I have to just look at the farm situation 

again a little bit more, and I look at my GST applications and 

this is, I think, is important when you look at your overall farm 

situation.  We had the benefits, Mr. Speaker, that I think 

brought a lot more discretionary income back into my pocket 

compared to what was there before. 

 

It's too bad that a lot of people didn't recognize this benefit a 

little sooner, I think.  There's a number of people now looking 

at it.  The farm people, as they're filling out their GST 

applications, they are finding that the federal sales tax, the 

GST, is coming back to them quarterly.  They fill out a 

relatively simple form and it comes back to them.  And the PST 

would have been included into that. 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 425 

I note in my own situation, it was about roughly $1,500 a 

quarter that I was receiving back in benefits, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And while I don't believe it would have been exactly 

the same with the PST, because there was a few items different, 

it would . . . I estimate, approximately $1,000 a quarter back to 

myself as well.  So I think it did have a significant amount of 

benefit. 

 

We find that with that benefit, it resulted in discretionary 

spending for myself which in turn I was able to spend into the 

economy around our community and didn't have to . . . 

Otherwise it was going directly into the government coffers, 

and they could do with it as they pleased with it, which I prefer.  

And I think most people would prefer to have the discretionary 

spending rather than having someone else making the spending 

decisions for them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, in light of all of these things that 

I've been talking about this afternoon, I think it's important that 

we recognize that the GST is not going to go away, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I think we have to . . . I think the former 

government's feelings was that if there is any benefit to be 

gained by harmonization, it should by looked at very carefully, 

and I think that was the reason that it was done. 

 

So in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, that is why I will not be 

supporting this Bill. And thank you for your indulgence when I 

was reading earlier.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm going to have 

a few remarks about this here, this Bill.  It's one that the 

government had to bring in.  There's no way about it. I mean 

they promised for a long time out there to remove the 7 per 

cent PST tax. 

 

And they had to naturally implement a Bill to have it happen, it 

just had to happen.  And we know it's going to go through and 

we're going to be in the Committee of the Whole before too 

long, we'll be asking questions.  It's going to go.  But we want 

to make our points, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why they had to do it, 

why they're doing it, and what they're going to replace it with.  

Because we know they have to replace it with something.  The 

money has to come from some place. 

 

The Deputy Premier and the Minister of Finance, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, sits there saying, what's your point, what's your point.  

Well I'll tell you, I'd like to know what his point was in 

bringing it in in the first place.  Why did they promise the 

people out there to bring in a PST tax . . . or I mean to remove 

it, and they know they had to replace it with something, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  They know the money has to come from 

some place -- they know it. 

 

The voters in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 

fooled many of them -- they fooled many of the voters.  

Because I argued with several when they said, it's gone.  At 

midnight on October 21 the PST tax will be gone.  And they 

didn't realize that the 7 per cent E&H tax would be right in 

there to take its place.  Because they misrepresented the people 

out there when they were knocking doors and writing their 

brochures.  All they said 

is PST tax gone -- gone tomorrow, gone. 

 

And we know that the Minister of Finance has to put a plan in 

to fool the people next spring when the budget comes in, to 

replace the money.  He's got to come up with the funds. 

 

Well let's talk real serious.  I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

we'll have inheritance tax back.  This government is famous for 

the inheritance tax, death taxes.  They taxed the dead.  That's 

why they got defeated in 1982 and that's why they'll soon be 

defeated again, because they have to bring these things back in.  

Because the people will always vote -- every time -- they'll vote 

for less taxes.  They'll always be fooled by it.  Everybody in 

Canada was angry and still angry at the federal government 

when they brought the GST tax in.  And they're the first 

government in the history of Canada that says, let's get rid of 

the hidden taxes and let's pay a tax out there where everybody 

can see. 

 

(1430) 

 

Now everybody knows that, because there's no chirping comes 

when I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  When the federal 

government said they were going to go for a 9 per cent GST . . 

. take away 13 per cent, replace it with 9, then they come in 

with 7. So a lot of people in this country had a net gain when 

the GST came in. 

 

And I'm not standing at my seat here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

saying I'm in favour of taxes.  Because I wish we could have no 

taxes.  But how would this province go on without any taxes?  

You couldn't. 

 

And the Minister of Finance knows that he has to replace every 

dollar that this government spends. And they're going to spend 

plenty, because they're not going to quit building highways.  

They'll have parks to have to have money for.  The Minister of 

Parks is probably already saying out there, well I want my 

share in that budget.  I'm sure the Minister of Highways will be 

saying that now.  They're probably already arguing in their 

cabinet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about I want my share. 

 

I'm sure that the member from Rosetown-Elrose is saying, I got 

to have money for farmers.  I'm sure that he's saying that.  He's 

saying, I've got to have like, not peanuts, I've got to have in the 

half a billion to billions of dollars for farmers.  He knows that.  

So he's in there fighting for it.  Well where's the money going 

to come from? 

 

It isn't going to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the money isn't 

going to come by cancelling taxes.  He's already hurt farmers 

by cancelling the PST.  Now they hurt quite badly out there. 

 

Anybody that's a farmer gets a refund on his GST tax.  We all 

know that. Now they made a good job at election time trying to 

tell people that doesn't happen.  But it does happen.  The 

farmer got it back.  He got his GST back and his PST.  Where 

every dollar of GST tax is refunded, so is the PST.  Now he 

knows that.  He knows that.  It is happening.  People sit there 

and shake their head at me.  It's a fact, because I can give you 

some examples.  I can take you to a potato irrigation farm in 

Outlook where their 

  



426 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

refund, they're expecting $7,000 per quarter. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On what? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- On his PST tax and GST together -- $7,000 

on the GST and PST.  And he paid it when he bought it.  The 

Minister of Finance says he never paid it.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that's misrepresenting because everybody has to pay it. 

 

The only thing that he didn't pay on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 

when he bought his tractor.  He definitely paid it on his 

irrigation equipment.  You kept . . . the Minister of Finance 

will not be able to show me where it's exempt to buy irrigation 

equipment, and irrigation equipment is in 100 to 200,000 just 

for one pivot. 

 

Now you see if you can find out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be intimidated by the Minister 

of Finance standing here and saying that I don't know.  And I'll 

challenge him that an irrigation farmer growing potatoes in 

Outlook buys irrigation equipment, he pays the tax.  He pays 

the tax and then he has to apply for a refund -- GST and PST. 

 

Then if he wants to build a building to put his potatoes in, 

which I have this one farmer in Outlook . . . and I can give his 

name, but I won't, but I can.  But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this man is spending around 70,000 on a wooden building to 

pay, and he has to pay a tax on that. 

 

Now if the Minister of Finance says everybody doesn't pay it in 

the first place, he's misleading the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, because they do.  And if you think I don't know 

what happens on my own farm where my sons run a shop, and 

they do, and this is figures that they've got, approximate 

figures, from their accountant in Outlook, Mr. Don Tofin, and 

on their own personal the refund on PST alone would be 1,500 

per quarter.  That's $6,000 in a year.  That's now approximate 

now. 

 

And his customers, if they've already figured out that what's 

rebatable, that they're now going to lose because they'll be 

paying 7 per cent on GST, like on batteries and belts and things 

like that that aren't refundable, it's going to come to 

approximately to his customers to $75,000 in one year. 

 

Now that's a lot of money.  You can say, well, tax has got to 

come from some place.  But what you're doing is getting it 

from the farmer and going to put it some place else.  That's 

what you're doing.  So don't stand here saying that you're out 

there to help farmers. 

 

To win this election out there, you went out there and you won 

all these seats in rural Saskatchewan out there by misleading 

the farmers saying that you're going to put on moratoriums and 

you're going to have farm plans, all these things; and you're 

going to remove the PST tax to save you money.  How do 

move a tax that's refundable to a farmer and then put in a 7 per 

cent E&H back on that's not refundable. 

 

Now I have a hog farmer at Imperial that sure isn't very happy 

with you.  He says in his quarter on the PST refundable will be 

$1,200 per quarter and he wants his 

name mentioned.  His name is Mr. Mooney from Imperial and 

he says I want it stated in here that it's $1,200 per quarter on 

my hog farm.  And that's $4,800 in one year, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that's $4,800.  Now they think . . . they know I'm 

right.  They know I'm right, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I assure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the members was 

saying they want to read it in Hansard.  Well I'll tell you they 

won't read it in Hansard.  They won't want to see it again 

because they know I'm right.  I'll guarantee you when this page 

in the Hansard comes through they'll just be . . . that page goes 

right into the garbage because they won't want to look at it.  

Because they know they can't read it.  They won't want their 

people in their riding to read it because you've misled them out 

there. 

 

Yes I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the voters have been 

fooled many, many times in Canada when it comes to tax.  But 

nobody can fool the people after they think for a while.  At 

election time it's something like John Diefenbaker said in my 

dad's kitchen in 1946.  He said to 12, 15 of my neighbours -- 

when I was about 15 years old -- he said I don't think you 

people really understand how elections really work.  He said, I 

don't think you understand how people think.  He said one-third 

of the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the side of the 

government, the other third on the side of the opposition, and 

the other third are on nobody's side.  And whoever crawls into 

their pocket-book and fools them at election time, wins the 

elections.  And that's the way it's always been, it's the way it's 

always been, it's the way it's always will be. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that the members opposite 

and the 30-day election period crawled into the pockets of the 

voter of this province and convinced them that we're going to 

remove a tax and it's going to help your finances.  And they all 

run to the polls and vote for them. 

 

But I'll tell you, I have a good friend in the town of Craik 

where I live, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this one doesn't vote for 

me.  He doesn't vote for me.  He's an NDP, and a very fine 

man. And if you think that he's very happy when he finds out 

that he has to pay a 7 per cent E&H tax . . . he thought it was 

gone. 

 

You people definitely fooled everybody out there by saying the 

7 per cent PST is gone at midnight.  And then the morning, 

about 5 minutes after 12, on comes another 7 per cent on E&H 

tax.  Now if that's being honest with the people out there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, boy I don't know; I just can't handle this.  It's 

just something that I didn't think that any government would 

do. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Progressive Conservatives 

promised to remove a gas tax.  We promised.  The economy 

was good in 1982.  And you know, and you know in 1982, you 

know that it was reasonable to remove that gas tax then.  It was 

reasonable because everything was fine.  We were able to 

balance budgets. 

 

But we didn't know, what we didn't know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is when we took over your cooked books, things 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 427 

weren't so great either.  Because if I ever heard of cooked 

books, it was in 1982.  And some of the people chirping from 

their desks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, weren't here in 1982 to see 

the cooked books.  And I want to see the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I'm having some difficulty 

hearing the member, and I wonder if other members would 

allow him the courtesy to be able to finish his remarks in 

relative peace.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It would 

sure be a lot easier on my voice too.  If they would just 

wouldn't say anything, I could talk lower and it'd be easier on 

my voice too -- be easier than everybody.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

I can stand here as long as people want to chirp over there and 

say nothing.  That's fine.  It's their Christmas turkey they want 

to be thinking about. 

 

I wonder if they realize what the business people in Arm River 

are thinking.  I have 25 towns with about 17 or 18 . . . with 

some pretty good businesses, some good sized businesses in 

Outlook, Davidson, Craik, Allan, Dundurn, Hanley.  Now it 

took me a lot of talking out there to get them to understand 

harmonization . . . (inaudible) . . . to understand that.  And they 

did.  And that's why I got re-elected because they understood it. 

 

And you people made a . . . You did a masterful job out there 

fooling the people.  You did a masterful job.  I've got to give 

you credit for that.  You did a real good job.  But I want to 

warn you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I warn the people that you 

better get something ready to cover up the Minister of 

Finance's big blunder when it comes to big budget next spring 

when he has to have either a hidden tax or new taxes, or this 

province is not even be able to go forward. 

 

There won't be any highways.  I can remember the member 

from Riversdale talking about our highways, that you could 

have . . . He was making fun of the Elbow road saying that you 

could have a golf course per mile -- the 18 holes per mile.  

Well I'll tell you, we kind of laughed.  And that was a pretty 

good one because we got it. 

 

It's written in blood now that we're going to build a new 

highway.  It's going to be a brand-new highway because of 

Elbow.  It's a town that's rising fast.  And they're requesting 

from Saskatoon, where you members here represent Saskatoon, 

your people wrote letters to this government -- they want a new 

highway right to Elbow. 

 

Now will there be money in the funds next spring in the budget 

to build a new highway from Elbow to Saskatoon?  Well I'm 

going to be watching very carefully.  Where is the funds going 

to come? 

 

The Minister of Health's been doing a lot of chirping from her 

desk.  I wonder where she's going to get the funds from the 

Minister of Finance to build the new promised senior citizen 

home in Hanley.  Where are these funds going to come from? 

 

So either they're not going to build the highways or build the 

nursing homes . . . put a moratorium on nursing homes like 

they did before back in the '70s.  When I was elected in '78, I 

couldn't believe it.  There was a caring 

government that took the credit for bringing health care in.  

They took the credit for that; brought health care in.  They said 

they did. After John Diefenbaker came up with the idea. 

 

But they have to give them credit, and I have to give credit to 

Tommy Douglas who was, I feel, was the father of health care. 

 

But I never thought the day would come when I would see 

moratoriums on nursing homes and everything in rural 

Saskatchewan and keep building them in Regina and 

Saskatoon. 

 

The Minister of Health would like me maybe to talk about 

moratoriums.  We talked about it in question period this 

morning.  We could turn to that subject if you so wish . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I'd sure like to say something now, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I'm not allowed to. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to have it on the record that 

I'm saying in this legislature how serious it is for the business 

people in the province of Saskatchewan that were just starting 

to understand it, starting to understand this in spots throughout 

Saskatchewan, harmonization was really meaning to them. 

 

(1445) 

 

I couldn't believe it until after the election.  The large restaurant 

owner in Davidson, he said, you know at the last moment 

somebody came in here and absolutely convinced me at 

election time that you Tories were wrong on how this 

harmonization works.  And he said I only spent a few minutes 

with you about two months prior, and I didn't listen close 

enough.  And he said, here I went and voted for one of the 

other parties, and now I've been fooled because it's been 

explained to me what I voted against -- been explained to me 

what I voted against. 

 

And explain to me what I've voted against.  I've voted against 

my own . . . (inaudible) . . . of the refunds it could have had.  

It's a fairly old restaurant and he came in and restocked and 

rebuilt that restaurant.  It cost him thousands of dollars and 

didn't realize that there was no charge on the PST tax and all 

that equipment in that cafe. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'd like to go back for a few moments and 

talk about the seriousness of the Minister of Finance when he'll 

have to bring in next spring death taxes and inheritance taxes.  

Because they used to have them on; they were on in the '60s 

and '70s, they were there.  And the hardships it caused people; 

it caused a lot of problems.  It broke families, families that 

worked their whole lifetime. And when they passed away, the 

farm was charged so much on death taxes and inheritance taxes 

when they passed it from one to another that it broke many 

estates. 

 

And that's why when the Tories . . . it's the Tories that removed 

these taxes and we intend to have them removed for ever, but 

now I don't trust the Minister of Finance.  I'm so afraid that 

when he's removed this tax he has to get the money from some 

place else.  It's got to come from somewhere, it has to come. 

  



428 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

And so I've heard little rumours throughout Saskatchewan that 

they're definitely talking about bringing back inheritance tax 

and death taxes. 

 

Now this is serious and I want this on the record, because when 

they do it over the next few years, they do this or something 

like it, it'll be the same thing.  If it's not a death tax or 

inheritance tax or whatever it is, the Minister of Finance will 

have to put a tax in place to get the money and he's going to try 

to fool people.  That's what it's all going to be about, he's going 

to try to fool people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the Minister of Finance, if the 

Minister of Finance . . . we've been doing all the talking on this 

Bill from this side, but I've never heard anybody from that side 

get up.  They just want to put it through.  They did all their 

talking out there. They did all their talking at election time, but 

now they can't stand in front of the people of Saskatchewan and 

defend it.  Oh there was two or three of you that spoke on it, 

but what about . . . We got 10 of us over here and we'll soon 

have all spoken on it. 

 

Now why can't they, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there's 55 

members over there, why didn't we hear 15 minutes from each 

one of them, because this is what they won their main election 

on.  This is the main thing they won this election on -- was PST 

tax.  That's all you heard out there.  The NDP will remove that 

tax, remove that tax. 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if they were so proud of that and it 

was the right thing to do and they had something to replace it 

with, why couldn't we not have all 50 members -- 10, 15 

minutes -- stand to their feet and defend it?  No sir, they're not 

doing it. 

 

I feel sorry for the Minister of Finance because he's one of the 

ones that has to defend this thing.  He's the one that's going to 

be in problems over it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Thank you, I need a friend. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm sorry that the 

Minister of Finance, after he puts all these taxes on to replace 

this tax, is not going to have very many friends left in 

Saskatchewan.  He's not going to have many friends left. 

 

There isn't any Minister of Finance in these hard, troubled 

times in North America that have too many friends.  The only 

time they have friends is when they're sitting with their people 

in their parliaments or legislature, their colleagues, that's the 

friends.  But when they go out to face the real people they will 

not be very popular people in this day and age. 

 

Because this economy the way it is in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is not just here in Saskatchewan, it's the same 

all over North America and I guess the world today.  In Canada 

now . . . I see in the paper the other day where our deficit has 

hit the trillion mark.  Then when you take a look in the United 

States there's nobody living today, nobody . . . somebody being 

born today will never ever see the deficit completely gone.  It'll 

never be gone. 

And the deficit we have in Saskatchewan, they're saying that 

the Tories created it.  Well I like to know who created it right 

clean across this country. I'd like to know.  I'd like to know 

who created the deficit in Ontario since the last provincial 

election. 

 

Like by the billions of dollars comes that deficit because, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, they made so many promises at election time, 

and they tried to keep them, and it's now 10, 15 -- 10 billion is 

it? -- $10 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You already lost that much. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- He said you lost it.  Goodness it's the NDP 

that won it, and it's them into debt for $10 billion.  And you 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that for sure this government will 

not be able to bring this here . . . make this promise that they've 

promised to do.  They cannot keep their promise. 

 

And I'm going to stand here, the member from Arm River, and 

I'll be the proudest man.  And I'll be proud of you people if I 

see taxes lower, balanced budgets, create jobs, save all the 

farmers.  I mean, I'd like to see you do that.  But it cannot be 

done. 

 

But I'll give credit where credit's due.  I'm 60 years old, and 

I've had a lot to do with people throughout this whole world, 

and when anybody ever does . . . my enemy does anything 

that's right, I give credit where credit's due and that's you 

people. 

 

I'll give you credit if you can balance the budget and lower 

taxes and create jobs and save all the farmers.  I heard several 

speeches here; if you lose one farmer, you've lost too many.  

By what we've heard in here this morning -- and we've heard 

several question periods about these broken promises for 

farmers -- I think we're in lot of trouble in Saskatchewan. 

 

Saskatchewan, you have to have money in the hands of 

farmers.  If farmers don't have money to spend, then you're 

going to have your shops in Regina and Saskatoon . . . Just 

look at Christmas time right now.  How many shops and stores 

are closing the door? 

 

I only had time to go shopping one night, for Christmas.  I went 

with my wife the night before last .  And the two stores that we 

went to in the Cornwall Centre to buy, had sheriff's sale on the 

door -- sheriff's sale.  They're going down.  And I'll tell you, 

people thought that these people were going to be saved as 

soon as the NDP got in in October.  This is December, but the 

doors are still closing.  And why?  Because people are not 

spending money. 
 

When you haven't got money moving though the farmers . . . 

it's the farmers . . . I've have had many business men in this city 

of Regina . . . I've talked to the manager of Eaton's here, just a 

few weeks ago.  And he told me, he says, you know I was 

always against it.  Every time I picked up a paper and I see 

more money for farmers, he said, why not more money for me?  

I have no connection with the farmer.  And, he says, you know 

it's taken me the last two or three years to get my head in gear 

that really why Eaton's right here in Regina are having a 

problem, a financial problem, because the farmer was the 

cream of  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 429 

the crop that came in and spent the money to give us our 

profits. 

 

You go talk to Lakeside Chrysler over here if you want to talk 

about finances and what it affects farmers.  Lakeside Chrysler 

went under this year, and it's not the cars that they sold in 

Regina area people, it's the farmers that quit buying half-ton 

trucks and grain trucks and cars because they haven't got any 

money. 

 

And here this government over here is going to starve the 

farmers.  They're going to put hundreds of farmers right off 

their land before spring.  They went to Ottawa.  The Premier's 

been down there twice, and he's come back empty-handed.  

Now I will be fair and say that yesterday was only a four or 

five-hour meeting.  But, my goodness, he could have just as 

easy had his ministers have a real nice, big brochure with a 

whole bunch of requests in and plans and ideas to hand them.  

It only takes a few seconds to hand somebody some ideas and 

put together . . . because they've had our ideas down there for a 

long time, and that's why we've been getting money.  We've 

never had a year since 1984 that money hasn't come into the 

treasury of Saskatchewan from the federal government since 

they've been elected in Ottawa -- 1984. 

 

But now I do believe that this government, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is going to go absolutely blank from Ottawa.  I don't 

think they're going to get a dollar out of there.  I don't think that 

they're going to get a dollar, because they don't know how to 

go about it.  They don't even know how to go about it.  You've 

got to ask but you've got to be reasonable when you ask.  

You've got to have your request.  They've got to be put together 

so they understand it. 

 

But just to get on a plane trip and take a trek to Ottawa and talk 

about . . . on the outset without a real plan, you're not going to 

get any place with Ottawa.  Not going any place. 

 

And unless we get money out of Ottawa, unless we get money 

out of Saskatchewan treasury, the farmers are going to be much 

worse shape by spring than they are now and much worse by 

fall.  I hate to be a pessimist, but I do believe that for farmers in 

Saskatchewan, that we haven't even got close to the doom and 

gloom yet.  I think it's still coming. 

 

Under a Tory government we would have at least kept . . . 

without finances, without money, we were going to be able to 

at least keep the farmers on the land.  Because we promised at 

election time, once you've been through the courts and lost that 

land, there'd be legislation come into this House for a lease to 

own.  And they could have at least kept them on that land. 

 

Because I can take you back to the '30s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

when the farmers that weren't tough enough and couldn't stand 

it, they left those farms and they weren't there when things 

turned good.  And we know that things . . . I'm happen to be a 

person that believes that no era of a life ever stays the same, 

that it'll change.  And times are going to get good again -- it 

will.  Because there's no times ever stays the same in the 

history of the world. 

 

And if we don't have farmers left on that land, who's going to 

be there when times turn good again?  We feel 

badly that the farmers that lost their farms through us.  But we 

done everything we could do to save them.  We put plans 

through to help the farmers. 

 

Our premier, the member from Estevan . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I did leave the House for a bit.  

Unless the members, while I was gone, have gone on to another 

Bill, when I left we were on Bill No. 3, An Act to amend The 

Education and Health Tax Act, and I see no relationship to 

what the member is saying in the Bill that's before us.  So could 

I draw him back on the Bill? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker.  By you not 

being here, you wouldn't hear how I connected it.  Mr. Speaker, 

there isn't a dollar spent, no matter where it comes from.  And I 

connected it all at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that this PST tax 

by removing it, it will be less money for farmers, and I took it 

into the hardship of farmers.  And yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll try to 

keep as close as I can to the PST and the hardships. 

 

We know, as I said in the beginning, that for sure this 

government is going to pass this Bill.  They have to.  They 

have to because they promised it and they put it on.  So it's just 

a housekeeping Bill as far as I'm concerned now, that they have 

to do what they promised at election time. 

 

But what we on this side of the House are trying to do is to get 

it on the record, and so we have the media print some things 

that we're saying so people will know that without the PST tax 

there's going to be hardships in the province of Saskatchewan.  

It will create hardships.  And where we're really going to see 

the hardships for the lack of the PST tax is next spring when 

the Minister of Finance brings down his budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he has created false thinking into the people of 

Saskatchewan with his $975 million deficit.  Now he keeps 

saying these here words and he keeps saying those figures.  

And I want the chance to be able to get a statement from him 

that shows exactly every dollar that he's talking about because I 

have a little trouble believing that $975 million.  I think it's 

about the same as what we were told when the election was 

called, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 that we have a balanced budget.  

And we found out that we went out and had an election on it 

and got into these cooked books and it was not a balanced 

budget. 

 

Yes, we were just short about a-hundred-and-some million just 

on a potash contract in my own riding -- a hundred million 

dollars -- Colonsay and Allan.  They just made mis-sales.  They 

calculated their figures.  They didn't do it honestly and that's 

why they're not doing this honestly but . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member knows that those 

words are unparliamentary, and again I would ask the member 

and draw him back to the Bill that is before us.  I don't recall 

that we are on 1982 unbalanced budgets; the potash company.  

We are on the Education and Health Tax Act and I ask the 

member to first of all withdraw the remark of the government 

not being honest, and then getting back on the topic again. 

 

(1500) 

  



430 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I'll withdraw the remark 

that they weren't honest.  All that happened, they made a 

mistake in the books. 

 

And perhaps they couldn't help it because . . . what I was going 

to say, Mr. Speaker, what happen and to relate through the 

problems we're going to have today and the problems we're 

going to have next spring when he comes down with his 

budget.  Because how they came up with these here losses is 

how I can walk into the bank tomorrow and say: Mr. Banker, I 

need to borrow 100,000 operating to operate my farm next 

spring.  And he'll say, well let's have a look at your revenues.  

And I'll say, yes my flax is going to make 40 bushels an acre; 

my wheat will run around the 50 bushels, and my oats will 

make 70.  And we take a guess at the prices, and we've got 

ourselves a nice balanced budget for my farm.  Farm looks real 

good. 

 

But boy I'll tell you, do you ever have a mess of a books, just 

like they had with the potash mines, if the sale fell through.  

And in my case, say that . . . this is hypothetical, but say that it 

doesn't rain or something goes wrong and the price goes down 

and the books don't balance.  And that's what they did with the 

potash mines in '82 and that's what I'm saying, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In 1992, the minister has to be honest when he comes up with 

this here budget.  He's got to show us where he's replacing the 

PST tax.  Where's it going to replace?  Don't fool the people in 

Saskatchewan because you fooled them at election time.  It was 

gone -- 7 per cent.  E&H came back.  Now don't fool them next 

spring when out comes this budget and it's supposed to be 

balanced.  You promised balanced budgets.  Now let's see how 

you can do it.  I wish the minister good luck in balancing 

budgets.  I wish him good luck in lowering the taxes.  I wish 

him good luck in creating jobs.  I wish him good luck in all 

these things and all their promises.  But I'll tell you, we on this 

side of the House are going to be here to see that you do it. 

 

And I thank you for your time, and I'll let some of my more 

colleagues have a few words to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With regards to this 

Bill No. 3, the burning question is not whether or not people 

want tax relief.  I think no one could say that we would be 

against tax relief for people.  I think anybody from our 

constituency that knows me will know that as a councillor and 

a reeve in the past, I've worked really hard to try to keep taxes 

low and have lobbied hard to have people reduce taxes for all 

of us who are in this province. 

 

And so that's not the burning question, whether or not we want 

tax relief.  The burning question has to be for us the question of 

what do you replace that tax with if you're going to balance 

your budgets and continue to provide the same goods and 

services to the people of the province that we have been 

providing in the past and that we were going to plan on 

providing with an extended PST. 

 

Now it's unfortunate that a lot of people thought in the province 

that the PST coming off would mean that all of 

the health and education tax would come off, because they're 

going to be very disappointed even when this Bill passes to 

find out that they're still going to be paying a 7 per cent tax on 

most of the things that they were paying it on in the past. 

 

And it's unfortunate how people jump to conclusions and the 

government certainly can't be blamed for all of that.  I guess it's 

wishful thinking on the parts of people to want to think the 

best, especially when it comes to thinking about the possibility 

of getting rid of a particular amount of tax that would be really 

nice to be rid of altogether. 

 

The reality being though, that I think when the government got 

caught up in this idea of the PST coming off and being a good 

political tool to try to win the election with, I think what 

happened was that they trapped themselves into a situation 

where they now have promised balanced budgets and they've 

promised also that they won't have this tax and they don't know 

quite where to go. 

 

And I wonder if they had known all of the answers to a lot of 

the questions that were asked of me as a candidate, if they 

would have in fact introduced this particular plan to reduce this 

tax or take it off. 

 

And so before I go into some of the questions that people have 

asked me . . . and I want to do that because I want to relate to 

you what some of our research discovered, so that at least you 

will have it on the record to consider again in the future. 

 

There's no doubt in my mind that you are committed to having 

to pass this particular Bill.  It's obvious that you are trapped 

into it by your election promises and we in the opposition can 

understand your need to have to fulfil that promise. 

 

We also know that you're going to have a need to come up with 

money in the future.  And so there's a pretty good chance that 

what you'll have to do is take a look at some different taxation 

forms.  And you may come up with the idea of reintroducing a 

tax form of this nature.  And when you do that, you will find a 

new name for it obviously because you couldn't possibly use 

one that a Conservative government had come up with in the 

past.  That wouldn't look good. 

 

So what you will have to do is come up with a new name for it.  

You'll have to circle it around it a bit, come at it from a 

different direction.  But you will be applying somewhat the 

same rules.  And when you do that, perhaps you can go back 

into Hansard and find out some of the reasons why this type of 

a tax would have worked, and why it would have been a benefit 

for the people. And you can call it your own idea and maybe 

even get some brownie points going into the next election. 

 

The burning question for us at this moment is of course how do 

we now pay the bills?  And we know that this question is being 

asked in the country because it's being asked of us. And we 

know that a lot of people, as we've stated, are happy that the 

PST portion, expanded portion is coming off. 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 431 

But now they're starting to wonder, how is this money going to 

be replaced?  What are we going to do to balance the budget if 

we're going to really do this?  Or are we going to follow 

Ontario's method of financing and find ourselves with billions 

of dollars worth of more debt?  And people are really, 

genuinely concerned about that.  I am personally concerned 

about that. 

 

It is a fact that we all have to at some time in life, finance for 

different things that we have . . . perhaps a home; perhaps, in 

my case, a piece of land that I might have wanted to buy.  But 

you have to do it with some perspective of looking into the 

future as to how you're going to pay that money back. 

 

And so I'm not condemning deficit financing totally.  What I do 

condemn though, is deficit financing that is done without 

regard to how you're going to pay it back.  And the expanded 

PST was going to do a lot in that direction.  Without that, now 

we have to ask ourselves the question, how are we going to 

make up for this shortfall in revenue. 

 

And because the answer isn't in this Bill, and because the 

answer hasn't been presented to us anywhere else, we have to 

now start to speculate in our minds as to what we will have to 

defend the people of Saskatchewan against coming.  And of 

course I suppose we could always hope ultimately, Mr. 

Speaker, that perhaps the government would reconsider after 

our deliberations here and our debate, and maybe they might 

put in an amendment to this or something like that.  Although I 

don't really, genuinely expect that that would happen right 

away. 

 

I think we're talking more to the prospect of bringing in 

something in the future and hoping that this exercise here won't 

have been futile, in that they may take a look at our arguments 

at that time and introduce them into a new plan that can work 

for the people of Saskatchewan, and give them a better life and 

a better tax system with a more even kind of an approach to 

taxation. 

 

The thing is that we don't know for sure whether or not there's 

going to be a balance in taxation or whether we will be 

targeting certain sectors.  And that is a fear, especially to the 

industries within our province, because of course industries 

have a tendency to be rather large in size.  And because they're 

rather large in size they become natural targets for taxation.  

And with this PST coming off, the expanded portion, the fear is 

out there that one of them may become a target.  As I think I 

had mentioned once before, they may become a cash cow for 

the government. 

 

And we on this side of the House I guess have a responsibility 

to point that out, and a responsibility to try to stop that sort of 

imbalance from happening within our society.  And so then we 

start to wonder, if we look at fairness and balance in taxation, 

and if this is going to be taken off, this expanded PST portion 

of the tax is going to be taken off, would the payroll tax be the 

next kind of a thing that would give you the most balanced 

approach to collecting taxes from the most people? 

 

And it does kind of strike in your mind that a payroll tax could 

be a move to be taken.  It would be seen as being fair 

and balanced because most people draw a wage of some sort; 

even people that are working for a corporation take a wage out 

of the company and pay themselves a wage.  All wage earners 

working in the labour force, of course, have a wage so they're 

an easy target. 

 

Simply applying a tax to payroll would be a very positive way 

of making sure that moneys in large dollar values come in 

almost immediately, because every employer would be 

compelled to take it off before an individual got his pay 

cheque, take-home pay.  And it would be taken off much like 

your unemployment insurance or something else is taken off 

right now. 

 

And payroll taxes I guess are not new, although I haven't had 

much experience in that sort of thing.  I've read that payroll 

taxes have been done before and apparently this is something 

that could be considered. 

 

And I would think that the people of Saskatchewan might be 

genuinely looking at that possibility, and they should be 

concerned because you have the money taken off compulsorily 

before you take your money home from your work.  Whereas 

the PST, or the expanded PST at least, gave you the option of 

saying, I don't have them dollars to spend, so I won't buy that 

particular item.  And if you happened not to need a new yacht 

or something like that, you could simply say, well no thank 

you, I won't buy that, therefore I'll save the PST and I won't 

have to pay that portion of the tax. 

 

And if you happen to decide you could afford three wives and 

pay alimony to them all and all that sort of thing, that's your 

business.  With the expanded PST you could decide where you 

were going to spend your money, how much PST you were 

going to be paying.  So we felt that there was more fairness in 

this tax approach than there would be in a payroll tax or that 

system of attempting to balance out the kind of taxation system 

that we could enter into in the province. 

 

We have out in our area, of course, mostly rural community, 

and naturally in rural communities, land becomes a factor 

because agriculture is the base for a lot of our economic 

activity and people out in our area of course farm ranches and 

farms that are not just one generation; they are probably three 

and four generations old.  And when you have land being 

transferred from generation to generation it becomes always a 

concern that a government may bring in a death or succession 

duty type of tax. 

 

And we've had that kind of tax in our province before, and it 

can certainly in difficult times be the end of a farming or 

ranching operation if you get stuck with that kind of taxation in 

the event that by some misfortune of fate one of your family 

members happens to die without having first transferred his 

land or property.  And of course not everybody can presume 

when they're going to die, so sometimes they don't prepare for 

these kinds of things.  And as a result they get caught by the 

system and end up losing a family operation. 

 

And in case you're wondering just how this can work, I'll relate 

just a little brief story of an individual that came to me during 

the election campaign and said, we want you 

  



432 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

to work hard if you get elected, to make sure that we never see 

this kind of unfair taxation ever happen in our province again.  

Because he said, this is what happened to me. 

 

He said, back in the 1970s when the NDP were in power and 

had a succession duty on farm land, his father passed away 

suddenly and unexpectedly.  And by the time he got finished he 

had paid $23,000 on the home quarter in death taxes.  And he 

said as time went by, and looking with hindsight, he wished 

that he had actually given that land to the government and left 

the province and gone away, because it was that much of a 

burden.  It was as though he had had to buy that property. 

 

And of course in the last few years farm property and ranch 

land hasn't been worth all that much and it continues I guess to 

fall in value almost by the day. 

 

So anyone that has gone through good times and had to pay it 

may have survived.  But now that we've gone into the bad 

times, they look back and realize that this kind of taxation was 

so totally unfair that they wish they hadn't been there at all to 

start with. 

 

It's so totally unfair because people get caught.  And one family 

will end up having to pay it where another family doesn't.  And 

that's just not a fair way to tax people.  If you happen, by the 

luck of the draw, just to have one of your family members die 

at a rather inconvenient time, you can end up being the farm 

operation that goes broke as a result of that while others around 

you who don't have the misfortune of a death can continue to 

operate and may survive financially. 

 

And so it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we look at the different 

kinds of taxation and how we implement them to bring a 

balance and a fairness into the tax system. 

 

And I'm not saying that I like taxes.  Here again I'll repeat that 

-- I don't like taxes any better than any of you do.  But we have 

to have a tax base provincially as we do municipally and as we 

do federally, certainly in order to be able to run the country and 

in order to be able to run the province and to be able to provide 

those things that the people have come to expect to get from 

our society; we must have a tax base.  But we've got to try to 

bring in something that is fair. 

 

The other possibility that is being looked at out in our area of 

course is a replacement for the expanded PST.  It would be, of 

course, income tax.  And there's some justification to talking 

about people paying an income tax because that is based on 

your income or your ability to pay.  And certainly those that 

have income can afford to pay a tax a lot better than those that 

don't have one.  That is a given. 

 

Unfortunately though, we've had some experience in the world 

with income taxes going too far.  And this is what can happen.  

And I believe quite honestly that we've come to that point in 

our country.  I think we've come to the point where we are just 

about taxed to the highest level that we can afford to tax people 

without killing the incentive to work. 

 

Sweden, I think, is a good example of that, where social 

programs were very good.  And I won't deny that people enjoy 

them and like to have them, and it kind of grows on you to get 

something for nothing, especially the things that you need. The 

trouble being though, that at a certain point if you tax too high 

and you take everything from a person that they can possibly 

earn and you confiscate it through a tax system, then they quit 

working.  And you found a situation in Sweden where your 

professional group were all saying, why bother working any 

more than what I have to to make myself a decent living.  

Because as soon as I've made my decent living, then the 

government has such high taxation rates that they confiscate 

everything else I make. 

 

So they came to that part in life where people simply said: I've 

earned as much as I can earn without the government taking it, 

so now I quit.  And you had examples of doctors and people 

like that, dentists, who would work a half a day and then they'd 

simply say there's no use working the rest of the day, we'll go 

home.  Unfortunately what happens is then that you have 

people that need that service that can't get it because the 

professional has quit.  He has gone home. 

 

(1515) 

 

So you have a kind of a double back-up there and you don't 

have anybody willing to work and you have people needing 

services that they can't buy for love or money any more.  And 

it's all caused as a result of too high a taxation system and an 

unfair taxation system, or at least the people perceive to be 

unfair.  And when people perceive to be treated unfair, they 

quit.  They just won't work for you any more. 

 

And that's why I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if this government 

were to have known the answers to some of the questions that 

we had presented to us, and had had access to some of the 

research that we did, they might in fact have done a better job 

of planning this. 

 

One of the questions that we first got was: what does 

harmonization mean and how does it work?  And I wonder if a 

lot of the members, Mr. Speaker, really understood what the 

program really meant and what it was going to do. 

 

Harmonization is the process of restructuring the Saskatchewan 

education and health E&H tax so that it applies to the same set 

of goods and services as the federal goods and service tax, the 

GST.  This will result in a single tax system which is easier for 

business to administer and for consumers to understand. 

 

From the consumer point of view there will be no question 

about which purchases will attract which tax since all goods 

and services will be subject to either the single harmonized tax 

or no tax at all.  From the business point of view there will no 

longer be a need to identify and administer two sets of taxes.  

The collection and remittance procedure for the GST will now 

be simply extended to include provincial sales tax along with 

GST. 

 

Now I think that was the fundamental way that the tax was to 

work and a lot of people I don't think really understood that at 

the outset.  And even if they did, when 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 433 

the government finds itself in this predicament now of having 

to come up with a replacement for the PST, they may have to 

look at some form of a balanced tax system.  And they might 

want to take some of these questions and answers into 

consideration when they formulate that new plan. 

 

The next question that was presented to me by one of our 

constituents was what is a dual sales tax environment?  Well 

we did some research, Mr. Speaker, and here was the answer 

that we got. 

 

The dual sales tax environment describes a situation that results 

when the federal government's GST entered the field of retail 

sales taxation on January 1, 1991.  It essentially refers to the 

fact that two very different systems of sales taxation coexists 

side by side.  One is a retail sales tax, although it is paid by 

businesses, and the other is a value added tax which uses input 

tax credits. 

 

And you see there is considerable difference here in the 

understanding that some of the other people out in the country 

had.  So it was an exercise that was well taken to do some 

research to find out the answers to these questions. 

 

The next question we had was does this mean that sales tax will 

soon double?  And the answer we found from our research was 

that no, many of the goods on which the harmonized tax will be 

levied are already taxable under E&H tax.  This means that the 

tax levels on these goods will not change as a result of 

harmonization.  Services, however, which have not recently 

been taxed in Saskatchewan will become subject to the 

provincial tax.  We went on through our constituency as we 

went through this process, and the more we talked about this 

program, the more people seemed to have questions. 

 

And the next question I got was: the Government of 

Saskatchewan has repeatedly stated that it is opposed to the 

GST, so why is the province harmonizing E&H with the goods 

and services tax?  And I thought that was a fair question for 

people to ask because they wanted to know.  They wanted to 

know.  And so we had to do some more research and we 

discovered that Saskatchewan was opposed to the GST mainly 

because it is complex, both for businesses and consumers.  The 

GST itself is complex enough but the federal government also 

created a dual sales tax environment by introducing the GST. 

 

And you will find yourselves in that same predicament when 

you come to the point of having to introduce some kind of a tax 

form to replace the reduction in your revenue through taking 

off this expanded PST.  So it would do well for you to take 

note of the answers that were given to the people at that time.  

The federal government demonstrated that it was not going to 

back down from implementing the GST.  Therefore the only 

way to simplify the situation was to harmonize the provincial 

sales tax with the GST.  In this way everyone -- business, 

farmers, and consumers -- would be dealt with with one sales 

tax. 

 

Quite frankly, we felt that the other provinces would harmonize 

sooner or later, and of course so far only Quebec has done that 

and I'm quite frankly surprised that 

that hasn't expanded at this point.  But I'm sure it will as time 

goes by.  And I'm sure that if it doesn't then the federal 

government is probably going to introduce some other form of 

attraction so that provinces can get in tune with that tax system. 

 

Another question that we were asked by our constituents was:  

Saskatchewan is broadening its sales tax base without lowering 

tax rates.  Why not?  Well quite frankly the province needed 

the extra revenue to finance agricultural support programs at 

the time.  And at that time international grain wars were 

keeping prices unnaturally low, well below the fair market 

values for the products we were growing.  And that's why this 

was introduced.  And I think probably that the government of 

the day will find that they're going to be asked the very same 

questions, and they will find themselves having to admit that 

the answers are still going to be the same -- we need more 

revenue to cover the things that we have to supply to our 

people.  And what we have to supply through PST type of 

taxation is things like aid to farm communities.  It has not 

always been a fact that in our province that farmers were 

helped by provincial governments, but of late years we find the 

provincial governments have been getting more and more into 

that kind of area of assistance.  So they'll have to tax in order to 

be able to supply that service just as we supply health or 

anything else with the original E&H tax. 

 

The next question that we found ourselves facing was why is 

the E&H tax extended to things like restaurant meals and 

clothing and isn't it just another tax increase?  And so we had to 

explain to the people why that was and so we did some more 

research and we discovered . . . and the answer was that the tax 

base changes that took place on April 1, 1991, simplified the 

application of the GST and E&H tax by aligning the treatment 

of virtually all products sold in departments and convenience 

stores.  Therefore these products will be taxed consistently 

almost immediately.  The extra revenue that this will generate 

in 1991 would help to finance agriculture support programs 

like GRIP and NISA as well as to assist the financing of health 

and education in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think that the new government is going to find that they 

will have to address both this question and this answer in 

almost the same way.  We are still going to have to finance 

both our health system, our education system, and yes our 

agricultural people because the dilemma that agriculture finds 

itself in financially has not gone away. 

 

In fact if anything, it appears that it may be deepening and may 

be getting worse as the winter goes on.  And we've got some 

people telling me now that we may have as many as 15,000 

farms that could go broke by spring.  Now I don't know if that 

figure can be substantiated but if it can it certainly frightens me 

to a great extent. 

 

And the next question becomes -- maybe we could live without 

15,000 farmers but the real burning question here then is, who's 

next?  Is it going to be your farm or mine?  And we all seem to 

be sitting on a ladder of different levels of rungs financially, 

and every so often we pull one out and everybody drops down 

one.  So we're going to have to have some taxation in this 

province in order to support those programs that stop this 

  



434 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

rung-pulling from the bottom of this metaphoric ladder that I'm 

talking about. 

 

Now the next question we're asked when we went through our 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, was what would be done with the 

extra revenue that this tax was expected to generate.  And of 

course I don't suppose it really needed an answer to be able to 

find a way to spend money, but we thought we'd better do some 

research and come up with what would sound like a 

professional answer and the following was the one we got.  The 

extra revenue that is generated for the provincial government 

by harmonization would be used primarily to fund the new 

agriculture support programs, the GRIP and NISA.  Since 

agriculture remains the backbone of Saskatchewan's economy, 

the government considered this money would be well spent. 

 

And I would think that the government of the day would find 

themselves in the same predicament with that situation as the 

government was last spring.  GRIP and NISA are a reality.  We 

heard the Minister of Rural Development explain to us here 

just the other morning how so many millions of dollars have 

now been paid out through the GRIP program in the first 

payment. 

 

And where did that money come from, Mr. Speaker?  We know 

very well that a portion of that money had to come from the 

provincial government because there is a signed agreement 

between the federal government and the provincial government 

to fund these programs, both the NISA and the GRIP.  And the 

GRIP program, with that payment, automatically meant that the 

provincial government had to come up with some of that 

revenue. 

 

And now that the PST that originally was put on and designed 

to pay for that is being taken off, that expanded portion, we 

have serious reservations as to whether or not this province can 

pay those bills without further increasing the deficit.  In fact I 

don't honestly think there's a possibility that that could happen.  

The deficit has to go up.  Because I think it's almost a given 

that we can't get the kind of bumper crops that we had last year 

every year in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is an amazing thing to me that on the first year we were 

protected with the public purse being there to back farmers in 

the way that GRIP did, we had a bumper crop in this province.  

Isn't that the irony of the day? 

 

But the reality of life, Mr. Speaker, is that we won't be able to 

expect that to happen every year.  And as we go into next year 

with the government treasury being committed to this program 

through signed contracts now that are guaranteed to be four 

years in duration minimum and another three to go, because 

every farmer has the option to get out next year, but he has to 

remain in for three years before he can get out.  So the public 

purse is tied to that program for a minimum of four years; one 

year gone by, three years for sure. 

 

The chances of getting three more bumper crops to take the 

provincial government off the hook just doesn't exist in my 

mind.  And the international prices then are the only thing that 

could save the government from having to spend hundreds of 

millions of dollars on those programs. 

And those hundreds of millions of dollars won't be saved 

unless that price of international products for grains and 

oilseeds goes up significantly, not just slightly but 

significantly.  And with the removal of the PST -- which was 

the tax that was aimed and designed to pay for that Bill -- now 

being removed, we've got to take a look at where we're going 

to go to get that money back. 

 

As I went through my constituency I mentioned we had been 

asked a number of questions, and the next one I have written 

down here that folks asked us was, why do you have to 

increase taxes instead of cutting expenditures to reduce the 

deficit?  And of course our government will be interested in the 

answer because they have said that that was what they were 

going to do. 

 

The answer we got from our expert staff was that reducing the 

deficit, while remaining a priority for the Government of 

Saskatchewan, is not the main reason for introducing a 

harmonized sales tax.  The underlying concept behind 

harmonization is simplicity in administration in the sales tax 

area.  The efficiencies that this initiates is expected to generate 

. . . will contribute to a stronger Saskatchewan economy and is 

a necessary first step in dealing with the deficit. 

 

Revenues generated by broading the sales tax base will also be 

directed in various ways to strengthening the economy.  And 

it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we have a strong economy in 

Saskatchewan.  And it was important to note in the answer the 

simplicity that this harmonization brought -- a simplicity that 

we are now not going to have because when we took the steps 

in this Bill no. 3 to remove the expanded PST, we also 

removed the possibility of the simplicity. 

 

And here again, I wonder if the members recall that when we 

joined the two taxes together, the PST and the GST, that meant 

that we were going to use one administration, one bureaucracy 

to collect the money.  Now we've got two.  We've got a set over 

here and a set over there.  We're paying this bunch over here 3 

to $5 million a year to collect the tax.  We've got that bunch 

over there being paid 3 to $5 million a year to collect exactly 

the same amount of tax from exactly the same people, and we 

don't have enough sense to put the two together and just hire 

one.  Three to five million dollars doesn't seem like much 

money in a provincial treasury but it sure would look good in 

my pocket-book. 

 

(1530) 

 

I think maybe that if the government, Mr. Speaker, had taken a 

little bit more time to look this matter over and hadn't gotten 

themselves caught up in an election promise that they have to 

probably fulfil, they might have reconsidered. 

 

And I still believe as I go along here that there's a chance that 

they will have to reintroduce some kind of a Bill like this in the 

future.  And if they do, I reiterate that I'm quite sure that they 

may want to come back to some of these questions and answers 

and this kind of discussion to try to find out how they can make 

a program work so that the PST in fact, if it is cancelled now, if 

it is brought back in some other form so that it in fact will work 

next time, and 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 435 

maybe they won't take the same kind of lumps over it that the 

past government did.  Because we recognize that the country 

cannot run without having revenue. 

 

Now another question that was asked me as I went through my 

campaign last summer was, during the first stages of the 

harmonization process, will my business be eligible for income 

tax credits?  And the answer we got back was no.  The first 

stage of the harmonization process, extending from April 1 to 

December 31, 1991, will involve a general broadening of the 

provincial sales tax base to correspond with that of the GST. 

 

Many of the administrative details, including the input tax 

credit mechanism for business, will require an extra time to be 

finalized.  These will be introduced when full harmonization 

takes place in January 1992, and obviously that won't be 

happening now if we pass this Bill.  But it's still interesting to 

note what could have happened and what can be used if you 

decide that you have to reintroduce some kind of a Bill like 

this. 

 

Next question was what happens if I buy something in another 

province and bring it into Saskatchewan?  And I think a lot of 

folks never considered this because this sort of brings into play 

this cross-border shopping thing.  And if you'll put that into 

your mind and think about it for a minute, cross-border 

shopping a lot of people didn't think was really tied to the 

expanded sales tax.  But it was tied to it. 

 

The trouble was there wasn't really a good enough educational 

process, I think, put into play in the province in order for 

people to understand how this process could in fact really help 

Saskatchewan in other ways other than just filling the 

pocket-book of the provincial treasury. 

 

So the answer was, as the case with the current E&H tax, you 

must follow certain guide-lines for self remittance of applicable 

taxes if you make purchases outside of the province.  The exact 

guide-lines that will be in force under harmonization will be 

developed in the coming months. 

 

That of course won't have to be done now, but the bottom line 

there in my mind was that you really did owe the tax.  Even 

though you went outside the province and bought those goods, 

you really did owe that tax to the provincial government when 

you brought that good across the border into the province. 

 

And a good example of that would be if you bought a new car 

in Medicine Hat.  When you bring a new car from Medicine 

Hat you don't pay the sales tax for Saskatchewan in Medicine 

Hat.  That's a bonus to you to buy it there.  You buy it cheaper.  

Now unfortunately for the buyer, he's got to get caught in that 

situation and in that scenario because when he comes to 

Saskatchewan he must register that car with the government to 

get a licence and insurance.  And at that time they charge you 

the 7 per cent and you haven't had such a good deal as you 

really might have thought you had. 

 

So the unfortunate part of that is of course that we don't register 

everything and it puts people's honesty to the real test.  And of 

course people being what they are, they sometimes will forget, 

and they just don't remember to 

send those taxes in.  So they find themselves going out more 

and more often to buy outside the province and that puts a lot 

of pressure on our businesses here at home. 

 

And the reality there was that with especially farmers and 

ranchers along the borders, if they were sometimes a little 

closer to a town over in Alberta or Manitoba, they might find 

themselves picking up their antifreeze over there and bringing 

it home and forgetting to pay the tax.  Whereas now under the 

new system of the PST they would have got that back.  And as 

a result of getting it back every month or three months, 

whichever option they chose to apply to get their tax back, the 

reality then is that they wouldn't have been tempted to go over 

there to buy it, because they would have got it back here.  And 

so the dealer at home would have had that business.  And it 

made us competitive businesswise. 

 

And I can go into that to some detail in the oil and gas industry 

as well, Mr. Speaker, because the same rules apply there that 

apply to farmers and ranchers. 

 

The next question I got on my journeys was, what if the 

businesses sell something to a foreigner or to someone from 

another province for that matter.  Do I still collect the 

provincial sales tax?  And it bothered me because I really didn't 

know the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, so again we went to 

research and we asked them to try and find us the answer.  And 

their answer was that during the phase-in period from April 1 

to December 31, 1991, the old education and health tax rules 

with respect to out-of-province sales would remain in effect, 

and the new administrative rules for full harmonization 

beginning in January of 1992 would be developed and finalized 

during that phase-in period. 

 

Now I think probably the best usage you can get out of that 

particular question and answer in light of Bill No. 3 being 

before us, would be the hope that the government would take 

that into consideration, if they ever happen to be finding 

themselves in a need to bring this type of a tax back into place, 

or some form of it in order to get that tax balance that we've all 

been looking for. 

 

The next question I was asked was, will I now have to pay 

provincial sales tax on big ticket farm items.  And of course 

that was a natural question in my area where agriculture is still 

the base of our economy.  The answer was no, the harmonized 

provincial sales tax will correspond to the GST list of tax free 

farm input purchases.  This list contains all of the major farm 

items from tractors to grain bins to herbicides, and a whole host 

of other things as well that I won't go into mentioning. 

 

The next question was do I have to become a collector of tax 

on my sales of agricultural products?  The answer to that 

question was no.  The new provincial sales system will adopt 

the GST legislation for determining what type of farm output 

sales are zero rated, not subject to sales tax.  This includes all 

the common agricultural products from grain to livestock to 

eggs. 

 

Now isn't that amazing, Mr. Speaker, that all these things could 

have been taken into consideration, and a lot of folks never 

ever did really find all that out.  And I guess probably we have 

to say that the educational system here  



436 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

wasn't probably as good as it should have been.  And I hope 

that if the present government finds themselves in the situation 

of having to bring in a tax that they will have learned one 

lesson from all of this, and that is that you have to really 

educate folks if you're going to increase a tax because if they 

don't understand it they're certainly going to be against you 

when you bring it in. 

 

And so I'll say again that while this Bill deals with removing a 

tax, we see the need to bring a new tax in in its place probably, 

and we're hoping that this discussion will help the government 

in its deliberation of how to introduce a fair and balanced tax 

system for the province so that they themselves won't fall into 

the same pitfalls that the last government fell into. 

 

The next question that I have down that we discovered most 

folks were asking was: will the harmonized E&H tax use the 

GST definition on snack foods?  And of course I guess most 

people think that a few potato chips aren't that important.  But 

the reality is that a lot of people do eat a lot of snack foods, and 

it's a big item out there.  And a lot of folks were quite 

concerned. 

 

The answer we got was yes, the harmonization means that the 

tax base definition for the two taxes would be the same.  For 

snack foods these definitions would take effect on April 1, '91 

and Saskatchewan would use the GST definition for restaurant 

meals, snack foods, and basic groceries to determine what is 

taxable and what is not. 

 

It is our hope that the difficulties of the GST in handling 

certain snack foods such as yogurt and baked goods would be 

simplified over the coming months.  And certainly that was 

being worked on.  And I would suggest to the new government 

that this might be one area where you would really question 

things if you ever went into this form of taxation to replace 

this, now being cancelled, expanded PST. 

 

Somehow, in my mind, I think possibly that part could have 

been adjusted or left out, and we wouldn't have had to have that 

in.  And maybe it could have still been harmonized to the point 

. . . or synchronized so that we could have used one collection 

agency without having to collect both sides of the tax on things 

like snack foods and six doughnuts instead of 12, or whatever 

some of those definitions were that all of you heard during the 

election campaign. 

 

The next question that we heard was: the merchants of 

Lloydminster who have to compete with their Alberta 

counterparts who do not have to collect an Alberta sales tax, 

how are they affected?  And the answer was that we have a 

policy in place to handle the discrepancies in Alberta and 

Saskatchewan's taxes now in that region.  That policy would 

remain in place, and we will be examining the issue in 1992. 

 

Well the reality of course of that statement is that Lloydminster 

was given a special exemption to having to pay the provincial 

sales tax some time ago.  And that is still in effect, and it's a 

shame that we can't all afford somehow to live without taxes 

and we could have that program in the whole province.  But 

obviously I don't think that will happen very soon, even though 

a lot of 

people did think that that in fact was what was going to happen 

when they went through the electoral process and heard that the 

PST was going to be removed. And they didn't hear the part 

expanded PST in that statement. They sort of wishfully thought 

that it would be all of it.  And they just heard the PST's going 

to be coming off; they didn't hear the word expanded put in 

front of it. 

 

And I don't really blame the members opposite for that.  You've 

got to blame people I guess for jumping to conclusions, and 

they have to take some responsibility for their thoughts 

themselves as well. 

 

The next question we used to get was, which government is 

going to do what in the administration of this tax and what do 

you mean by a commission after 1993?  And the new 

government might want to take that into account because the 

answer here could help them to formulate some of their plans. 

 

The answer was the federal government would administrate the 

harmonization tax on a day-to-day basis.  The province would 

direct the audit responsibility in Saskatchewan.  And that was 

good, because we were going to direct the audit part of it. And 

I think any provincial government, and especially the one we 

have here, would want to be sure that if they get into any kind 

of a tax deal with the feds in the future as a result of having to 

remove this tax, and if you're looking at a new one, you're 

going to have to take a look possibly at doing something with 

the federal government, be sure that you do consider getting a 

hold of this idea of being in charge of the audit.  Because that 

gives you basically control of seeing to it that things are done 

right and that you get your share. 

 

The independent GST commission idea was examined during 

the federal-provincial national sales tax discussion before 1989.  

And the commission would be independent from Revenue 

Canada and its provincial counterpart.  And it would direct the 

day-to-day operations of the harmonized tax. 

 

And that's important if you're going to set up a commission. 

And I believe that you probably will have to find a way of 

producing revenue in the future, and you may have to go into 

some kind of a joint program with the government. And it's 

important that you do have commissions set up to make things 

right, and it's important that you take these kind of ideas into 

consideration. 

 

Next question we got was, now that I have begun adjusting to 

the GST, will I have to reinvent my entire farm accounting 

procedure again?  That was naturally a question that we got, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our area, being that we are to a large 

extent a farming community. 

 

Then it was a big concern, because farmers are trained to work 

with the land, and they're trained to work with an awful lot of 

chemicals and an awful lot of machinery, and they know a lot 

of things about a lot of things.  But they're not accountants, and 

they're not lawyers, so it was important to them to know just 

how this program would affect them.  And the new government 

might want to take into account the answer there in the event 

that they do 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 437 

decide to reintroduce some kind of a taxation form to bring in 

the revenue that they're going to lose as a result of cancelling 

this particular expanded PST through Bill 3. 

 

Now the answer was no; the harmonization tax will be 

designed to fit right in with the filing system of the GST.  Once 

the tax is fully harmonized, all that will be changed are the 

numbers you enter on your GST form.  Once you have learned 

the GST system, harmonization should pose no additional 

adjustment problem.  You see, you were just filling out one 

form and doubling the figures in most cases.  It just worked out 

naturally. 

 

And you can see why farmers and ranchers were starting to 

change their mind as the member opposite over here had 

pointed out, from Arm River, in his statements.  So you can see 

why, even after the election, they had come to him and 

admitted that they'd voted for one of the other parties because 

they thought the PST was so bad. 

 

But after they had thought about it and after the election 

process was over and they'd gotten a chance to study it further 

and realize that they actually had an advantage here . . . they 

were going to get all of the PST and all of the GST back on one 

application form.  This was a bonus for farmers and ranchers 

and people in business and industry.  And a lot of them didn't 

understand that at the time. 

 

And so we, I guess, who are members of the Conservative 

Party, have to admit that we didn't educate the folks out there 

well enough.  Otherwise they would have seen the light of that 

before the election.  And we don't fault you folks for that, but 

we do ask you to take note of it if you're planning on bringing 

in some kind of a program in the future, to make sure that you 

use these guide-lines so that you can produce a fair and 

equitable tax system.  Obviously you're going to have to have 

one some time to replace the revenues that you're now losing. 

 

The next question I had from my constituents was that on April 

1 taxes on tobacco were increasing, and why not on liquor?  

And that was kind of a frivolous type of a thing, I suppose, but 

to some people this is very important.  Now I don't particularly 

smoke at all, so I suppose maybe it's not of a concern to me, 

but I'm sure that some people do. 

 

(1545) 

 

So just for the record, I'll read you what our answer was in case 

you ever need it in your deliberations on a new tax.  The 

answer was, increases in the tax on tobacco products will raise 

over 25 million per year and will increase the deterrent to the 

consumption of this harmful product.  The increase also places 

Saskatchewan in line with other provinces which include 

tobacco products in their sales tax base. 

 

The province taxes liquor for similar reasons, however 

previous increases in provincial mark-ups and taxes have 

brought Saskatchewan liquor taxes to a point where they are 

already high in relation to other jurisdictions.  To further raise 

liquor taxes at this time might jeopardize the province's 

brewing and hotel industries.  And for sure we have to be 

careful of that.  For simplicity purposes, the tax rate on liquor 

will be adjusted to match the general rate 

while prices will be maintained through adjustments to the 

mark-ups. 

 

I think possibly when we take off this tax in Bill 3, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we have to consider again where we're going to make 

up that revenue.  And again the liquor, tobacco, and hotelier 

business is a natural target, just as some of our larger industries 

are natural targets as cash cows.  It has in the past always been 

that liquor and tobacco are a taxation cash cow for provincial 

governments. 

 

And I would suggest to the new government that they take a 

real hard look at what they do if they decide to introduce new 

taxes and not kill our hotelier industry because they are in 

enough trouble already without having some more heaped on 

their backs. 

 

The next question we got was, won't my carrying costs increase 

under a harmonized tax system?  The answer was no, because 

most major farm expenses are tax free, carrying costs between 

time and payments and time in refund of the harmonized tax 

should not amount to very much.  Most farmers have the option 

of filing annually, quarterly, or monthly, depending on their 

accounting methods.  The more often you file, the more often 

your returns arrive, and the less carrying charges you incur.  

And I think that was an important feature in the protest and one 

that is now not going to be in play as we determine to remove 

this tax if we pass this particular Bill. 

 

And of course I suppose there's always the hope that maybe 

someone would reconsider after all these remarks and they 

might decide to do something else. 

 

The next question we got . . . And just in passing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, those that enjoy heckling in the House won't enjoy it 

so much when they realize that I'm handicapped and don't hear 

and as a result am not hearing them.  All I hear is noise.  So if 

you really want me to know what you're saying, you have to 

write it down and send a note.  It's probably the handiest thing 

that a politician could ever have; I've been turning it off pretty 

regularly this afternoon. 

 

The next question we got, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and I think I 

should carry on so that the folks across don't go to sleep on me 

-- the next question we got from our constituents was, how can 

the government argue that it is saving businesses administrative 

costs when 130,000 Saskatchewan businesses must comply 

with the new tax while only 35,000 complied with the old tax?  

And the answer to that was when harmonization was 

completed, businesses in Saskatchewan would no longer have 

to comply with the E&H tax but instead will be complying with 

the tax which is identified in nature to the federal GST. 

 

Since 130,000 businesses in Saskatchewan which must comply 

with the new provincial tax will already be complying with the 

federal GST and only one tax administration will be in effect, 

there will be very little additional costs associated with 

complying with the new harmonized tax.  The Canadian 

Federation of Independent Business has estimated that the cost 

of complying with the provincial sales tax is about $1,380 

  



438 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

per business per year.  Therefore the 35,000 Saskatchewan 

businesses who must currently comply with the E&H tax will 

save tens of millions of dollars in administration costs. 

 

That was pretty significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think 

possibly the members across should take note of that because 

they're going to have to come up with a very comprehensive 

plan of taxation in the future if they're going to balance our 

economy. 

 

It should also be mentioned that there is an unfair compliance 

cost burden placed on businesses that must comply with the 

current E&H tax relative to other businesses which do not have 

to comply.  Currently 35,000 businesses incur the entire cost of 

complying with the E&H tax.  Once we have harmonized, the 

compliance cost burden will be shared by all businesses. 

 

Now furthermore the current compliance cost burden is born 

disproportionately by small businesses, and the CFIB 

(Canadian Federation of Independent Business) estimated that 

small businesses incur compliance costs of 22 cents per dollar 

of tax collected while large businesses incur costs of 1 cent per 

dollar on tax collected.  Now isn't that significant, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker -- that much difference in taxation in just the way you 

handle things? 

 

And the new government of course is being faced with the need 

to raise revenues if they're going to balance the budget, are 

going to have to go into a very complex system of taxation if 

they want it to be fair across the board through the whole 

province. 

 

So my suggestion is that you take these measures into account 

and include them when you decide to vote this particular Bill 

through and you decide that you're going to take the expanded 

PST off.  I suggest to you that you are going to fall short in 

revenues and you're going to have to bring in a new tax system 

of some sort, and I hope that you will take these matters into 

consideration. 

 

The next question we had gotten was, what will the two 

governments save in administration costs of harmonization?  

And the answer to that is interesting.  It is expected that about 

$5 million per year will be saved from a single administration 

of the GST and the provincial sales tax.  Now they thought at 

that time $5 million -- that's a lot of dollars.  This saving will 

be realized over time as staffing levels reduced, and attrition 

and administration efficiencies are realized. 

 

Currently about 250 federal and provincial employees are 

involved in the present dual sales tax environment.  It is 

expected that considerable reductions will take place over the 

time once the two sales taxes are fully harmonized.  And it is 

important to note that no staff lay-offs would result from 

harmonization.  Reductions in personnel would occur from 

attrition. 

 

Now that was important because people are important in our 

lives.  And you can't just go out and say, well here we've got 

one group of people collecting the tax and there you've got 

another group; we'll fire this bunch and let them do the work.  

Because then you've got these group of people without a job 

and that wouldn't be fair. 

And so we caution the new government that if you go into a 

program like this, and I assure you that my feeling is very 

strong that the federal government is going to be pressing you 

to go along with some kind of a program of a harmonized or 

synchronized tax system -- you can call it a different name if 

you want -- and in that process they're going to be pointing out, 

here you can save some money by letting this group collect the 

tax and this group here won't have to be paid any more. 

 

So you'll have to be very careful that you treat your labour right 

and use a formula that will allow attrition to be the measuring 

stick of how you reduce those jobs and reduce that cost.  And 

take care of your people because people are the real thing that 

matter in our society.  If it wasn't for people, we wouldn't have 

to have taxes to start with.  So let's treat them right and be 

careful with this. 

 

Next question was, how could you say harmonization will be 

more simple since the GST creates a lot of paperwork?  Now 

doesn't the Saskatchewan GST just add paperwork?  And the 

answer to that of course was no. 

 

The fact that the GST is firmly in place means that businesses 

dealing with the tax now face the paperwork associated with 

the GST-styled taxes.  It had already become a reality, and we 

were convinced at that time that there was no way that we were 

going to get the government to cancel GST.  So not being able 

to cancel the GST, then this answer follows through.  However 

the harmonization of the E&H tax with the GST actually 

eliminates the paperwork formerly associated with the 

provincial retail sales tax. 

 

Once fully harmonized, the businesses collecting the two taxes 

will only have to report to one sales tax administration.  That 

will be a reduction in paperwork.  And this will be similar to 

the fact that businesses without income tax on behalf of their 

employees only have to deal with one income tax 

administration.  And so you see it actually was going to bring 

some benefits right down to the business of keeping the 

records. 

 

Next question we ran into, Mr. Deputy, was that do you think 

the harmonization can work without other provinces getting 

involved?  And the answer to that was yes.  Since 

Saskatchewan sales tax generally applied to activities inside the 

provincial borders, if the other provinces harmonized fairly 

soon, there is some possibility of developing a true national 

sales tax.  And I really believe that we should have had a 

national sales tax strategy associated with this whole thing.  

But of course that wasn't in play at the time and so that didn't 

happen. 

 

But I hope that this government will take note of that and push 

hard to try to have a national approach to taxation.  Because a 

long time ago, if we in this province had synchronized our tax 

system with Manitoba and Alberta, we'd be so much better off 

now in terms of being able to administrate on a balanced basis 

between provinces and having people feel that in Saskatchewan 

we were getting the same deal that people in Alberta, for 

example, are getting.  And instead of having them charged 700 

or $800 per family for medicare and us having a sales tax, we 

could have harmonized. 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 439 

And I'm not going to stand here and fall into the trap of saying 

which side has got the better plan.  The truth of the matter is 

that either plan works.  They are working for people on both 

sides.  But it would be so much more beautiful for us in 

Saskatchewan if we had one or the other for both of us and 

were all equalized and balanced. 

 

And wouldn't that be a great advantage for a government who 

finds itself in the kind of position that governments in 

Saskatchewan have always had, and that is to have the sales tax 

encouraging people to leave the province to do their shopping. 

 

Now the next question was, do you think that harmonization 

can work . . . No, I'd better get on to the next page here.  I think 

I already did that one. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I wonder if I might 

have leave of the Assembly to introduce a guest here today. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I want to draw members' attention to 

Simon de Jong, the Member of Parliament for Regina 

Qu'Appelle who has joined us on the floor.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 3 (continued) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We're very happy to have guests introduced, 

and certainly it was nice to have a chance to have a drink of 

water. 

 

I'll carry on with the answer to that question, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, just in case some of the members may have missed 

the question.  I'll just repeat that; it's a very brief one.  Now it 

said, what is the GST advisory committee?  A lot of folks I 

don't think realize that there was going to be such a committee. 

And in case the government does decide to vote on this 

particular Bill and remove the PST, they may find themselves 

in a position where they'll have to bring in some new kind of a 

tax system, and it may need such a committee.  And it would 

be good for them to understand how the old process was 

planned so that they could bring it into play in any of their new 

programs. 

 

The answer was that the GST advisory committee was 

appointed by the Hon. Lorne Hepworth at that time.  And of 

course the Minister of Finance now is someone else, and that 

person would be in charge of a new committee.  And on May 

16, 1990, it was made up of a number of Saskatchewan citizens 

who represented a diversity of groups and interests including 

business, labour, consumers, and farmers and was chaired at 

that time by a Mr. Wright from the Government of 

Saskatchewan.  And the committee tabled its report on August 

27, 1990. 

In it were several recommendations addressing the questions of 

Saskatchewan's response to the introduction of the GST.  Chief 

among these recommendations was that Saskatchewan should 

move as quickly as possible to harmonizing the education and 

health tax with the GST. 

 

Now it just goes to say that a little bit of research is good, I 

guess.  And they did that at that time, and I'm sure that a new 

government would have to do that same sort of thing.  You 

would have to set up that kind of a committee in order to make 

sure that you didn't fall into the pitfalls of maybe introducing 

something too quickly or getting it mixed up so that you 

wouldn't in fact have that balance of taxation that was really 

intended to do to start with. 

 

The next question we ran into through our campaign out in the 

country was, when will legislation be introduced to harmonize 

the provincial sales tax?  And of course that was already done.  

And I don't think I have to bother you with the answer because 

I think you already all know that.  But it was a concern to our 

people out there because they were preparing it that time for 

the bookwork. 

 

(1600) 

 

And the next question was, why is Saskatchewan not following 

Manitoba in enforcing tax extra pricing?  Now that's kind of a 

complicated word, isn't it?  And so the answer was the GST 

legislation allows businesses to choose how they will display 

the application of the GST to the prices.  There are two options: 

tax included in the price or tax added at the cash register, tax 

extra.  Now one method may be more appropriate than the 

other, and this may only become evident after the tax has been 

in place for many months. 

 

We currently are in the early stages in the evolution of the GST 

in Canada and it has only been fully operational less than, at 

that time, two months. But of course now it was a long time.  

And I feel that Manitoba's move was premature. 

 

I understand that it is currently . . . contrary, rather, to the 

European experience with value added taxes.  There most 

consumers apparently want to know the final price including 

taxes before they step to the till.  Nevertheless I appreciate the 

need for consumers to be able to comparison shop. And we are 

keeping an eye on the situation. 

 

Now looking back on that, Mr. Speaker, my thinking is that the 

government if they introduce such a tax to replace this removal 

of the PST is that they might take a look at that European 

experience a little closer.  I've had the experience of being there 

and found that in Switzerland, for example, they have a 22 per 

cent value added tax on their goods.  And the folks there don't 

really mind paying it all because they know that it's for the 

good of their nation, and of course they also have the 

advantage that they . . . with about a 12 million population, 

they also have about 12 million tourists going through their 

country each year.  And so if they charge everybody extra taxes 

that's coming through, then they are getting a lot of tax dollars 

to run their country from the tourist trade that they wouldn't 

have if they didn't have a value added tax. 

  



440 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

And they're very happy with that because then the government 

can give them concessions in other areas. And that's very 

important to a population because if you have taxes from a big 

group of people from outside coming in to help you pay for 

your country and the operation of your country, you can have 

better highways, you can have better hospitals, you can have 

better everything.  And you do it at the expense of the 

consumers that are naturally going to be there because tourists 

just like to buy things. 

 

As we went on through the process of last fall, we found that 

folks were full of questions.  And the next one that we had was, 

how would the family tax credit work.  Now I think it's 

important that the government realize that when they take this 

expanded PST off in Bill 3, that they are going to be killing this 

part of that particular legislation and this is something that's 

going to affect some folks that really genuinely could have 

used the money. 

 

For example, you take folks on minimum wage or folks that 

happened perhaps through no fault of themselves to not be able 

to find work and maybe have to go to Social Services programs 

for assistance.  This is money that $200 per child was coming 

in in cash.  And you had to spend -- I think one of the members 

told me -- over $2,700 on these taxable items in order to spend 

$200.  And of course people who are in that kind of financial 

situation don't spend that kind of money on their kids, I'm 

pretty sure.  So they actually would have had a net gain here of 

some dollars that they could have used for those children in 

their families or for the rest of the members of the family. 

 

But I'll read you the answers so that the members opposite can 

take it into account and perhaps they'd want to continue with 

that program even with this part of the legislation having been 

taken off. 

 

Now the family tax credit is a refundable tax credit equal to the 

number of tax filer's dependent children times $200.  The tax 

filer with two children would be entitled to a tax credit of $400, 

and the credit is phased out at the rate of 5 per cent of family 

income exceeding $24,355. 

 

It was a really quite fair thing because those people with higher 

incomes that didn't need it, of course, then weren't going to get 

it, were they?  See families with two dependent children and 

incomes up to $32,355 would benefit from the family tax credit 

and of course -- but not very much -- on a lower basis and up to 

that point.  And the threshold is the same one used for the 

federal government for the GST credit and will be indexed 

annually for inflation.  And I think that's a fair way of doing it. 

 

The credit will be paid four times a year rather, with the first 

instalment coming in April of this year and that was 1991.  And 

for a lower income family with two children the combined 

federal-provincial payment will equal $245 each quarter or 

$980 per year.  And the refundability of the tax credit means 

that families who do not incur tax liability, for example those 

on social assistance, will be entitled to credit. 

 

Now I think that might be something the government might 

consider doing for folks in our province, even 

though we do maybe pass this Bill and remove the sales tax -- 

the expanded sales tax.  This portion might be something for 

the government to consider to help people in situation of lower 

incomes and help their families to continue. 

 

In general the family income eligibility of the family tax credit 

is determined on the basis of family income rather than the 

income of the individual tax filer.  The combined incomes of 

married couples and couples who are living together are the 

common parents of a child, will determine eligibility for the 

credit . . . (inaudible) . . . however only one parent will be 

eligible for the credit.   For example, a two-income couple with 

two children and the per year combined income of $31,000 will 

be entitled to an annual family tax credit of $67.75 on the basis 

of a threshold of $24,350 and a tax back rate of 5 per cent.  

Eligibility of the Saskatchewan tax reduction in contrast is 

determined on the basis of the tax filer.  Tax filers in 

two-income families determine entitlement separately without 

including the other partner's income. 

 

Refundability. The refundability of the tax credit means that it 

is refundable to the extent that the credit exceeds tax otherwise 

payable.  If the taxes are payable the total amount of the credit 

will be refunded.  After social assistance the recipients do not 

incur tax liabilities.  They will receive the total amount of the 

family tax credit . . . (inaudible) . . . about 24,000 children are 

part of families receiving social assistance.  Another 6,600 

children are part of families receiving benefits under the 

Family Income Plan. 

 

The family tax credit differs from the Saskatchewan tax 

reduction which is not refundable.  The reduction, at the most, 

will reduce Saskatchewan taxes owing to zero.  The tax filer's 

eligibility of $800 of the reduction with a tax liability of $400 

will utilize only $400 of the reduction. 

 

The quarterly payments. Now a married tax filer below the 

threshold level of $24,355 with two children is entitled to $400 

tax credit.  And it will be $580 with a quarterly payment of 

$145 and the combined quarterly payment would be $245. 

 

The threshold.  The threshold is the level above which the 

amount of entitlement is phased out or taxed back.  There is an 

income level at which the credit will be entirely phased out so 

that families at or above this level will not not be entitled to the 

credit.  The threshold level of $24,355 for the 1989 taxation 

year was used to determine credit payments for December 1990 

and April 1991.  And the threshold, which is increased for the 

1990 tax year, of $24,769 will be used to determine credits, 

payments for July 1991 and October 1991 and January 1992 

and April 1992. 

 

Now this program is all going to die with the passing of this 

Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And here we have money that is 

being paid in cash dollars to people that needed it, who were on 

the lower end of our income scale, and now they won't be 

getting that benefit. 

 

And I think that that is something that is going to be a bit of a 

shock to them, because they have become used to it already 

now.  They've gotten those dollars for the past 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 441 

little while.  And somehow I think maybe the government 

should consider or reconsider keeping this portion of the 

program in effect for those folks so that that shock of losing 

that income won't be so great on their families. 

 

And I think we all agree that there are people that do need 

financial assistance in our society, and here was a good vehicle 

to do it.  It was based on fairness, it was based on caps of so 

many dollars for certain income levels.  And that was fair and 

reasonable.  And I think it ought to be reconsidered by the 

government opposite. 

 

The next question that we got was that the federal government 

provides a GST credit for individuals; what assistance are you 

providing to low income individuals to defray the cost of 

harmonization?  The answer to that was that this government 

has established support for the family as a fundamental factor 

of Saskatchewan tax policy, and for this reason we have 

directed resources to assist families who have additional costs 

of raising children rather than individuals. 

 

The general note there was that there is no income tax offset 

provided to low income individuals as the cost was prohibitive.  

As well, the assistance would be going to students and to 

two-income couples with no children.  Social assistance 

recipients will receive some additional benefits due to higher 

living expenses incurred as a result of harmonization at the 7 

per cent rate. 

 

Now of course these are rather technical things, but if the 

government is planning on helping these folks . . . that this 

assistance is going to be coming from now because they're not 

going to get it any more when this Bill passes.  And if they 

reconsider this, they will probably want to keep these same 

kind of formulas in mind in order to promote fairness.  Because 

obviously if you're going to go in to a program like that, Mr. 

Deputy, it would be too expensive just to give it across the 

board to everyone.  And if you start with things like means 

tests and that sort of thing, it gets very complicated, very 

expensive.  And here you have a program that's already been 

laid out that the government could sort of at least adopt in 

principle using those kinds of guide-lines and they could bring 

out a really rather fair system of helping to assist those folks 

that are presently getting assistance that won't be getting it once 

this Bill No. 3 is passed and the expanded PST is killed. 

 

And that is one of the reasons, Mr. Deputy, that I'm so opposed 

to killing this Bill, is the fact that these folks have gotten used 

to the idea of having that $200 per child tax credit and now 

they won't be getting that.  And I think it's very important, 

especially going into Christmas season here, that we have these 

kind of programs not just jerked away from people that were 

sort of expecting to get some cash relief.  And we know that 

$200 is not much money to me and you and probably the rest 

of the folks here, but to a lot of people out there a couple of 

hundred dollars per child is a lot of money and it counts, 

especially just before Christmas. 

 

The next question we were asked always here was, will the 

harmonized sales . . . the provincial sales tax be a fair tax?  And 

the answer to that was -- from our researchers again that 

researched this -- was that the Government of 

Saskatchewan had taken steps to ensure that the harmonization 

package is fair as possible. 

 

The family tax credit will provide offsets to lower income 

families for the additional taxes resulting from the 

harmonization; raising their high income surtax from 12 to 15 

per cent will increase the share of taxes paid by higher income 

earners.  Taxpayers in the long run will benefit from 

harmonization through lower costs and increased economic 

activities.  Increased economic activities will lead to more 

government revenues which can reduce the need to raise taxes 

in the future.  And that I think was very important. 

 

The general note that they had added here was that even though 

the higher income taxpayers will pay more sales tax than lower 

income taxpayers under the harmonized system, the new 

system does not enhance the progressiveness of the tax system 

because lower and middle income earners will experience a 

greater percentage rise in taxes.  However the high income 

surtax does increase the progressivity of the measures.  The 

individuals earning 250,000 per year will pay a thousand 

dollars more in surtax due to the increase in rates. 

 

Now that brought fairness into the program.  And here we have 

this Bill 3 going to be passed any time now.  And when it's 

passed we're not only going to lose the tax credits, but we're 

also going to lose what was a very fair and broad based tax 

system.  And in its place we're going to have to have either a 

tremendous amount of reduction in expenditures, or else we're 

going to have to have an increase in taxation in some other 

field or with some other kind of tax based program. 

 

And I can't for the life of me imagine what that tax system is 

going to be, but I'm convinced, Mr. Speaker, that somehow 

they will bring in some kind of a tax that will generate these 

revenues because I cannot see that the government has the will 

to reduce the services that the people of Saskatchewan have 

become accustomed to. 

 

You saw how quickly people panicked when we suggested the 

possibility that someone might have to pay for any part of 

health care.  I mean, it was almost like people were ready to 

just panic -- that's the only word I can think of -- because they 

didn't want that tampered with. 

 

So the government finds itself in a position where they can't 

take services away.  They've eliminated, through Bill 3, the 

basis of gathering the revenue and they're left short.  So they're 

going to have to come up with some new tax system.  And 

when that new tax system is brought in for the folks opposite to 

take into consideration the approach that we were taking when 

we considered this approach to taxation . . . 

 

We found that the question was asked, why was the amount of 

$200 chose for the tax credit for the family and for children?  

And why would it be mailed out quarterly?  I think the answer 

to that might be obvious to a lot of folks, but our researchers 

came up with the idea that the amount was chosen to 

approximate the additional taxes experienced by low income 

families as a result of harmonization, and their credit payments 

will be mailed 

  



442 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

out quarterly to provide advance assistance to help recipients 

defray the cost of the additional tax that will be a result of the 

harmonization. 

 

(1615) 

 

In other words, it was designed to give folks help before they 

incurred the problem.  And I think that was a good idea and it's 

one that the new government should consider.  And as I've 

suggested a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, it's also my opinion 

that the government might consider keeping these tax credits in 

for low income people, even though this particular passing of 

Bill 3 is going to take it away.  Because the shock of not having 

that money is going to be pretty tough just before Christmas. 

 

The family tax credit will leave families with income less than 

$20,000 better off -- they actually would be better off 

financially.  And that was good and it was fair for low income 

people, and most of the hurt would be removed from the 

family's income up to $25,000.  And I think we all realize that 

folks that make more than $25,000 a year can probably make 

out not too bad in our society, but those folks under that of 

course needed that kind of assistance. 

 

And I'm quite happy that the former government had that kind 

of a compassion and that big of a heart for the families of this 

province.  And they saw to it that people with children who are 

on fixed or low incomes were going to be taken care of in that 

way.  They did a lot of work, a lot of research, and I'm happy 

that they did that.  And I hope that the new government will 

take that into account when they bring in some kind of a tax 

program or whatever they decide to do. 

 

The next question that we ran into was: isn't this a regressive 

tax?  And of course that's important to a lot of folks.  And the 

answer was: there is an inherent regressiveness in all sales 

taxes in terms of their insensitivity to the concept of 

progressiveness.  This is the reason the Government of 

Saskatchewan is introducing some other tax changes along 

with the harmonization.  These include the introduction of the 

family tax credit for low income families, increases in the 

corporate capital tax rate and the corporate income tax rate for 

larger businesses and an increase in high incomes surtax.  The 

result will be a continuation of the government's ongoing 

commitment to fair taxation. 

 

Now when the new government finds itself cash poor and short 

because of passing Bill 3, they might want to take that into 

consideration.  And certainly if they don't, they'll find 

themselves being blamed by the people of Saskatchewan for 

not being fair and not bringing in a balanced tax system. 

 

And this was the problem with this whole process, was that in 

order to be balanced, in order to be fair with taxation, you had 

to bring in such a complicated plan that most people just didn't 

understand it.  And you didn't have enough time to educate 

folks as to what it really meant or didn't mean.  And of course 

the NDP found themselves on the platform at election time 

thinking that well, if you kill a tax, you're bound to get votes.  

They 

never thought about the implications of being short of revenue.  

They only had that need to win and I don't blame them for that.  

That's politics.  That's natural.  But that's what they did and 

now they've got their backs against the wall. 

 

And we're going to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they'll have to 

come up with some way of getting revenue and they may have 

to find themselves changing the name of this particular plan 

and bringing it in in some other way.  And if they do, we want 

them to know the answers to the questions that we have faced 

so that they can bring in a fair taxation system. 

 

The questions was:  how much more taxes will the average 

household pay?  That was the one that most people were 

interested in.  They wanted to know how much they themselves 

were going to have to pay because most folks think in terms of 

what comes out of my back-pocket as being the most important 

thing of the day. 

 

And the answer was that the average householder will pay an 

additional $535 in taxes.  Now I don't know how they manage 

to figure these things out so close, but there are people who are 

professionals in our society whose job it is to be able to figure 

these things out, and they came up with an exact figure of $535 

that they figured it was going to cost. 

 

And the average increase in taxes for a household is as follows:  

for a single parent it was $440; for married plus two was $780; 

unattached individuals was $315; and all households was that 

average of $335. 

 

Now note the average household rather than an average family 

was used, because the total tax increase for the married plus 

two is 780, and the family credit is phased out before one gets 

to the average married plus two income level, as the average 

income of this group is $49,000-and-some-cents there. 

 

Now when you have a tax program, you have to have 

consideration of the impact.  And we got the questions of: 

won't this tax have a tremendous inflationary impact?  Our 

experts came up with the answer, Mr. Speaker, that no, like the 

GST, expectations are that the result of harmonization will be a 

modest one-time rise in the rate of inflation.  This is expected 

to be counterbalanced over time by increased growth in the 

economy which results from lower business input costs which 

will in turn create investment and employment. 

 

Now that was their answer, and I think probably it looked to 

me like it would work that way.  So if the new government 

finds itself bringing in a tax, obviously they will have to take 

that into consideration as well.  There's going to be some 

impact always on the rest of the economy around you when 

you increase a tax, just as there may be some impact when you 

pass Bill 3 and take this PST expanded portion of the tax off.  

You're not only going to impact just the people who don't get 

the $200 tax credit, but you're going to impact some other folks 

as well. 

 

Now next question we ran into was: can I really save money 

under the new provincial tax system?  And the 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 443 

answer to that was yes.  Under the old education and health tax, 

many purchases you made for your farm operation may have 

had some retail tax embodied in the price from the previous 

transactions.  This was true for both exempt and non-exempt 

farm purchases.  This type of tax cascading will be completely 

eliminated by the flow-through mechanism of the harmonized 

tax system.  All tax from all levels of production is ultimately 

passed on to the final consumer of a good or service.  As a 

result, the cost of production for many businesses including 

farms will decrease substantially. 

 

Now I think that that is the part that a lot of folks missed, was 

that in fact you were going to pay less taxes on your business 

inputs.  And that made our economy work better.  And that 

was, I think, probably the fairest part of this whole tax system, 

was that we were going to allow people who were in business 

-- farmers, ranchers, people who ran all kinds of other business, 

gas and oil industry -- they all would get that tax back on those 

things they bought to go into their businesses. 

 

That freed up more cash to invest back into their businesses.  

That meant that there was more goods and services being used, 

more generation of that circling effect in the economy.  And 

that's what money is for.  That's what it's good for in our 

economy, is to spend and to create activity and to get things 

rolling.  And that's what this was going to do in a lot of cases, 

especially in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next question was:  what about the negative effect on the 

consumer demand that harmonization will cause?  And like the 

GST, the base-broadened focus of harmonization is expected to 

have short-term dampening effects on the consumer demand, 

especially on goods and services which were previously 

untaxed.  Once the consumers adjust to the new tax system, 

however, demand is expected to return to normal levels.  And 

the long-term growth effect which results from a simpler and 

more efficient tax system will benefit everyone. 

 

And the truth to that was in the restaurant industry, although I 

know there's a lot that won't agree with me.  But my opinion 

was that the last couple of months I went in a restaurant, I saw 

just as many people there as I ever did before, and I never saw 

anybody pass up a meal. 

 

So I think the system was actually working the way that these 

conclusions had worked out. 

 

But now we're going to be taking this expanded PST off, so 

most likely we will have to find another way of producing 

revenue. 

 

The next question we ran into was how much E&H tax was 

being paid by businesses, and isn't this amount just going to be 

transferred to the customer?  Now the answer to that that our 

experts came up with was that approximately 60 per cent of all 

E&H tax revenues were paid by businesses.  And when the 

E&H tax is fully harmonized, businesses will be eligible for 

input tax credits and the tax will be born undeniably by final 

consumers. 

 

However the E&H tax was often built into the price so that 

the tax was passed on to customers in that way.  And that will 

not happen now, but now how this exactly washes out is 

difficult to estimate at that time.  And I'm sure that as time 

went by it probably did wash out. 

 

And we have just one final question here I guess, or two, that 

folks asked me. And I do want to pass them on because I think 

the government's going to need the answers to these questions 

as time goes by. 

 

The next question we found out, or that we were asked rather, 

was that, what are the economic impacts of harmonization?  

And that's important to know.  It's important to know what the 

impacts of harmonization would have been if we'd have kept it 

into place.  Because we may still want to reconsider this and go 

into it.  By harmonizing the GST, Saskatchewan's economy, 

the real gross GDP, is expected to grow by 1.6 per cent at that 

time. 

 

Now since businesses' inputs will be tax free under the 

harmonization tax system, the cost of the capital will decrease.  

Thus capital intensive industries like agriculture will 

experience the largest increase in inputs and the primary 

industry expected to grow by about 2.8 per cent. 

 

Now that was good for Saskatchewan if we could get that kind 

of growth.  Growth in the Saskatchewan economy will lead to 

an increase in the demand for labour.  Harmonization is 

expected to generate in excess of 5,000 jobs in the province.  

Now wouldn't it have been nice if we could wait and see if that 

could happen instead of just sort of jumping in right away and 

taking it off. 

 

However there will be the transitional period where prices in 

Saskatchewan will increase due to the harmonization and that 

was proven out to be a fact.  We just didn't have time for the 

rest of the program to actually come into effect. 

 

Now the federal government estimated that Saskatchewan 

would experience a l.7 per cent price increase if we participated 

in the national sales tax at a rate of 7 per cent.  And the price 

actually increased more than 1.7 per cent and the benefits may 

take longer to realize.  However in light of the current 

recession the price increase may be smaller than predicted 

since businesses currently have an incentive to pass on all tax 

savings from the removal of the E&H tax. 

 

As well the wage price spiral is not likely at this time since the 

current recession has reduced the demand for labour.  Now that 

was unfortunate that we happen to run into a recession just at 

the same time that we were bringing in that new tax system 

seeing as how we were trying to make that particular point, Mr. 

Speaker.  But I'm sure that under normal circumstances -- and 

we will get back to normal circumstances as time goes by -- 

this kind of a program might still be something that the new 

government will consider and they may want to try it and they 

may want to borrow this particular document from me, and I 

can assure you that I'd provide it to them so that they can study 

it and they won't fall into any of the pitfalls that the previous 

government fell into. 

  



444 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

Now I have one final thing here that people ask me, and that 

was, what is the economic advantage of removing the E&H tax 

in favour of the PST? The answer to that was that the E&H tax 

is levied at the retail level because it is intended to be a tax on 

consumption.  And it's important, folks, to take this into 

consideration, because there's different forms of taxes, and a 

consumption tax is quite a bit different than the others, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

However, businesses often purchase inputs from the retail 

level, and therefore end up paying tax on their inputs.  As a 

result, businesses can either pass the tax on to their consumers 

in the form of higher prices, which leads to a tax cascading 

problem; absorb the cost of the tax in the form of lower profits 

which reduces business investment; or maintain their profit 

margin and pass the cost of the tax back to the labourer, which 

means lower wages for labour. 

 

By removing the E&H tax and replacing it with the value 

added tax, Saskatchewan businesses will benefit by having all 

sales tax removed from their inputs.  This will allow businesses 

to compete with imported goods on equal footing, and they will 

be able to compete more effectively in the export market. 

 

Now that was important. We have to be able to compete in the 

export market in Saskatchewan. 

 

This provides a tremendous opportunity for Saskatchewan 

economy to diversify, since goods which previously had to be 

imported into Saskatchewan because it was uneconomical to 

produce them here, can now be produced in Saskatchewan if in 

the export market, existing companies will be able to export 

more, and new companies will now find it profitable to begin 

exporting their products. 

 

Now this is what we're going to lose when we pass this Bill, 

my friends.  When we pass Bill 3, that's what we're going to 

lose -- the whole impact of what this balanced tax system was 

intended to do.  I realize it was complicated, I realize that it's 

tough to understand, and it's always difficult to accept very 

complicated programs.  But there was a lot to be said in here 

and a lot was said and it could have helped our province and 

maybe we could reconsider what we're doing here.  Because of 

all of the things that we've pointed out this afternoon that could 

be of benefit to the Saskatchewan economy . . . and to the 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We have another question that was asked of me here and that 

was:  how can the government justify introducing this tax 

during a recession?  And that was a good question because we 

were certainly in a recession, and we certainly are.  But the 

government will still have to raise revenue and even after they 

take this off.  So it's important that they have the answer to that 

question as it was discovered by the researchers that did this 

particular research, because obviously they were not politically 

inclined people, they were people that were employed to find 

the answers to legitimate questions. 

 

The government's harmonization initiative is forward looking 

in that it places the economy in a position to take full 

advantage of the growth potential that will be 

available once the recession is over.  By removing the tax from 

business inputs, harmonization will effectively reduce the cost 

of capital goods in Saskatchewan, making the province an 

attractive place to invest for residents and non-residents. 

 

(1630) 

 

Now that was important.  This, combined with the effect of 

lower interest rates, which are currently at their lowest level in 

several years, places Saskatchewan businesses in a position to 

be able to expand much more dramatically than would 

otherwise be the case. 

 

Furthermore, price increases will not be as severe in a recession 

as would be in the case of an expansionary period.  Businesses 

will pass the savings from the removal of the E&H tax on to 

their consumers which will ensure that the benefits from 

harmonization are realized as quickly as possible.  If the 

economy were in an expansionary phase there would be less 

incentive for businesses to pass the savings on to customers 

which may postpone the benefits from harmonization. 

 

Now isn't that something?  That here in one stroke of the pen 

we're going to take and destroy with Bill 3 all of this work.  

There's a lot of work in there, a lot of research and a lot of 

balance and a lot of fairness. 

 

And I say again, we didn't like the tax to be put on because 

nobody likes tax, but we had to have money to run the 

province.  You will have to have money to run the province, 

and you're going to either have to accept this kind of an 

approach or you're going to have to accept some other kind of 

approach of either higher taxes or else reduce services or else 

you're going to have a deficit like Ontario.  And we can't afford 

that, Mr. Speaker.  And with those remarks, I'd like to close my 

argument against Bill 3. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In the 

interests of time, I will not deliver my usual lengthy . . . 

(inaudible) . . . scintillating speeches, but I will rather try to be 

somewhat succinct this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think that it becomes obvious that some of our speeches, 

because of the depths of our feelings, have been somewhat 

lengthy.  But I will, as I said before . . . I've taken out every 

other page of my speech to make sure that it's not going to be 

too long and give me an excuse for being somewhat disjointed 

at times. 

 

But the other reason why I'm not going to be all that lengthy is 

because of a threat made by the Minister of Finance about half 

an hour ago when he suggested that one ways in which he's 

going to raise money might be to start taxing speeches on the 

number of pages that were delivered, Mr. Speaker.  So I will 

take that to heart, as a desperate government trying to raise 

money, at any cost. 
 

So I would like to commend my colleague, the member from 

Maple Creek, simply not only for the number of many points 

that he brings out and the length of time that  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 445 

he can take to do them, but something that is rather -- let me 

finish -- something that is rather surprising in this House that 

he makes sense at the same time all the time.  I would certainly 

commend him.  And I would tell all members of the House 

right now -- and you've heard it here first -- that in four years 

time that man is going to be a member of cabinet if and when 

the Premier has the courage to call an election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I see I'm getting to members opposite.  I do not 

have the advantage that the member from Maple Creek has in 

that he can turn his hearing aid off at any time when the 

members opposite start heckling him, so I do have to put up 

with the comments from across the way.  But, Mr. Speaker, I 

do want to put on record and that's the reason why I'm getting 

up at this stage is to talk in a serious vein about Bill 3, the E&H 

tax. 

 

It was something that the former government did because it is 

something that we believed in.  Not, Mr. Speaker, because we 

enjoy adding taxes.  Governments do not like to tax because it 

does not make them popular.  And citizens in the province of 

Saskatchewan do not like new taxes because it means more 

money out of hip national to pay those taxes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, members of my constituency said to me 

during the election, we don't like this tax.  Some of them 

probably voted for someone else other than me because of the 

tax.  But I'm proud to stand here in this Legislative Assembly 

now in spite of that, with a plurality that many members 

opposite could only dream of and wish for.  We have the 

landslide member from Rosetown-Elrose and 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and so on, mute testimony to that fact. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Speaker, governments do have to 

take their responsibilities seriously.  And governing is not 

always a popularity contest.  And while oppositions have the 

luxury of saying we will take away taxes, we will reduce and 

eliminate the deficit but at the same time we're going to have 

more money for universities, for hospitals, education, and all 

the other kinds of things, governments cannot say that unless 

they're prepared to eventually put up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think history will prove us right.  I think 

history is going to say that the NDP for short-term gain have 

inflicted a long-term pain on the citizens of Saskatchewan.  The 

short-term popularity I think in the long run is going to prove 

their undoing. 

 

Now I'm not going to go through the whole business that my 

colleagues have so effectively covered through, gone through, 

but I do want to touch on a few key points.  And that is that the 

history of the development of this tax is one of half-truths, of 

cavalier statements, of misinformation supplied to the public by 

the now Premier, and certainly by his former Finance critic. 

 

And I want to trace just a little bit of that history, because while 

synchronizing the education and health tax with the federal tax, 

when it was first discussed, what did the representatives of the 

NDP say?  The now Premier, then member and still member of 

Riversdale, issued a news release dated October 3, 1990 which 

said, and I quote: 

The fairest and most sensible way to proceed would be to 

harmonize the two sales tax.  End quote. 

 

And February 21, 1991, the Moose Jaw Times-Herald said, and 

I quote:  Harmonization was recommended by NDP MLA (the 

current member for Churchill Downs) who felt it would be 

simpler to have one tax.  End quote. 

 

On the same day in the Leader-Post we read, and I quote:  An 

NDP government would harmonize the taxes but at a lower rate 

than the combined 14 per cent, said the member from Churchill 

Downs.  End quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they would harmonize, but a lower rate.  Well 

whoop-de-do.  There we have the history of the NDPs.  But 

however a month later the NDP Finance critic repeated the 

party's position on March 15, 1991 in the Leader-Post and I 

quote: NDP Finance critic stated that his party supported the 

harmonization of the two taxes but added they would lower the 

rate.  It makes much more sense to have one tax rather than 

two, he told reporters. End quote. 

 

We'll do it.  We'll do it but at a lower rate.  We don't like the 

way the PCs (Progressive Conservative) are doing it; we'll just 

do it a little bit differently. 

 

So when discussing the choice between a side-by-side tax -- 

which this Bill will restore -- and a synchronized tax, when that 

choice comes down, the NDP Leader, the Premier now of this 

province, on October 4, 1990 in the Leader-Post said, and I 

quote: The NDP Leader called applying the GST and the 

provincial sales tax side by side a second-best option.  A 

second-best option, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can continue on.  When the federal government first 

announced that they were intending and committed to 

implementing the GST, I had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

represent the PC, to represent the then minister of Finance, 

Lorne Hepworth, in Weyburn.  We were in Weyburn and we 

had an all-party, all-candidate discussion.  And the member 

from Churchill Downs was there representing the NDP as their 

Finance critic.  I was there representing the government at the 

time.  And we even had the Reform member Deborah Gray 

was there as well. 

 

And the discussion was based on the fact that one tax, one 

harmonized tax is better than the other.  And the member from 

Churchill Downs reiterated his statement at the time.  And of 

course my main concern at the time -- and still is, quite frankly 

-- the complexity of the GST, the complexity for the consumer, 

and certainly the complexity for suppliers and the businesses 

involved. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have the documented history of the NDP 

supporting the synchronization of the two taxes over and over 

and over again.  They supported it publicly.  But then they got 

into an election -- they got into the election mode.  And then 

the question no longer became what is fair, what is the best for 

the citizens of the province, but what is best for the party, the 

NDP, and how can we wrench power away from the PCs, the 

government of the day. 

 

And at that point, Mr. Speaker, their courage and, quite  



446 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

frankly and bluntly, their intelligence left them. 

 

Once the election was on, suddenly the member from 

Riversdale had a change of heart.  He had a change of heart.  

The member for Regina Centre stayed silent on the issue 

suddenly, and we note that that member is no longer 

responsible for Finance for the NDP, and we wonder why. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in giving up synchronization, this government 

knows two things -- two things.  It will have to make massive 

cuts to the programs and services provided for the people of 

this province.  And we've seen evidence of that already.  We 

know the Minister of Health is reducing the amounts of 

moneys available to the Department of Health.  We suspect it's 

zero.  She says it's one and a half per cent.  But already 

hospitals are very, very nervous.  Hospitals are going to be 

closing more beds. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, one of my residents, one of my 

constituents is being personally affected by this result right 

now in that their family was on the way to Calgary and there 

was a car accident.  Their daughter was killed, their son 

tragically injured as was the daughter-in-law.  That was 

October 7. 

 

They're still in Calgary.  And the reason they are in Calgary 

and are not being transferred back to closer to home and to the 

University Hospital is not because Saskatchewan air ambulance 

is saying we can't do it.  They're prepared.  They're willing.  At 

the drop of a hat, they'll be having the kids back into their local 

area.  But the University Hospital is saying, we don't have 

room.  We haven't got beds.  We're closing too many beds. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it's kind of ironic for the party that is 

considering health to be their mandate, their niche in life, to 

have this type of a situation developing so shortly after taking 

power. 

 

And that's not only there; it's also in education.  We hear what's 

going on in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 

and Technology).  We hear what's going on in a number of the 

institutions for kids going to university -- tuition fees going up, 

and essentially no money for education.  A zero per cent 

increase is probably what they're going to be getting. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it's an indication of the price that we 

have to pay when a government is not able to have the courage 

and the will to do what is right, but rather looks at the political 

aspects and the political incentives and convenience for the 

moment. 

 

So it will have to cut services or it's going to have to make up 

revenue.  It's going to have to make up revenue somewhere 

because there is essentially a $240 million loss of revenue that 

we're going to be facing. 

 

How do you make that up?  Well it's going to have to make it 

up in numerous nefarious ways, I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker.  Education, tax -- what's it going to become?  Ten per 

cent flat tax, personal income tax, death tax?  All of these 

issues have been raised by my colleagues.  We know it's going 

to happen, but obviously we don't know 

exactly where it's going to happen and who's going to get hit 

how hard by what direction. 

 

But certainly in looking at one of the ways the government 

wants to make up the revenue that it's going to be losing 

primarily because of this Bill, is considering the position and 

the comments by the good member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow.  And this is a man who claims that allowing 

gambling was absolutely unacceptable.  And now we're looking 

at that possibility in this province as a result of what's going to 

be happening by this disharmonization that is going to be 

taking place.  

 

And I want to quote the Leader-Post of February 23, 1989, 

where that member that I just referred to said, and I quote:  It 

appears the government is hard up for cash and sees this as a 

quick fix.  In many ways the government is like an individual 

who might turn to gambling in hopes that it will solve its 

financial problems, only to find out it leads to more problems.  

End quote. 

 

(1645) 

 

Now we have before us a Bill now, Mr. Speaker, that creates 

great financial problems, and the government is looking at and 

considering gambling as a means to solve that problem.  And I 

would say that that's quite the connection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the same article the member called on the government to 

take more time to allow consideration and consultation 

regarding the ethical issues of gambling.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm proud to say actually that the PC government of the time 

did exactly that.  Many of us on the PC benches, whether we 

were back-benchers or in cabinet, were very uncomfortable 

with the concept of the government getting into the business of 

gambling.  And I have no qualms about saying that I was one 

of them.  And I have no qualms about saying that we won the 

day; we did not take that route.  We chose to stay out of 

gambling as far as the government is concerned. 

 

And now we see, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Moose 

Jaw Wakamow has joined his colleagues in that flip-flop.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill passes we will not only be faced 

with a government gambling for cash, we will be faced with 

the unfortunate and reprehensible sight of the Minister of 

Social Services standing in this Assembly and saying there is 

no money to keep our commitments to the poor. 

 

The members opposite say the lack of cash is all the fault of the 

previous government.  But, Mr. Speaker, the simple truth is 

that this government is directly giving up in excess of $200 

million a year in passing this Bill.  It is forgoing even more 

revenue than that indirectly. But if we stick with the direct cost, 

I can say that the Minister of Finance has tried to play more 

games with the people when he put out his little report that 

claimed that only $72 million as we heard in question period 

the other day, that there would only be a $72 million loss.  And 

in committee, Mr. Speaker, we will have some very, very direct 

questions for that minister. 

 

But the point here, Mr. Speaker, is that the officials in the 

minister's own department estimate the net revenue next 

  



December 20, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 447 

year to be $181 million.  Now when the Minister of Social 

Services gets up and says there's no money to help the poor, let 

us look at what her leader the member for Riversdale said it 

would cost to totally eliminate poverty in Saskatchewan -- the 

now famous election promise made by the NDP that there will 

be no poverty in Saskatchewan.  That is the election promise 

that they have made.  And I quite frankly consider that to be a 

grossly indecent promise to make. 

 

Not only did we have someone that was greater than the Peter 

that they had, saying that the poor will always be with us, but 

now to try to make election points and gain votes on the back 

of the poor, of the desperate who will cling at almost any straw 

to be helped and to say that this is going to happen.  But that's 

an aside that we could get on to and I don't want to, at this 

point, Mr. Speaker, discuss that issue. 

 

But on the Cable Regina program Night Views the Leader of 

the NDP said he would eliminate poverty and he said that the 

cost of eliminating that poverty would be about $100 million 

per year.  That was his figure, not mine.  Whether we agree 

with it, that's incidental at this point. 

 

But in fact, if I could provide the quote from March 20 on that 

night he said: All of this eliminating poverty can be done and 

relatively inexpensively in the order of, well, total tab of a $100 

million.  End quote.  Hundred million dollars. 

 

So I say to the Minister of Social Services, if you vote for this 

Bill and you are saying goodbye to a $180 million, probably 

closer to $200 million, you are actually eliminating poverty . . . 

you're preventing the elimination of poverty which would only 

cost half of what you're giving up by passing this Bill. 

 

So don't say that the cupboard is bare.  Where there's a will, 

where's there's a courage, there is a will -- there is a way. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what this government has in store for 

Saskatchewan as a result of the Bill is rather frightening -- the 

intent to condition the public, I would suggest, with more 

information that may not be quite on the mark.  I would suggest 

also that in passing that one of the intent of the Gass tribunal to 

create a political climate of fear and misunderstanding. 

 

They intend to try to convince people that as everything is out 

of their hands, whoops, they have no control.  They have to 

increase taxes.  They have to increase personal income tax, 

death tax, oil industry tax, payroll tax, as they have in 

Manitoba.  Now that's certainly going to be something to create 

jobs and stimulate the economy and have that mixed-up 

economy that the Premier is always talking about that he's a 

great fan of. 

 

What about the increase in your power bills? your telephone 

bills? your auto insurance?  And, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 

member responsible for Rural Development tells us that they're 

now even refusing to pay oil and gas lease payments that they 

have always gotten. 

So I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to people that after 

this government is done, the people of Saskatchewan will look 

back and say that 7 cents on a cup of coffee was a pretty good 

deal after all. 

 

Now I want to touch on one more thing, Mr. Speaker, before I 

sit down on this second reading.  And that is that after this Bill 

is passed -- after this Bill is passed -- the government's excuses 

are over.  The Minister of Finance, his continual answers to 

questions is, well it's your fault; it's the previous government's 

fault.  To watch the member from Melfort sit there while her 

colleagues responsible for Sask Water announces that the 

contract signed with the city of Melfort to build a water project 

is under review and may not proceed, that, I would suggest to 

you, is a highly irresponsible statement and course of action to 

take.  And then to hear them say that, well it's because there's 

no money and then they bring this Bill forward, that, Mr. 

Speaker, is not right. 

 

To hear members across the way escape responsibility in every 

question for every action in every way possible is to be 

condemned, I would suggest to you, in the strongest way 

possible, Mr. Speaker.  Because sometimes we on this side 

look at you folks over there and wonder if you really realize 

that you won.  You won the election.  You are the government. 

 

And with that government and with that aura of now being a 

minister of the Crown, ladies and gentlemen, there comes an 

element of responsibility.  And that responsibility means 

having the courage and the will to do what is right -- not 

politically, but what is right for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And in the long term, as I have said before, history will bear 

out that the decisions that you are making now are short-term 

decisions, not with vision for the future.  And I think in the 

long term we are going to lose in this province because of the 

decisions that you are making. 

 

I accept the verdict delivered on October 20 by the people of 

Saskatchewan.  I accept that.  And you see the results of this in 

the distribution of the House in this legislature at this time.  But 

I also accept the fact that the people of Saskatchewan were 

voting for change and they were voting for a government that 

would help them out of their dilemma.  And all of us in 

Saskatchewan are in a dilemma.  That is no denying that. 

 

But you can't hook onto the people in their desperation and 

come up with a plan that is ultimately going to be worse for 

them than the plan that we were offering.  So they were 

snowed, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, by a lot of the promises 

made by members opposite not fully explaining their 

intentions.  Now the day after the election, I was in a sporting 

store in Saskatoon.  And the fellow ahead of me at the till was 

very, very peeved to say the least at what was going on at the 

till because he said, I don't have to pay this tax.  I voted for the 

NDP and they said this tax was going to be taken off.  Took 10 

minutes for that storekeeper to try to convince that gentleman: 

oh no, no, that was only the expanded PST, only the expanded.  

You're still paying all the rest of this.  You're still paying that. 

  



448 Saskatchewan Hansard December 20, 1991 

There were some pretty upset people around, and I don't have 

to tell the members across the way anything new here because 

they've experienced it themselves.  They've experienced it 

when the minister from the town of Swift Current goes home.  

He's heard that in the stores, so this is nothing new for these 

members because basically they're throwing revenue away.  

They're having trouble coming up with some alternatives and 

then they turn around and simply say, well it's not our 

responsibility; it's Ottawa's responsibility, or it's the previous 

government's responsibility and so on. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, well I'll continue on until 5 o'clock at least so 

that we have an opportunity to go to something else at the 

conclusion of my remarks. 

 

But it's not good enough, Mr. Speaker, for members opposite to 

simply say it's not all our fault; there's nothing that we can do.  

Throw up our hands and they say well, we'll blame Ottawa.  

We'll blame the poor.  We'll blame the opposition, blame some 

athlete.  We'll blame some lawyer, anyone.  Just don't ask this 

government to take on responsibility.  And, Mr. Speaker, this 

Bill is an abdication of responsibility.  It is a serious abdication 

of responsibility. 

 

In conclusion of a long road for the member opposite in 

achieving his role of Premiership of the province . . . and I 

congratulate him for that.  I wish him well in his role as 

Premier because the better he does, of course, the better the 

people of Saskatchewan do.  And so for the sake of the people 

of Saskatchewan, I sincerely hope that we will not see this 

whole rate of tax increases in the many, many areas that exist 

in lieu of a built-in advantage for the people of Saskatchewan, 

built-in advantage for the businesses in Lloydminster, around 

the Alberta border; built in for businesses around the southern 

part of our province to make them competitive against the 

Americans.  Businesses living just on the west border of 

Manitoba and eastern border of Saskatchewan, the Manitoba 

people could only wish that they were living in Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the idea of taking away this tax is going to 

have ramifications throughout the province.  We have the 

Department of Social Services social service recipients -- not 

only social service recipients, but certainly the low-income 

members of our society -- with the tax credits, with the child 

tax credit in place, with the GST tax credit in place.  And what 

we as a province were going to do . . . In effect, the people 

then, the low income people of this province were better off 

under harmonization than they would have been and will be 

now under the straight 7 per cent of the E&H that we're going 

to revert back to for, I don't know for how long, how long it's 

going to take until the rate there goes up to 10 per cent, or 

whatever it's going to be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, on that basis, I'm going to be opposing this 

Bill.  I'm going to be opposing this Bill because I don't think it's 

the right thing to do.  I stood up in my constituency.  I told my 

constituents that.  I told them that I didn't like the idea of books 

and so on being taxed. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, we made adjustments there. We 

made adjustments and we were prepared to make 

further adjustments as time went on.  But we were certainly not 

prepared to take the easy route out and simply say to the people 

we don't have to tax you; we don't need this extra money; 

things will continue on; the deficit doesn't make any difference.  

For example, the government in Ontario, the NDP government 

in Ontario, being the laughing-stock throughout the province, 

quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, simply because their philosophy is: 

we will spend our way out of this recession.  We will spend our 

way out.  Never mind about the deficit.  The deficit doesn't 

matter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the deficit does matter.  The deficit does matter. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, I do 

leave the Chair until 7 o'clock this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


