




















































Hansard: December 18, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 325 

 December 18, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on 

Friday next that notwithstanding rule 3: 

 

 This Assembly shall, following the adoption of this motion, 

meet from 10 a.m. o'clock until 12 a.m. o'clock and from 2 

until 5 p.m. and from 7 o'clock p.m. until 10 o'clock p.m., 

with orders of the day being called at 10 a.m. and routine 

proceedings being called at 2 p.m. each day; and in addition 

to regular sitting days, the Assembly shall sit on Saturdays. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Under 

the notices of motions and questions I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next ask the government the following questions: 

 

 Regarding the Minister of Education: (1) the names of all 

persons currently employed by or accountable to the minister 

directly or indirectly excluding only members of the Public 

Service Commission who were employed prior to November 

1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in no. 1 the (a) details of 

employment including compensation, (b) job description, (c) 

qualifications including employment history, (d) the name of 

his or her immediate superior, (e) the authority under which 

the person was hired, and (f) the actual date that the person 

started work. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Minister of Health: (1) the names of all 

persons currently employed by or accountable to the minister 

directly or indirectly, excluding only members of the Public 

Service Commission who were employed prior to November 

1, 1991;  (2) for each person listed in (1) and (a) details of 

employment including compensation, (b) job description, (c) 

qualifications including employment history, (d) the name of 

his or her immediate superior, (e) the authority under which 

the person was hired, and (f) the actual date that the person 

started work. 

 

And I'll have some others, Mr. Speaker, that I'll just table to 

save time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next, regarding the Minister of Highways and 

Transportation, ask the following questions: 

 

 (1) The names of all persons currently employed or 

accountable to the minister directly or indirectly, excluding 

only members of the Public Service 

 Commission who are employed prior to November 1, 1991; 

(2) for each person listed in (1), (a) details of employment 

including compensation, (b) job description, (c) qualifications 

including employment history, (d) the name of his or her 

immediate superior, (e) the authority under which the person 

was hired, and (f) the actual date the person started work. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I shall 

on Friday next ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding the Minister of Community Services:  (1) that the 

names of all persons currently employed by or accountable to 

the minister directly or indirectly, excluding only members of 

the Public Service Commission who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in no. (1), that 

(a) details of employment including compensation, (b) job 

description, (c) qualifications including employment history, 

(d) the names of his or her immediate superior, (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired, and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice 

that I shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Minister of Energy and Mines: (1) the names 

of all persons currently employed by or accountable to the 

minister directly or indirectly, excluding only members of the 

Public Service Commission who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in (1), (a) 

details of employment including compensation, (b) job 

description, (c) qualifications including employment history, 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior, (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired, and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Minister of Rural Development: (1) the names 

of all the persons currently employed by or accountable to the 

minister directly or indirectly, excluding only members of the 

Public Service Commission who were employed prior to 

November 1, 1991; (2) for each person listed in (1), the (a) 

details of employment including compensation, (b) job 

descriptions, (c) qualifications including employment history, 

(d) the name of his or her immediate superior, (e) the 

authority under which the person was hired, and (f) the actual 

date that the person started work. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I give notice that I 

shall on Friday next ask the government the following 

question: 

  



326 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

 Regarding the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources: 

(1) the names of all persons currently employed by or 

accountable to the minister directly or indirectly, excluding 

only members of the Public Service Commission who were 

employed prior to November 1, 1991; (2) for each person 

listed in (1), (a) the details of employment and including 

compensation, (b) job description, (c) qualifications including 

employment history, (d) name of his or her immediate 

superior, (e) the authority under which the person was hired, 

and (f) the actual date that the person started work. 

 

I so move. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- I would like to, to you, Mr. Speaker, and 

through you today introduce some family and friends in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Decking your halls today we have my sister, Armella Sonntag 

and her husband Kim Paisley, and his father Bill Paisley.  

Armella and Kim are here today from Peru and they're on their 

way back to Peru.  They work for an organization out of 

Toronto, Mr. Speaker, Scarborough Foreign Mission.  They 

work very much with social action groups and with the setting 

up of small co-operatives and stuff. 

 

One of the requests that they had of the Assembly here is that 

we would join them in a couple of yuletide choruses of "Come 

on Ring Those Bells", but the members opposite did six 

hundred verses of that the other day.  So if you would join with 

me in welcoming them today here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of this 

Assembly three guests seated in the west gallery.  I'd like to 

introduce my father-in-law, Eric Moller and his brother Roy, 

and also Mr. Gugulyn, who is a former student of mine.  Please 

welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the members of this Assembly two very 

good friends and supporters visiting Regina from Melfort 

today, Garry and Trudy Jackson in the west gallery.  I'd like the 

Assembly to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

the Assembly a guest who was making a presentation this 

morning to myself and others, Garry and Marg Christian who 

are in your gallery.  And I would like you to welcome them and 

thank them for their interest in agricultural policy and the 

contribution they're making to the development of it.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Alteration of Employment Contracts 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the 

Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, if it is appropriate for the 

government to proactively change employment contracts that it 

finds unacceptable, then no logic can argue that it is not also 

appropriate for private employers.  Mr. Minister, will your 

government introduce similar legislation to allow private 

employers to retroactively alter employment contracts and 

engage in personal attack in the course of altering those 

contracts? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have another question, Mr. Speaker, to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, do you believe that all contracts 

entered into by private employers are right?  And if so, will you 

introduce a law that allows them the same powers to persecute 

employees that you yourself are giving yourself? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

restrictions on the right to contract with respect to employment 

matters, and those are well known to the members opposite.  

They exist for example in The Labour Standards Act.  They 

also exist in some respects in legislation such as the Human 

Rights Code.  So that there are many restrictions around.  The 

member will know that the purpose for the piece of legislation 

that was introduced into the House yesterday is to deal with a 

particularly unusual situation involving contractual provisions 

which are simply not found in the private sector to any 

significant degree at all and which are matters that the public of 

Saskatchewan just insist be addressed by this legislature and be 

changed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, if you do not 

intend to give private employers these powers of persecution, 

you must believe there is no such thing as nepotism, 

unbalanced negotiations, unfair contracts, or excessive claims 

by private employees.  So I ask you simply: is that what your 

position is going to be in relation to what the government is 

going to do, and also to private employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, there's no element of 

persecution in these contracts -- none at all, none at all.  This is 

just a question of treating public employees in a fair and 

reasonable way; not doing it in secret but making those 

contracts public and making them conform to some kind of 

standard.  That's what the legislation's all about.  That's what 

we're trying to do by introducing it into this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

Mr. Martens: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday you 

gave first reading to a Bill to suspend the rights of individuals 

to protection under the law.  First your government suspends 

the rules of this Assembly and now you're suspending the law 

of the land itself. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm asking you: can you give this Assembly any 

precedent whatsoever of a government introducing such a law 

as this one that you did yesterday? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I dare say that never has a 

government been faced with the situation with respect to 

employment contracts that we encountered when we took over 

the government of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The extraordinary provisions in these 

contracts, all of which were secret, all of which were not 

known, none of which were known to the public of 

Saskatchewan, created a very unique situation which required 

not that we deprive them of their rights under the law but that 

we put the matter to the law and ensure that the courts are the 

ones that will determine what is a reasonable and what is a fair 

amount, in the event that these employees are terminated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to ask the minister the question 

again about whether he has any precedent of it ever happening 

in the history of the Commonwealth, Canada, or the provinces 

across Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought that I answered 

that question directly.  I don't know of any precedent because I 

don't know of any government that has been faced with the 

extraordinary situation that we were faced with when we came 

to power. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A new question, Mr. Minister.  The law is 

unprecedented, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister.  Such a law has 

never been introduced in this country or in any province in this 

country.  And therefore your government is hitting a thousand 

on setting democracy on its head.  You're just right up there 

ahead of all the rest. 

 

First of all, no constitutional provisions will be allowed to stop 

you on the basis of your budget or assumed budget.  Now no 

law will be able to stop you as it relates to the court. 

 

I want to ask you specifically, Mr. Minister, after watching 

your interviews with the media yesterday, is it your position 

today that this law would allow all government employment 

contracts to be open to public scrutiny?  Is that your opinion?  

Yes or no? 
 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, that's a question for 

a specific kind of information, the interpretation of the Bill that 

is in front of this House. And the member can ask that specific 

question that he had 

during the committee study of the Bill clause by clause. 

 

The minister can read the Bill.  The minister knows what the 

Bill is aimed at . . . or the member.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is a 

unique situation in speaking of democracy, in the democratic 

traditions of this country, for a government to come into power 

and find practically the whole of the senior public service as 

parties to employment contracts, none of which had been made 

public, all of which are secret, and all of which contain 

provisions that are practically unknown in employment 

relations in this country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to ask the question 

again.  Would you allow all the contracts to be opened by 

scrutiny by the public or just the ones that you want to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the Bill is quite specific on 

the matter.  The member can read it himself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  I know this is 

difficult for you, Mr. Minister, because I know personally that 

you're one who believes in justice.  But the fact remains that 

you have provided this Assembly with no reasoned approach to 

have that law introduced in this Assembly.  At least in my 

opinion you haven't. 

 

If you look through the Bill, you will see that it contains 

provisions to keep contracts of the new government secret.  

Why have you, as minister, allowed several sections in the Bill 

to maintain a state of secret . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows well 

that you may not, during question period, refer specifically to 

sections of Bills that are before the House.  I simply say to the 

member that that question is out of order and will not be 

accepted.  So if you can rephrase it, I will accept your question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you agree, Mr. Minister, that the 

provisions of the Bill before the House today maintain a state 

of secrecy for NDP (New Democratic Party) contracts, but 

retroactively expose all of the others. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- No, I do not agree with that, Mr. 

Speaker.  The Bill is quite explicit that these contracts are 

going to become public.  There's provision there as to the way 

in which they will become public.  They will become public as 

soon as the legislation is implemented, and that will continue to 

be the law until such time as it no longer is the law.  But that 

will apply to the future to all contracts that are mentioned in the 

Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Your 

observations are accurate, but there are some glitches in  



328 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

there that don't allow for certain people to have their exposure 

the same as the others have.  And therefore I want to ask you 

this question:  if you are interested in letting the public in on 

your little arrangements, why does not the law cover all 

employment arrangements and why have you hidden behind 

the guise of no contract and no exposure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I was not aware that I have ever hidden 

behind that shield, Mr. Speaker.  And accordingly I just have 

no idea what the minister's talking about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, just a point of clarification.  

There are places in that Bill that do not allow for . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I have just ruled that we will 

not accept questions on specific sections of Bills that are before 

the House.  We're getting ourselves into an argument of 

discussing aspects of the Bills which are not pertinent or will 

not be allowed in question period.  New question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- A new question, Mr. Speaker.  Will you stand 

in your place today and confirm it is your opinion as the 

Minister of Justice that slander, defamation of character, and 

psychological abuse are proper and useful and should be legal 

if they are used to get rid of people's jobs? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I just have no idea what the question . . . 

what information the question attempts to elicit.  If the question 

is a general sort of open question, you know, no problem.  I 

mean, the answer is obvious. 

 

I must say, Mr. Speaker -- and I want to make it clear to the 

House and to that member -- that I am prepared to stand and 

discuss this Bill in detail all day.  We can go straight through 

second reading into third reading without any problem at all.  

And I'll be happy to do that. But it's a little difficult to address 

those questions in the format of question period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The fact, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, is 

this. This Bill makes it legal to engage in any manner of 

extreme personal attack so long as those attacks are intended to 

make someone quit or done in the process of firing someone 

without cause.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the fact, and you can read 

that in the Bill any time you want, and there are a number of 

places that I would refer to but I'm not allowed to. 

 

You suspend the rules, replace tenured boards with political 

appointees to suit your needs.  Considering all of that, is it your 

intention to remain the highest officer of the law of this 

province when your own government is overthrowing the very 

justice you are sworn to uphold? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, that really is an 

outrageous so-called question.  I'm prepared, as I say, to stand 

during committee study of that Bill and discuss it clause by 

clause and answer any questions that that member or any other 

member may have with respect to that Bill.  The fact is that 

nobody is going to be slandered, nobody's going to be attacked.  

Those questions aren't going to arise. And I have no idea why 

the member would draw that interpretation from this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the observations that I would 

make about the Bill are those that it does exactly that. And 

that's why I'm raising the question about the method that you 

use to deliver it, and also the method that you use of talking 

about it in the Assembly. 

 

I really want to ask you one more question about it, and that is 

this: do you intend to introduce any other laws that expand this 

policy of the NDP first, and everything else up to and including 

the lives of individuals, last -- absolutely last? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, we have done no such 

thing and we will do no such thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- It's absurd for the minister to be making 

such outlandish allegations as this.  We can get into a full 

debate on this Bill and I hope to be able to demonstrate to him 

and to his colleagues and to the people of this province that this 

Bill is the only response that the government could make to this 

absurd situation that we found on taking office. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SaskPower Executives' Salaries 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I direct 

my question to the minister responsible for SaskPower.  And, 

Mr. Minister, as a preface to my question, I was glad to hear 

the Minister of Justice espousing upon his desire for full public 

disclosure on the details of employment. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would ask you this question.  I'm not 

asking about contracts; I'm just asking for the details of the 

employment.  Can you tell us today, Mr. Minister, can you tell 

the public the details about how much you are paying Jack 

Messer and Carol Bryant, the two NDP campaign managers -- 

how much are you paying them now to run SaskPower? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take this 

opportunity to answer . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Answer the question -- how much?  No 

speech, just how much. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes . . . if the member will give 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

me the opportunity, I want to indicate to the Assembly today 

that Mr. Messer, who was hired to replace Mr. Hill who was 

earning at that time over $400,000 a year, was hired for $400 a 

day during the period that he worked as a special advisor to the 

government.  At $400 a day he was earning about one-third of 

what Mr. Hill was earning. 

 

We are now in the process of setting salary scales for the heads 

of the Crowns and departments.  Mr. Messer's salary has now 

been set and I want to inform the Assembly today that over the 

next while we'll be establishing the whole range for heads of 

Crowns as well as department heads; but his salary will be far 

less than Mr. Hill's, at $150,000 a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the members in the gallery 

please not to participate in the activities on the floor. 

 

Freedom of Information 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new 

question for the Minister of Justice. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- It seems we have mini-ministers over there, 

Mr. Speaker, or ministers that hope to be. 

 

Question to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, you stood in 

your place in this legislature last spring and voted for freedom 

of information.  Your government could have proclaimed that 

Act.  By that Act, all of these contractual arrangements 

would've been available to the public. 

 

Matter of fact, the very first initiative your government 

should've undertaken, sir, was to release that Act, to proclaim 

it.  You have not done so because of your political agenda.  Do 

you not agree, Mr. Minister, the only reason that that was 

included in this Bill is because you do not have the courage of 

your convictions, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- This is the day for great questions, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The minister will know that the 

Department of Justice has been working on the implementation 

of the freedom of information Act for some time, including 

during the time when he was a member of the previous 

government.  It continues to do so.  It continues to consult with 

other departments and ready all of the machinery of 

government for the implementation of the Act. 

 

I will tell the member that the implementation course is still on 

schedule and that we intend to implement that Act as soon as 

it's possible to do so, as soon as all the administrative 

arrangements have been made.  We are not trying to slow it 

down or to hide anything behind it.  When that Act goes into 

place, it applies to all 

government information, past and present. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, you know full well that that Bill was passed 

unanimously in this House.  And the reason that you have not 

done it is because of your track record over the last two 

months.  We have had the Gass Commission, a quasi-judicial 

tribunal, sir, without access to the public or the press. 

 

We have had the example of your government setting aside the 

rules of this legislature to do its will.  And now, sir, and I ask 

you, now we have a Bill before this House which sets aside the 

right of the individual to seek court action.  When, sir, when 

will the political thirst for revenge by the New Democratic 

Party be quenched in this province, or shall you override more 

individual rights before you're done? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, that is a collection of 

absurdities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member knows perfectly well the 

complexities involved in implementing the freedom of 

information Act.  They had it on their plate for the last six 

months of their government and didn't get around to 

implementing it.  And he knows the reason they didn't was the 

complexity of preparing government for the implementation of 

the Act, because on the date the Act is proclaimed the 

information has to be in shape to be produced when people call 

upon the government to produce the information. 

 

We picked up that Act as soon as the transition took place, as 

soon as we took over the government, and we intend to 

implement as soon as possible.  It can't possibly be used as any 

kind of a weapon to cover up anything, and the member knows 

that perfectly well.  And that's what makes his question so 

absurd. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Hiring of Lawyers 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Justice as well.  Will the minister tell the Assembly what 

private lawyers the government is currently using and how 

much per hour, per day and per month he is paying those 

lawyers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure what the 

member is referring to, what lawyers that he is referring to. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The ones doing your dirty work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The member says from his seat an 

insulting question.  The answer to that is that we have no 

  



330 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

lawyers doing dirty work at all.  As to the other question, if the 

member will perhaps put his question more specifically as to 

what particular lawyers he's talking about or what legal work, 

then we can address the question.  May I respectfully suggest 

that he submit a written question on the matter, Mr. Speaker, 

and I'll be glad to answer it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Use of Consultants 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new 

question for the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Speaker, will the 

minister tell us today how much they are paying Don Ching for 

his esteemed services, and what other benefits does he receive 

for his employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  The question would 

have been better directed to me because Mr. Ching is the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You mean you've got the answer? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I most certainly do, as I always do, 

member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the question is better 

directed to me because Mr. Ching is the acting chief executive 

officer of the Crown Management Board.  He has been acting 

as my advisor for some time.  During that time he was paid 

$400 a day; he now is acting chief executive officer and is 

being paid at a far less rate than the former chief executive 

officer at $150,000 a year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, will 

the minister for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation) tell the House how much he paid Frank Quennell 

for all arrears of compensation, and what were the terms of his 

employment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, Frank Quennell was the 

special advisor to SPMC for a short period.  He is no longer 

with SPMC and I don't have the answer that he seeks, and I'll 

certainly take notice of it and reply in written form. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  Will the Minister of Agriculture 

tell the Assembly if his employee, Marg Benson, did consulting 

work for any other departments; and particularly, did she 

advise who should be fired or hired in other departments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Your question was previously asked in 

written form and answered, and she acted in an advisory 

capacity to me for a period of a month when she arrived. 

 

Thank you very much. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Compensation for Ranchers 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Rural Development.  Mr. 

Minister, some time ago I wrote you regarding the matter of oil 

and gas lease payments to Saskatchewan ranchers.  Your 

political assistant replied to me that your officials would look 

into the matter and that you would get back to me. 

 

Would you tell the House when the ranchers can expect the 

back payments currently being withheld, particularly in light of 

the very difficult income situation out there for all of our 

agricultural producers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as the minister 

opposite well knows, there's a little background to this 

particular problem.  In March of 1991 when the previous 

government wrote the budget, they removed all compensation 

to leaseholders for gas wells.  And this was the situation that I 

faced when I first came to office, was the fact that people who 

had been expecting their cheques since April had heard 

nothing. 

 

And since that time we have been reviewing within the 

department and trying to juggle some numbers to find some 

money.  And we are coming to . . . in the process coming to a 

resolution of the problem very quickly and the ranchers will be 

notified immediately. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Impact on the Meat Industry in Saskatchewan 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as minister 

responsible for the Saskatchewan Economic Development 

Corporation, I'm pleased to announce a package which will 

assist two meat processing companies affiliated with Intercon 

Packers Limited.  They will undertake development which will 

have a major impact on the meat industry in Saskatchewan. 

 

The package will assist the purchase and expansion of the 

Moose Jaw packing plant of Maple Leaf foods and reopen an 

upgrading of the Norex Foods hand-processing operation in 

Saskatoon. 

 

The developments that will be made possible by the package 

we have approved will have the potential to provide a total of 

nearly 160 new jobs in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, these developments 

will have an impact on the province's entire economy, both in 

terms of economic development in jobs, as well as the 

agricultural sector. 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

In addition to the jobs these projects will provide, they will add 

badly needed new opportunities to the livestock sector of 

Saskatchewan livestock's industry, increase foreign exports, 

provide work in construction trades, and create other spin-off 

job opportunities. 

 

The financial package by SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation) consists of two parts and it totals 

$5.5 million.  The first involves Western Canadian Beef 

Packers Ltd., which will purchase and expand the Maple Leaf 

plant in Moose Jaw.  Western is owned by Western Canadian 

Equities Ltd., an investor group controlled by the Mitchell 

family.  The Mitchells are also principals in the 

Intercontinental.  Under the agreement SEDCO will purchase 

$4 million worth of shares in Western Canadian Beef Packers. 

 

The second phase of the package is a 1.5 million term loan to 

Norex Food in Saskatoon, an affiliate of Intercontinental.  The 

loan will assist Norex to reopen and upgrade the ham 

processing plant, formerly operated by Empire Meats.  The 

improvements will be designed to increase capacity to meet 

market demand. 

 

The plans for the Moose Jaw facility involve the purchase of 

new equipment, upgrading, and addition of a boxed beef 

facility.  The plant currently employs about 185 workers, 

slaughters about 2,000 head of livestock a week.  It is expected 

that the boxed meat expansion would add another 100 

employees and more than double the slaughtering rate.  The 

reopening and the upgrading of the Norex plant are expected to 

provide about 57 new jobs and provide an expanded market for 

Saskatchewan hogs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Intercontinental has identified a growing United 

States market for lean imported hams from Canada, and will 

use the Norex facility to meet that demand. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity today to 

congratulate and thank the Mitchell family and Intercontinental 

for the initiative they have shown in taking up the challenge of 

what they foresee as an important opportunity for 

Saskatchewan meat processing and the livestock industry. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

compliment the Mitchell family with the following through an 

agreement that was principally done under the previous 

government.  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, any time that the red 

meat industry has value added alternatives in Saskatchewan it's 

a plus for the province.  This has been clearly recognized for a 

long time by the previous government. 

 

I might also like to say that I'd like to congratulate the former 

head of SEDCO, Mr. Douglas Price, who had a great deal of 

impact on how this deal was put together, a member who these 

people dismissed for being incompatible, but one certainly who 

they took enough confidence in to basically take the same 

agreement the previous government put together and put it 

through. 

 

As I said, it's a good day for 

the farmer, it's a good day for Moose Jaw, it's a good day for 

the meat packing business. And we congratulate the Mitchell 

family for having the fortitude to be part of that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day I would 

like to ask leave of the Assembly to make a brief statement 

regarding one of my constituents. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit Recipients 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

congratulate Yvonne Hassett who is unable to be in the 

legislature today.  Yvonne was awarded the province's highest 

award, the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, on November 25, 

1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this award recognizes achievement, excellence, 

and outstanding contributions to the well-being of the province 

and its residents. 

 

Mrs. Hassett is a nurse who has worked with the native people, 

the disabled, the elderly, and schools for many years.  She is 

active in the Canadian Cancer Society and plays a major role in 

the CanSurmount organization.  On her own time and at her 

own expense she visits seniors, shut-ins, and the bereaved. 

 

Mrs. Hassett is well respected and is indeed an inspiration to 

many people to whom she has provided her support.  I ask all 

members to join with me to congratulate Yvonne Hassett on 

this award and for her lifetime commitment to helping others. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to take an 

opportunity to add my words of congratulations on behalf of 

the government caucus to Yvonne Hassett, a person who is 

well known in south-west Saskatchewan and I guess right 

across the province, to say congratulations here on her 

achievement. 

 

I think the other thing that I wanted to mention and to say here 

is that the opportunity of the member to bring this name 

forward I think is a . . . should be an important part of the 

working of the Assembly, and I want to say that we join with 

him and the members of the opposition in congratulating 

Yvonne on the achievement. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to have leave to 

acknowledge another individual who received the same award. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the city of Swift Current has  



332 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

 been honoured on many occasions by people who have 

received the award of merit and one of those was a gentleman 

by the name of Art Wallman, who received one last year, and 

very worthwhile recognition. 

 

This year a researcher at the research station in Swift Current, 

Dr. Ronald DePauw . . . He was born in Kamsack in 1944, 

went to the University of Missouri and the University of 

Manitoba where he received a degree in plant genetics, and 

during his studies, worked for three years in Kenya. 

 

He was a plant breeder at Ag Canada in Alberta from '73 to '78 

when he became a research scientist in the Agriculture Canada 

Research Station at Swift Current.  He has served the Swift 

Current Separate School Board as a judo instructor and has 

raised an Ethiopian refugee child himself. 

 

Mr. DePauw has acquired an international reputation for his 

achievements in plant breeding.  He has developed a number of 

varieties of wheat and other cereal crops which are resistant to 

disease, moisture, and insects, and have a high yield and 

protein content. 

 

He has worked closely with the Canadian Wheat Board and the 

Canadian Grain Commission, has introduced a new class of 

wheat called "Canada prairie spring," which has greatly 

expanded the market for Saskatchewan farmers and is . . . 

particularly those people around the Lanigan area where the 

feedlot is there. His nine wheat cultivars now account for 28 

per cent of the pedigreed acres of wheat in Canada. 

 

He worked closely with producers and industry in agriculture 

research and technology transfer, has published numerous 

articles, and is much in demand as a lecturer. 

 

Mr. DePauw received a distinguished agrologist award from 

the Institute of Agrologists in Saskatoon in 1988.  And I would 

like to have this Assembly acknowledge his work on behalf of 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of 

attending the banquet and the function at which the 

Saskatchewan Order of Merit was given out this year, and on 

that occasion had the pleasure of meeting Dr. DePauw and 

talking about Swift Current and his experience living in Swift 

Current and working at the experimental farm.  We have a 

great many mutual acquaintances and had quite a lengthy and 

enjoyable conversation that evening. 

 

I certainly acknowledge, as we all do on this side of the House, 

the enormous contribution that Dr. DePauw has made to 

agriculture in this province and in this country, and in 

particular his work in the area of plant breeding.  And we also 

on this side of the House extend our congratulations to Dr. 

DePauw and thank the member for his comments about him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I too would ask leave of the House to have a few comments, a 

couple of minutes on the passing of a great Canadian. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank the members for their indulgence, Mr. 

Speaker.  It seems to me that this House would be remiss if one 

of us did not get up and pay tribute to the passing of one of the 

greatest Canadians that Canada has had the fortunate privilege 

of having.  And of course I refer to the hon. Joseph Robert 

Smallwood of Newfoundland, who although I did not always 

agree with his procedures or perhaps I could say his antics, was 

certainly someone whom all Canadians learned to recognize as 

being one of great stature, particularly as being the last 

surviving Father of Confederation. 

 

I recall many days of my school days when the premier of 

Newfoundland certainly was the topic of conversation.  He was 

the leader of the Confederation with Canada movement which 

resulted in Newfoundland joining the Confederation.  He had 

many, many orders of merit, Companion of the Order of 

Canada and so on; I'm not here to recite all the things that he 

was able to accomplish. 

 

But I'm very proud in one sense to say that Joey and I had 

something in common.  And that is that besides being in 

politics, he also was a hog farmer.  And it says here that he 

operated the largest hog farm in Newfoundland from 1943 to 

'46.  And I just want to indicate to members of this Assembly 

that when I became a hog farmer, I bought out the largest hog 

farmer in all of Saskatchewan, and there's no doubt in my mind 

that he weighed at least 380 pounds.  So that Joey and I do 

have something in common from that point of view. 

 

Certainly he was also . . . Mr. Smallwood was very interested 

in reading, in writing.  In fact he is said to have said that 

politics was an interlude for him between his love of reading 

and writing.  And I think all hon. members would join with me 

in saying that we are certainly very, very fortunate that he 

chose to have an interlude from his first love and get involved 

in politics, and for the contributions that he made to Canada. 

 

And on behalf of Newfoundland and Canada, I'm sure all 

members join with me in congratulating him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

join with the member and all members of the House in 

extending a word of appreciation on the contribution of the 

hon. Joey Smallwood, the contribution that he made to Canada 

as one of the Fathers of Confederation. 

 

Mr. Smallwood was indeed a great Canadian.  He was one of 

those people who made a significant contribution to bringing 

this country to the greatness which we experience today.  We 

are now going through some stressful times as a nation, Mr. 

Speaker, but I'm assured, 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

because of the foundation that was laid by people like Mr. 

Smallwood and people like him, that this country will come out 

of this difficult time even stronger and make such a great place 

for people of this country to live. 

 

Mr. Smallwood was a colourful man, he was committed, he 

was dedicated. And he was proud to be a Canadian, as I know 

all members of this House are proud to be Canadians, and can 

look to the example of people like Mr. Smallwood as we work 

towards making this country the country we want it to be. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance on 

Monday introduced a motion which has been described as a 

blatant and unprecedented attempt to bypass democracy to the 

suspension of the province's constitution. 

 

The NDP motion rescinds the rules and procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and the usual 

procedures for tabling, referral, and consideration of Estimates 

and for the presentation of a budget and the budget debate in 

order to appropriate taxpayers' money to fund government 

operations.  The NDP government is trying to hide its political 

agenda, including the partisan hiring and firing of government 

workers which would normally be questioned in the Estimates 

process. 

 

The government is unilaterally changing the rules of the 

legislature and turning all back-bench and opposition MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) into rubber-stamping 

machines.  It's a flagrant attempt to postpone democracy to suit 

the political needs of the NDP.  Obviously this government is 

on an agenda of suppression and dissent. 

 

The NDP are doing precisely the things it said it would not do, 

Mr. Speaker -- exactly what they said they wouldn't do.  But 

the opposition will do whatever to prevent the NDP from 

abusing this Legislative Assembly.  We will do, Mr. Speaker, 

anything we can in opposition to keep these people honest and 

straightforward over there.  That's what we're here for, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I never thought when I came into this legislature 

in 1978 that we would have two Bills come . . . a motion, Bills 

come forth like has come forth this week.  This here interim 

supply Bill that they call a . . . I call it a budget, just as plain 

and simple a budget.  They just trying to get around those 

words.  And also Bill 18. 

These two Bills and motions I never thought would ever 

happen.  I never thought as I grew up . . . And I had five uncles 

in my family, Mr. Speaker, who went to war.  Two of them 

stayed over in Europe, are buried.  They give their lives for this 

country in World War II.  And then in World War I, I had three 

uncles over there.  And they wanted things right for this 

country.  I am sure, Mr. Speaker, they never thought in 

Saskatchewan this legislature would ever come to something 

like this where we'd have something that's jammed down our 

throat. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, if we could just be asking questions, but it 

can't because they don't want to answer.  Why we're even doing 

here this fall?  Why are we in here at all?  Why did we come 

here?  We only came here so they could justify a budget that 

they won't call a budget.  That's all they're here for. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Their political agenda. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Right.  As the member from Thunder Creek 

says, their political agenda. 

 

In 1978, in 1978 when I was elected in the same time in 

October, the hon. Allan Blakeney did not bring the House in till 

March.  He didn't bother fooling around with this kind of stuff.  

And I don't know why we're here.  There's no reason 

whatsoever to be here. 

 

If we're going to be here and you're going to present, Mr. 

Speaker, if we're going to present a financial report which, as 

the member from Estevan, our leader, said the other day is 

exactly a budget, and you said it's exactly ours, it's not, Mr. 

Speaker.  I've been through it and they've changed it.  It's not 

the same figures that we had.  So then why isn't it a budget and 

why couldn't we have had at least a couple of days, a couple or 

three days to ask the ministers questions? 

 

I wanted to ask the Minister of Finance if I could. And I should 

have the right when he goes around this province saying that 

the deficit and this government now is nearly $975 million.  

That's the deficit for this year.  Almost a billion dollars.  That's 

what he's been saying. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that statement.  I have hard 

time with that one.  I think somebody's been playing with 

figures.  Somebody's been playing with figures, and they have 

a plan, Mr. Speaker.  They have a real good plan.  But it's 

going to backfire on them, because the people of Saskatchewan 

will see by spring how shallow this plan is.  They'll see through 

it. 

 

They started out with their plan with a trek to Ottawa because 

all through the election campaign they kept trying . . . they 

seemed to feel they were going to win, those last couple of 

weeks of the election.  They practically were talking as if they 

were the government.  And they said, Mr. Speaker, that soon as 

we are the government we're going to trek off to Ottawa and 

we're going to get all the money we need from the Prime 

Minister of this country to save the farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

They, Mr. Speaker, knew before they went down there there 

wasn't any chance of getting any money.  They 

  



334 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

knew that.  I think every individual in this province knew, after 

the member from Estevan when he was premier just got $800 

million, that they weren't going to go down there before the ink 

was dry on the paper that gave us the $800 million, that they 

weren't going down there and get some more. 

 

But they had a plan.  The Minister of Finance had a plan.  And 

his plan, Mr. Speaker, was to try to reflect all this here problem 

onto the federal government.  They want to take it off 

themselves.  And then they kept talking about all the money, all 

the money that has been spent.  And we've got such a deficit 

that we cannot do anything for you in Saskatchewan.  We can't 

do one thing because the pot is dry. 

 

That's what they wanted to create.  And what the Minister of 

Finance is trying to do here, Mr. Speaker, is to create a thinking 

in all the taxpayers and all the individuals in this province, that 

we are really broke; to be able to come out next spring with a 

deficit budget, not a balanced budget as he promised the people 

of Saskatchewan.  We know that they went throughout this 

province saying at election time, we will balance the budget, 

lower taxes, create jobs, get money out of Ottawa, improve the 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Which we all know that it's an impossible 

thing to do. 

 

I challenge, over the next four years, if this Minister of Finance 

and his cabinet can balance the budgets, create jobs and lower 

taxes at the same time.  I challenge him, Mr. Speaker, because 

he can't.  Because what he has in mind is have everybody all 

ready next spring for this balanced budget.  Then he's going to 

say no, Ottawa wouldn't pay the farmers, and the Tories left us 

in such a disastrous situation.  He's going to create this 900 . . . 

 

I want him to be able to stand and I want this right before next 

March.  I want this right now to be able to have him show and 

table and show the media and show everybody in this province 

exactly where this $975 million is, because I don't believe it's 

there.  I just don't believe it's there, and I know that he knows 

it's not there. 

 

I want the right to have Estimates in this House, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to be able to ask the Minister of Agriculture what he's 

going to do for farmers in this province of Saskatchewan.  Why 

haven't we got that right, because in the book here, this little 

report, he's saying that he's going to spend some money.  We 

don't know where it's going to go, but we, Mr. Speaker, need 

that right to get the Minister of Agriculture on his feet and say, 

are you going to live up to the promises that you made for the 

farmers in this province of Saskatchewan? 

 

You went throughout this province for the last nine and a half 

years saying, Mr. Speaker, that we have a plan for farmers and 

business men.  We have a plan that's going to keep them on 

their farms. 

But where is that plan?  We thought for sure we would hear it 

in June.  Then we thought we would hear it in July, and then 

when the House prorogued we knew we would hear it because 

he kept saying we have the plan.  And then by August he said 

this plan is coming together, but then they'd come out saying to 

save the farmers, Mr. Speaker, they'd come out to say, we will 

put a moratorium on farm land while we're putting the plan 

together.  And I thought for sure when this House came in this 

fall . . . that's why I said a while ago, Mr. Speaker, in my 

remarks that what are we doing here?  What's the most 

important thing? 

 

When they went out in rural Saskatchewan to win this election 

they said the most important thing was farmers.  Now we 

haven't had one thing from them.  This House is just about 

ready to go home for Christmas.  We haven't had a Bill; we 

haven't had a moratorium; we haven't had a promise from the 

Minister of Agriculture what he's going to do.  He just stands 

up in his seat a couple of times and he told the independent 

member, and he said to me one day, oh, we've been to visit the 

banks and we're discussing with the banks and we're going to 

work out . . . what governments all across Canada have been 

doing on behalf of farmers, visiting banks. 

 

If you think, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Agriculture thinks 

for one moment . . . I'd like him on his feet answering questions 

in an estimate.  I'd like him to stand up here and say, why do 

you think a bank is going to help you out to solve this problem? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We're all in it together, Gerry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- He says we're all in it together, Mr. Speaker.  

Well I'll tell you, he'd better get all in it together because the 

Tories, when we were in government, we were in it together 

with the farmers.  And I've got farmers phoning me -- not just a 

few a day but many a day, Mr. Speaker -- saying, is the new 

government coming down with some protection for farmers?  

What are they doing in ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan)?  Are you asking these questions in the 

House? 

 

They're asking me, are you asking these questions?  We don't 

get a chance to, Mr. Speaker, to ask these questions in the 

House.  We don't get a chance because we haven't . . . they got 

their budget but we've never in the history of this country, ever, 

ever had a budget come down and can't ask questions . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Finance has already 

said, I'll answer every question but I'll not answer for any 

ministers; I'll not answer on behalf of the ministers. 

 

So we have been stifled on this side of the House.  And I want 

all the people in the province of Saskatchewan to know that if 

they didn't want to answer questions, if they didn't want 

Estimates, then they should not have brought this House in till 

next February, March, brought down a proper budget, and 

everything would have been fine and you wouldn't have had us 

so disturbed on this side of the House.  And you wouldn't have 

had the people of Saskatchewan so disturbed, which they're 

going to be when they find out that we've not had a chance to 

ask questions. 

 

I guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, that when we ask the 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

Minister of Finance, if this ever gets into . . . this motion gets 

passed, if we decide in this House to let it pass, because it's up 

to us.  It's up to us, Mr. Speaker, if we decide to do like they 

did many times over there -- talk and talk for days and days and 

days. 

 

And if they think, Mr. Speaker, that the members on this side 

of the House, the 10 of us can't sit here and put amendments in 

and talk for days and days and days until we get some answers 

. . . And I feel like it inside here, Mr. Speaker, until we have 

something solid for farmers, either a plan or a short moratorium 

or whatever, whether it's a short or a long, we have one or the 

other to help farmers. 

 

Because if this House goes out now and there's nothing in place 

in a Bill, there's going to be hundreds and hundreds of farmers 

will not be there by seeding time.  They will not be there. 

 

When we were in government they stood up over here and kept 

saying, unless you people do something instantly we're going 

to lose those farmers, like by the hour.  Now over here when 

you ask the question in question period they say, oh well, we're 

talking with bankers; we're discussing it with bankers. 

 

Well I'll tell you, what this government here when we were out 

on the campaign trail, what we promised for farmers . . . And I 

want to ask the question to that minister in Estimates. I want to 

ask him why he can't put this here lease to own in, that we on 

this side of the House and when we were government promised 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to ask him in Estimates what's happening to this here 

Bill that we were trying to get through last summer in June and 

July -- and they filibustered the House and we had to just give 

it up and go home -- that were going to protect the farmers with 

the first right of refusal on leases.  We had it all ready.  And 

you know it was ready to go and you didn't let it get through.  

We were going to protect farmers out there.  I want the right to 

ask the Minister of Finance these things. 

 

I want the right to ask him what he's going to do in Estimates, 

Mr. Speaker.  I want that right and I have that right.  I have that 

individual right as an MLA representing my constituency and 

on behalf of people in the province of Saskatchewan, to ask 

him what they're going to do.  They've been in government 

now for almost two months -- and maybe you could say that's 

not a long time -- but boy, when you had nine and a half years 

to plan your plan to what you're going to do in this province, 

and can't say one word except bring in something that's 

unprecedented, this supply Bill and then Bill 18, I mean that's 

all you can think about.  There's just no reason for it. 

 

I want the right to be able to ask the Minister of Health.  

There's a big, big figure here in health, Mr. Speaker.  I look 

down here in the Department of Health, three hundred and one 

billion, two hundred and three for the entire year, but on the 

last quarter, $390 million being spent.  And I haven't got any 

idea, Mr. Speaker, what in the world that $390 million is.  

Nobody in this House has any idea what that $390 million can 

mean.  How do you just put $390 million is going to be spent 

on the department.  Is that 

going to be for the nursing home in Hanley?  Nursing hospital 

in Macklin?  Is it going to be for additional hospital space? 

 

You sit here and you complained and you complained that we 

were letting people die for the lack of hospital beds, closing in 

Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker.  But what have they done?  

They've been there two months; you don't see them doing 

anything more sensational out there.  But they do have $390 

million they're going to spend, and I want to know what it's for.  

I want to know whether it's going to be for their campaign 

promises, Mr. Speaker.  Because boy, they could sure make 

them at election time.  They made them all summer. 

 

We can go back to the Department of Education.  I want the 

Minister of Education in this House answering some Estimates.  

If it's only for even 15 minutes, could get a lot of questions 

answered from all these ministers, especially if we had a half 

an hour with her for three or four basic questions to give us an 

outline where this money's going. 

 

In Education, $142 million in the last quarter.  What's it for?  Is 

it going to be for the new school that they're trying to build in 

my town of Loreburn, or my constituency of Loreburn?  Is it 

for that?  Or is it for department salaries?  Or what is it for?  I 

mean it's there. 

 

And we can't get the answers because the Minister of Finance 

says he'll answer any question -- any question.  Mr. Speaker, 

this here will never get into committee because it's a motion.  

It's not a Bill.  It won't get into committee.  If this Bill could get 

into committee and we could talk about it, it would be entirely 

different thing.  We could get some answers.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we won't be able to get the answers because it's not 

going to go to committee.  This is going to be done a different 

way. 

 

The Minister of Finance just said, I'll stand up and I'll answer 

all of your questions, but don't ask me one question that's going 

to be to an individual minister because I won't answer it. 

 

Now I'm telling you if the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan only knew what was going on here, and if we 

had a press that would put the proper news out . . . but they 

don't even have enough fortitude about them to even look into 

what's going on.  I think they just want to get home for 

Christmas like you people.  Our media . . . I haven't got any 

great love for the media.  I'd say that most of our people in the 

press gallery here are not too bad.  They try.  But they go back 

to the Leader-Post, they go back to the CKCK TV and the 

radio and they said, aw that's not important.  And they won't 

even dig into it. 

 

This morning . . . I know some lawyers in this province were 

getting . . . or in the city of Regina were getting phone calls; 

can you interpret what this Bill 18 means?  Well the lawyers 

didn't know what it means.  The press didn't understand it.  If 

the media,  our smart media, didn't understand it, how come 

they had to go and find out?  They're trying to find out today 

the dangers of this. 

 

Anyway I can't talk on that Bill here because we're talking 

about a supply Bill.  I want that right, Mr. Speaker, to have the 

Minister of Health here.  My critic position is Health,  



336 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

and I have many others like Labour, and I want that right.  I 

want the right to ask these people these questions.  I've got 

questions that I'd like to ask the Minister of Labour, many 

questions.  It wouldn't take very long, but I want that right 

before you start spending this kind of money. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people aren't taking this serious.  They go 

out to the media and they make up their nice little comments 

and what the past government done. 

 

Well I'll tell you, when you're just closing off getting ready for 

an election in the summer of 1991 and when this NDP 

opposition filibustered so much that this House got 

unmanageable because . . . Didn't they, Mr. Speaker?  They 

said they wanted to make the House unmanageable.  They 

wanted to make government unmanageable.  They said that.  

And I got to give them credit, Mr. Speaker, they did a good job 

of making it unmanageable. 

 

I've sat in this here House here for 13 years, and I'll tell you, 

I've never screamed and hollered and bellowed like some of 

these people have and walked out and rang bells for nothing 

and filibustered with 10-day speeches and all that.  Well I'll tell 

you, when I . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're doing it now. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well I think maybe 15 minutes in 15 days is 

two different things, Mr. Speaker.  It's two different times.  If I 

ever, ever try to stand up in this House -- which I can do it -- I 

could stand up and say nothing for 10 or 15 hours.  Absolutely 

nothing. 

 

I can remember when the minister from Moose Jaw sat right 

about here, Mr. Speaker, and he went on for, I'd say and I 

believe it was nine hours, and then another one of the members 

from Regina did outdo him by about an hour.  And you've got 

to admit, Mr. Speaker -- you were sitting over here -- that boy, 

they didn't say absolutely nothing. 

 

Well I'm going to be speaking for just a little bit longer and I've 

been saying something here.  I've been saying something 

serious, and you know I'm serious.  And don't laugh because 

it's not a laughing matter to the people in Saskatchewan that we 

can't have you cabinet ministers . . . never, ever did you ever 

see our government or ever before in the province of 

Saskatchewan you've never been known . . . it's never been 

known that a budget comes down, whether you call it a 

mini-budget or whatever it is, that you don't bring forth 

Estimates to at least start out and try. 

 

We could have asked a few questions to cover some of these 

important questions we're asking to the ministers, but no, 

you've absolutely stifled us.  The Minister of Finance walks 

around this House here with his hands in his pocket . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I know the member knows that we are 

not to refer to other members in this House, regardless of 

whether they are walking around or sitting in their desk.  And 

the member knows that's unparliamentary. 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I apologize.  The 

Minister of Finance has said very, very clearly that when this 

motion is ready for you to answer questions, that he would 

answer questions -- any questions, any questions we ask.  He 

said it, I can show him in Hansard where it says: any 

questions, and then he went afterwards, he went to relevant 

questions.  And then afterwards he says, well not on behalf of 

my ministers, I can't answer.  So this has never, ever, ever 

happened before. 

 

I want the right, Mr. Speaker, to ask the Minister of Labour, I 

want my right to ask him what . . . is he going to bring in a . . . 

money . . . or is it going to happen this winter, that without the 

legislature -- that you don't even need it -- that they can raise 

the minimum wage to 7 to $10 an hour?  Is that going to 

happen without the legislature?  Could it happen, Mr. Speaker?  

Yes, it could happen. 

 

When I went throughout this province all this summer, people 

were quite put out . . . restaurant owners, and they were put out 

because people had to pay a 7 per cent PST (provincial sales 

tax) tax on their meals.  Most of them tried to understand it the 

best they could, that we had to have the money and they knew 

we had to have that money.  But they said, people are not 

coming to the cafes as much as they used to.  Well now what 

happened?  They took that PST tax off.  It just went off like 

that on October 31 and I've had many restaurant owners say 

that we never even lowered our prices.  We left it exactly the 

same because we had it included.  People are all coming back; 

they eat their meals and don't know the difference.  They 

weren't worried about it at all because these people, Mr. 

Speaker, went throughout this province scare tacticing people 

about your just . . . this money . . . You're misleading them 

about what that money was going to do that they paid in the 

cafes. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want the right in Estimates to ask the 

Minister of Labour . . . I want my right to ask him what's going 

to happen to the cafe owners and the people that walk in to buy 

their meals in the . . . all restaurants in the province of 

Saskatchewan,  What is going to happen if the minimum wage 

goes to 7 to $10?  I want my right in Estimates to ask him these 

questions, if that's going to happen between now and spring.  

Because I feel it can. 

 

Now if you put a minimum wage $2 to $3 increase per hour 

and the employee of the cafe has to . . . restaurants pay this, 

that will be . . . 7 per cent would be small peanuts -- be 

absolutely small peanuts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to go back and say a few more words 

about the Minister of Agriculture . . . if he understands the 

seriousness of how serious this situation is with the plight of 

the farmers out there.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if he really 

understands how many names are at the Farm Land Security 

Board, Farm Debt Review Board, mediation services; that 

they're at the end of their road now.  That they're right at the 

end of that road.  Unless a moratorium comes on or cash help 

from this government, there's going to be thousands of farmers 

won't be there by spring. 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

Mr. Speaker, this is going to be so serious that this province 

will never ever forget what could happen between now and 

spring.  It could be as serious as 1935.  There could be so many 

farms foreclosed upon, and people have to vacate their farms.  

And I want that right to be able to ask that Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

We have some big spendings in here, Mr. Speaker.  There's 

Social Services, $98 million.  Well I don't know what kind of 

spending that is, whether that's increasing social service 

funding to social welfare people or is that for staffing, or what 

it is, I don't know.. That's why we need to be able to ask these 

questions.  And I want that right, Mr. Speaker, to ask these 

questions. 

 

We've got some departments in here that aren't spending 

anything and I want to know why, Mr. Speaker, that they aren't 

spending some on that department and why they're spending so 

much on another.  We need that right.  That's our right in 

opposition. 

 

You people when you were in opposition took that right and 

you were rightly so.  You had that right and we always had a 

minister here to answer your questions.  Always.  There never 

was once in the history of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

never once was there not a minister here to answer questions in 

Estimates -- and I would venture to say probably in the history 

of this province.  This is going to be the first time. 

 

See now, Mr. Speaker, they're starting to chirp because that 

bothers them.  They've set a precedent for the first time, the 

first time. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- With leave, I'd like to introduce some 

guests before they leave. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I've recognized in the gallery and I hope I 

haven't missed any, but I'll recognize Jake Bendel and Dan 

Kachur and Mr. and Mrs. Yaworski who also participated in 

the meeting this morning.  And I would like to thank them 

again for their contribution to the discussions this morning and 

welcome them to the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also 

like to introduce some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise to also 

welcome the people in the gallery.  I've worked with them over 

the last number of years in Agriculture and understand the 

desire and compassion they have for this problem in this 

province, and I'm glad to see they're continuing their work.  I'm 

sorry I couldn't meet with them this morning, but welcome to 

the legislature. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure (continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, there's also the 

Department of Community Services.  That's quite a large figure 

here.  And then they got . . . It's just $23 million, and that's just 

for the last quarter, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And we're not going 

to ever have a chance to ever find out where this money's going 

to go.  We'll have no way of finding out. 

 

Some members are shaking their heads over there.  Unless 

some minister will tell us these in Estimates, we won't know till 

next spring when we come in in the next budget.  On item 1 

we'll be able to come back and ask after the fact. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's got to be wrong, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  It's got to be wrong that these ministers sit 

over there now.  Several days has gone by.  We could have 

asked a lot of questions of these ministers.  We've had two or 

three days just absolutely wasted here.  There's no way that I 

should have to be standing here at my feet . . . and we're going 

to have some other members talking about this. 

 

We'd be far better if you would just turn it into Estimates.  

Bring your Estimates forward.  Let it go into the Committee of 

Finance so we can ask the ministers our questions.  I mean 

what was wrong with that?  Because we're going to lose some 

time here.  We won't be able to have any answers of where this 

money's going to go.  And we're talking about a lot of money in 

the last quarter. 

 

And they're trying to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, oh it's just 

because we haven't got time to make up a budget.  Well if they 

haven't got time to make up a budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

then why are we here?  Why did we come in here?  What are 

we wasting the public's . . . They want to save money.  They 

went and cut back and froze their cabinet ministers' salaries to 

make them look like . . . which the Tories did since 1982, I 

believe.  We froze the cabinet ministers' salaries to show the 

people we had a heart. 

 

So they followed through with the same thing to save that 

money and then they bring us in here for three or four weeks, 

and talk about how much money that costs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  How much did it cost?  I'd like to know what it costs 

for this House to open up for two or three weeks to pass 

absolutely nothing.  There isn't anything that's . . . one thing 

that's . . . I can't see one Bill that couldn't have waited till 

spring.  Not one thing.  Not one Bill. 

 

And if we don't get some answers, that's what's going to have 

to happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We'll have to hold it up.  And 

then we don't have anything passed until spring until we get our 

answers.  You can, the heavy-handed  



338 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

government can, just up and prorogue the House any day they 

want.  And that's going to cost more money, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  It'll cost more money because each member gets a 

per diem.  They are allowed up for 70 days in a year -- 70 days 

in a session, I should say.  But they can make this into two 

sessions.  And you watch, that's what they're liable to do. 

 

When they get ready for turkey they're just going to prorogue 

this House and then that means everybody got their 

hundred-and-some dollars a day.  Then we'll be coming back in 

the spring and a brand-new session and that way we get another 

70 days.  Shouldn't have bothered with this here three weeks 

right now.  No way we should have -- unless they had have 

brought something forward like they said. 

 

Because I had to hear it for months and months that there's 

going to be a plan for farmers and while we're putting the plan 

together we'll have a moratorium; it's the first piece of 

legislation.  Did I see legislation for a moratorium?  The only 

way you can bring one in is you have to give notice like today 

to be able to even talk about it on Friday.  And I see we got 

extended hours and then . . . But I'm sure if you brought a Bill 

in, regardless whether it's a moratorium or whatever it is, that 

you'd get co-operation from this side of the House, that we 

wouldn't make you . . . we'd give you leave if you'd bring one 

in tomorrow.  We'd give you leave to discuss anything if you 

want to help farmers.  But for goodness sakes, get it here.  If 

you got something that's going to help a farmer out there, get it 

here. 

 

I've heard through the rumour mills right from your own 

departments that the Bill is being put together, a Bill for 

farmers.  That's come right out of your own departments, from 

leaks, that they're worrying about how they're going to keep the 

credit unions exempt and they're going to do this and they're 

going to do that and bring ACS in. 

 

We keep hearing it through members that sit on the different 

boards and what not.  And they tell us that it's happening.  But I 

don't really think they're serious.  I think that you're just trying 

to get through and then blame everything onto the Tories, that 

we held this House up and it didn't happen. 

 

Well I want to put on the record, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if 

they go out of this House here at Christmas time and say that 

the Tories filibustered in this House and they didn't get a farm 

Bill through, well I'll tell you, you've had almost three weeks to 

put a Bill in here about farmers.  So don't ever try that one on 

us.  Don't ever try that one on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 

I've still got a little bit of hope, because there's some members 

over there I've got a great lot of respect for, that they're going 

to come in with something, something for farmers for 

Christmas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if there isn't 

something comes forth before we go home for Christmas that's 

going to give some farmers that's being put off their land a 

feeling of security at Christmas time, boy, the respect I had for 

those members will sure disappear fast. 

I'll lose all my respect, all of it, if one of you people that's 

involved -- there's three or four people that are the power in 

this government . . . and if there isn't a Bill come forth to save 

farmers . . . you can't save them all but you can sure try to save 

as many as you can, and you're not doing anything -- not one 

thing but a trek to Ottawa, that's all you did, and even that was 

a good start on the money.  You took the leader of the Liberal 

Party with you and she thanked you for it, and she was quite 

happy about getting a trip to Ottawa.  And I would have likely 

went if they had have asked me, but I would have been asking 

different questions than you people did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the next time that they go to Ottawa I'll ask them 

to take me with them.  I'll go with them any time.  I've been 

quite successful, Mr. Speaker, in my trips to Ottawa. 

 

There's been a lot of changes, Mr. Speaker, in Crop Insurance 

when I was the minister of Crop Insurance.  And I'll tell you, 

when I went to see the minister of Crop Insurance -- federal 

minister of Crop Insurance -- I tell you, we got changes.  So I 

want to have the minister of Crop Insurance in this House 

under Estimates and answer some questions.  I want him 

answering questions -- how much he's saving by the 271 

firings, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to know how much money 

he saved and how much it's going to cost the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I want to know if the 271 people that were just blatantly fired, 

the ones that were at 44 days . . . they didn't even pick 45, 

because in my constituency they made a mistake and fired two 

adjusters at 45 days, apologized two days later on the phone 

and said you can come back to work; we made a mistake.  So 

they were only trying to get rid of anybody that wasn't into the 

union yet.  Soon as you hit the 45 days, oh, our unions will 

protect you; you're protected by this government; there isn't 

any problem if you belong to a union.  As long as you belong 

to a union, we don't care what your . . . even what your politics 

is as long as you belong to a union.  That's the whole thing 

right there. 

 

Two hundred and seventy-one farmers out there . . . basically, 

farmers that needed money for Christmas themselves were 

fired just like that.  Like Bob Larter, who used to be the 

member from Estevan, said sitting right here years ago, he said, 

where is the socialist sickle going to strike again, where is the 

socialist sickle going to strike again? 

 

Well I'll tell you, you've got a lot of socialist sickles that sure 

struck this last few weeks.  It's got a lot of heartaches at 

Christmas time.  We got somebody that works for the 

government in . . . an individual that wrote me a letter this 

morning, that he worked for SPMC for 21 years -- 21, 22 years 

-- and he was just fired like that without cause. 

 

There was a little bit of cause. He took 30 days leave without 

pay -- without pay, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and took a chance -- I 

thought he could in a country that's . . . where you have 

freedoms.  It was the campaign manager for a Tory.  He made 

his mistake.  But he took . . . after 21 years, go home and tell 

your wife you've got no job and see what that did to their 

Christmas. 

 

We talked about it in question period, Mr. Deputy  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

Speaker, and there was many, many, and you said none -- 

whoever minister answered -- there was none that we hurt.  We 

didn't hurt anybody. 

 

Well I'll tell you we can bring in . . . I'll bring you around 

300-and-some names that you hurt bad.  Then I heard some of 

the ministers go out to the press, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and say, 

oh the PCs when they took over from us in '82 that they just 

fired and fired.  Yes, in that first three or four or five months 

we got 27 -- 27. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that to me is wrong information.  

Ministers who walk out there should look at the facts, they 

should look at the facts.  Well how many did the PCs fire?  I 

remember bringing in when I was sitting over there in 

government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember bringing in the 

facts what the NDP did in '71 after they beat Ross Thatcher.  I 

remember when they came in here and the man from Pense, 

Jack Nichols, his picture on the front page of the Leader-Post, 

that one of the ministers came in and gave him 15 minutes to 

clear out his office.  Well they did it in '71, they're doing it in 

'91, 20 years later.  They don't care.  And we need our right, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We need our right to be able to have our 

ministers lined up over there, and we should have been doing 

it.  Instead of me standing here talking, we should be asking 

ministers question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well then sit down. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well can we ask them . . . Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the House Leader just said if I sit down we'll have the 

right to ask questions to the Estimates to the ministers.  Is that 

what you heard?  Because if they will go to Committee of 

Finance, I will gladly sit down. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I thought for one minute that the House 

Leader was serious, if he was serious, if he would ask me and 

ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and put his light on and ask me 

that question, I'm sure we'll say we'll do it.  All he has to do is . 

. . It happened before, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's happened 

many times in this House where a member stands up and says 

would the person talking entertain a question. 

 

Well, if he wishes to stand to his feet, the House Leader, if he 

wishes to stand and ask me any question, I will give an answer.  

If he wants to go to Committee of Finance . . . now I think he 

wishes he hadn't have said that. 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would like to ask the member a 

question.  And the question is, if we could get him to sit down 

and if we could move to committee on this resolution, we could 

wrap it up here very shortly. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Does the member agree to take a 

question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, he already . . . he 

asked the question, and he said if we could move to the 

Committee of Finance.  And naturally we would if he got up 

there and guaranteed that all the ministers will stay there and sit 

there and answer our questions.  We will do it, but not in the 

way he done it.  He said it when the light wasn't on.  He said 

exactly what he would do; if I would sit down we would get at 

it because I was talking specifically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

specifically about asking ministers questions.  And he said, sit 

down and we'll do it.  But when his light's on and we asked the 

question, he wasn't quite able to do it, was he, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? 

 

We know where we're at.  We want to ask a lot of questions.  

My questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be going in Estimates 

to the Minister of Agriculture, to the minister responsible for 

Crop Insurance, the Minister of Labour, and the Minister of 

Health -- that's my main critic position.  And I've got a lot of 

questions and we all have.  And we want our right. 

 

And yes, as soon as . . . if that's on tomorrow's agenda, we hope 

that the House Leader, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he's serious 

what he says.  We hope he's really serious and tomorrow we 

see where we're going to have Estimates in this House.  Then 

democracy will be back in Saskatchewan.  There's what we 

want.  That's all we've asked for.  And that's not much of a 

request, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ask of a new government. 

 

It isn't our fault, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the now Premier 

picked about six or seven people from his ministers that had no 

experience.  It's not our fault that he's a little bit worried about 

putting them up to answer questions.  It's not our fault because 

we, as the minister . . . The member from Estevan said the 

other day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he said it very clearly.  Maybe 

we have to allow a four or five months kindergarten for these 

ministers. 

 

I think that the . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that the 

Minister of Agriculture has been a person that's been 

throughout this province, involved in a lot of things, and he can 

talk pretty good, but he can't say anything.  He will learn by 

spring.  He'll know enough of the problems of agriculture that 

he'll be able to stand in his seat, stand beside his seat with his 

light on and he'll be able to answer questions because he'll 

learn something over the winter. 

 

But right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he doesn't know or the 

first day of business would have been a Bill tabled for farmers 

in Saskatchewan.  He didn't do it because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

he has not been there long enough to be able to go to the 

power-house and say: Mr. House Leader, and Mr. Premier, this 

is what I demand for the farmers in Saskatchewan.  He's just a 

little boy sitting out there waiting to be told. 

 

And he'll be able to talk all right, but now when he stands up in 

this House, he says nothing.  And I'm hoping by spring when 

this House comes in that he'll understand when the farmers told 

him that it's too late.  It's been too late.  We have lost our farm 

-- we have lost.  That the big farm credit and the big bank 

walked over top of us -- the great big bank.  And this here 

union government didn't do nothing about it   Not one thing -- 

not one thing.  Because I don't think they're really going to. 

  



340 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

Yes, absolutely nothing in this throne speech. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What happened before October 21, 

Gerry? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I heard a heckle from over there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  What happened prior to October 21?  Well 

I'll tell you, a lot of things happened. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not much. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Oh yes. I'll tell you that it wasn't . . . an NDP 

government was against when the federal government brought 

in a Farm Debt Review Board.  They were against the Farm 

Land Security Board. They were against mediation services. 

 

But I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture, why can't he be 

here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and answer for Estimates.  Because 

if I asked him what does the Farm Land Security Board and 

what does mediation services work, and in what order?  And 

what is section 16 and section 20 of the Farm Debt Review 

Board mean?  He hasn't learned that yet.  I know he doesn't 

know.  I know he doesn't understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And that's why they're trying to get this thing through.  They're 

trying to last till March so they can answer a few questions 

after the people and the farmers of Saskatchewan inform them. 

 

As I said here the other night in my throne speech, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that we, the Tory opposition, are still speaking on 

behalf of farmers in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's proved 

by the vote count. 

 

I don't know whether I said this or not, but I'll say it now in 

case I didn't, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was approximately 

600,000 voters in the province of Saskatchewan -- 

approximately 600,000 -- 150,000, 25 per cent, went to the 

Tories.  We did get 150,000. There's about 110,000 voting 

actual farmers in this province -- about 110,000. 

 

So where did that percentage come from?  It didn't come from 

Saskatoon and Regina and Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, it 

came from the rural farmers of Saskatchewan.  So we say that 

we're still talking for farmers. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge the House Leader that 

just left . . . sorry, I withdraw that almost what I was going to 

say.  We challenge the House Leader and the Premier of this 

province, tomorrow when I look at the blues and look at the 

agenda that there'll be Estimates and a Committee of Finance is 

going to be on the agenda.  That's what I ask for.  And that's 

what I expect that we're going to get because he said it very 

clearly.  I hate to repeat it again, but you've got to repeat to this 

bunch many, many times so they understand. 

 

But your Deputy Speaker, he said it very clear: if I would sit 

down it would happen.  So he got up and asked me the 

question. His light's on, he's on the record, but he changed it 

from what he . . . but he's thinking. He changed the way he had 

it worded, but I think we're getting him to move. 

I think that if the media would just do their job now and they 

would jump right on this here government, if the media would 

get their mind off and get a little card from them that they're 

having a Christmas party or something -- if they can get their 

mind on the people and the province of Saskatchewan and get 

their mind on you people and ask you some of these questions, 

maybe they can move you a little bit.  Because it's the media 

and you that were together for nine years.  That's why we got 

defeated. 

 

I hate to put down the media too hard.  But boy I'll tell you, I 

don't think the media does their job of reporting as good as 

when I came in here in 1978.  When I came in here in 1978 that 

was full from door to door and members would be called out 

for opinions; and they would come back in and they would sit 

there the better part of the day, because you can't tell me 

watching on a screen back there or reading in Hansard is 

exactly the same as listening in the House.  Because the odd 

one that come in and listened would get what's really going on; 

he would understand what that person's saying. 

 

And we need the media.  I challenge the media to go after the 

Premier.  They're back in their little rooms watching on 

television.  They might learn, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 

Minister of Finance and the Premier of this province and the 

House Leader are the three powers in that government over 

there.  And it's up to them, it's up to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

to decide between now and tomorrow -- because tomorrow is 

Thursday and we're getting out of time.  Because I see the 

pressure is being put on for longer sitting hours on Friday, 

longer sitting hours continuing on Saturday and also is going to 

be continuing on Monday and the long sitting hours are going 

to continue on Tuesday, and I'm afraid we're still going to be 

here on Wednesday. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've had many people say in this 

province, well what in the world are 10 people going to do in 

opposition to scrutinize this big, powerful government?  Well 

I'll tell you, these 10 people that sit here in opposition are going 

to do a lot to scrutinize you people. 

 

You may be able to use your power; you may be able to 

outvote us. You may be able to do those things, but I'll tell you, 

there won't be anything that you're going to push over this here 

opposition without the people of Saskatchewan knowing what 

you're doing. 

 

We're going to remind them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there's 

been no change from 1982 to 1991.  We had nine years of Tory 

government, and the NDP went out there for this last year, 

saying you're going to get brand-new government, you're going 

to do all these wonderful things. 

 

Well I'll tell you, two of these Bills that came in here is more 

than . . . I said when I started out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I 

couldn't believe that we had to sit here in this province and we 

had people that never, ever thought -- like my five uncles that 

fought in World War I and World War II, and two of them 

gave their lives -- whoever thought that this would ever happen 

in this province of Saskatchewan, that we would lose our 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

freedoms. 

 

And when we have Bills like have been brought forward . . . 

there's even one on the municipality Act here that I never 

thought I'd ever see.  You never seen Bills like that under a 

Tory government. 

 

So if you think you're smart over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

they think they're smart bringing in these type of Bills. I'll 

guarantee you by spring they'll be at about a 35, 40 per cent on 

the polls.  And look out, because I also said many times in the 

last six months that if we lose this government, if we lose this 

election, we'll be losing government.  But if the member from 

Riversdale, the Premier of this province, now Premier, had 

have been in government and defeated us four years ago, he 

would have been gone with the wind, exactly the same as we 

did. 

 

If you think that for one minute that it's any different in Texas 

and Oklahoma and North Dakota and Kansas than it is right 

here, because it isn't.  Because what you hear farmers say down 

there, they're against whoever's in government.  And they're 

going to be against you and awful fast. 

 

I've got people, Mr. Speaker, I've got people in my cafes in 

Craik, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are saying, what is this 

government doing when they won't let you ask questions in 

Estimates?  They won't let you ask them, and they voted for 

you.  They voted for you or for the Liberals in this here 

province.  They voted for you, but they've already got second 

thoughts.  They've already got second thoughts.  So that 

happened in two months. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I watched the polling very carefully in 

this province, as it happens.  Well I tell you we were sitting two 

years . . . In 1984 we were sitting almost as high as we were on 

election day.  So if you people the way you're slipping right 

now in the first two months and bringing these kind of things in 

. . . And if it wasn't for Christmas time, you wouldn't get away 

with it, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's because of the season.  

Everybody's out there shopping and . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I thought they didn't have any money. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well the union people . . . The Minister of 

Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says they haven't got any 

money.  Well I'll tell you, the farmers aren't out there doing 

much Christmas shopping.  It's your union boys that's doing the 

shopping with the big wages.  They're the ones that's doing the 

shopping. 

 

In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so some of my other 

colleagues can have something to say on this motion, my last 

words are that I challenge and I expect between the media and 

the three or four main power-houses of that government to get 

together tonight.  And we see on the blues tomorrow that we're 

moving into Committee of Finance.  Thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy this 

afternoon to address the supply Bill.  The actions taken by the 

government through the motion before the House today are 

unprecedented and of grave concern.  The very principles of 

democracy are at stake here, Mr. Speaker.  The principles of 

our constitution are built around freedom of speech and the 

rights of individuals and on the accountability of those elected 

to serve the people. 

 

Long-standing traditions of grievance before supply must be 

observed if a government is to remain accountable to the 

people it serves.  These very basic rules date back to the Magna 

precedent and are fundamental rights, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The motion before this House today suspends those very rights.  

It eradicates the accountability of government; it eradicates the 

opposition's right to voice their opinion.  And, Mr. Speaker, it 

eradicates the very essential rights of democracy. 

 

The principles set before us through the constitution include 

holding government accountable for the spending of public 

funds.  And, Mr. Speaker, accountability is necessary.  The 

government must outline where the moneys are to be spent.  

The government must answer questions about where the funds 

are to be allotted and why.  And, Mr. Speaker, through the 

democratic process every member in this House is allotted six 

days to debate the spending, to exercise a very important right 

allowed to us in a democratic nation -- freedom of speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the motion before us today takes precedent over 

the rights of the people, over the rights of the members of this 

Assembly. 

 

Never before has a government in Canada stripped the basics 

of democracy from the pages of the very constitution written in 

order to safeguard its own political agenda, in order to erase 

any questions of why hundreds of innocent people have been 

fired by the NDP for political reasons; in order to discuss and 

dismiss questions that would expose the NDP government for 

using totalitarian tactics to fulfil a socialist mandate; in order, 

Mr. Speaker, to undermine the very principles this Assembly 

was formed to protect. 

 

No other government in Canada has ever abused a huge 

majority of members in order to suppress the rights of the 

individual and . . . (inaudible) . . . inherent in each of us by 

democracy. 

 

But then again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP members have already 

stated that the rights of the individual aren't as important as the 

institution.  That is evidenced by the Draconian legislation 

before us today. 

 

This motion, Mr. Speaker, makes it impossible for me to ask 

the NDP why they have allotted 1.3 millions of dollars to fight 

forest fires in Saskatchewan in the middle of the winter.  Well 

we all know there are no forest fires in Saskatchewan in the 

dead of winter.  So where is the money really going?  We have 

no way of finding out because this motion makes it impossible 

to question the 

  



342 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

minister. 

 

I would also like to ask the Minister of Social Services where 

the remaining $300,000 went that funded the Sask Works 

program.  But am I allowed to pose my question?  No, the new 

Minister of Finance has tried over the past couple of days to 

take the spotlight off of this motion and place it on the former 

government.  Mr. Speaker, that is not good enough. 

 

If he recalls, the former government presented the budget 

before the House and also went through Estimates.  Questions 

were posed by the opposition and answered.  Answers, Mr. 

Speaker, that is all we are asking today -- answers to important 

questions.  Mr. Speaker, we have already told the members 

opposite, we are willing to give up the budget debate in order 

to have the Estimates.  We are also prepared to give them quick 

interim supply if they should allow us to pass through 

Estimates and get answers to the people of Saskatchewan, 

answers the people deserve to have. 

 

But the NDP will not allow us to pass through Estimates 

because they have much to hide from the people of 

Saskatchewan.  What other reason could the NDP possibly 

have for not allowing Estimates?  The NDP form of open 

government, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of government Lenin 

would be proud of because it is not open, Mr. Speaker.  It is 

anything but open. 

 

In fact I am watching the Bills from the NDP, looking for a 

wall to be constructed around our province.  After motions like 

the one before us today, fencing people in will be the only way 

the NDP can maintain a population in Saskatchewan.  Since it 

will take over four years to build a wall of that magnitude, the 

NDP will cram other totalitarian tactics down the throats of 

citizens in the meantime. 

 

What the NDP, through its motions, are trying to do is totally 

unacceptable, Mr. Speaker.  They are taking money directly 

from the people of Saskatchewan and excusing themselves 

from any accountability, any questions whatsoever.  Mr. 

Speaker, they are putting themselves above the reproach of 

their official opposition, above the reproach of this Assembly, 

above the reproach of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

What is the use of meeting in this Assembly if the NDP are 

going to use a swollen majority to exploit the principles of 

democracy and place themselves above the principles this 

country was built upon?  The members opposite should be 

ashamed, Mr. Speaker.  If this Assembly bows to the pressures 

of the NDP vast majority and this motion, we may as well 

change our province and name it to the People's Republic of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

In addition to forcing totalitarian methods upon this Assembly, 

the NDP have also asked the official opposition to nominate 

members to a special rules committee the government is 

forming to rewrite the rules after this act of suspension.  If the 

NDP government is willing to suspend all the rules whenever 

conveniently required, then it matters not a whit what the rules 

are. 

 

How can such members be appointed in the current 

climate where the government has proven conclusively it has 

no regard for the role of the opposition of or the rules 

themselves? 

 

It's inadmissible, Mr. Speaker.  It's also inadmissible for the 

NDP to act as if they are fulfilling the will of the people by 

putting this motion forth.  The will of the people, Mr. Speaker, 

is to have as much say in government dealings as possible, to 

make decisions for themselves. 

 

The motion before us is making it impossible for the public to 

know what the NDP government is doing.  The motion makes 

it impossible to get answers for the over 250 crop insurance 

adjusters that were fired by the NDP; makes it impossible to 

learn the details of the Gass tribunal and their political 

mandate; makes it impossible, Mr. Speaker, to find out any 

details of Estimates and expenditures of any minister in the 

government. 

 

When is the NDP government going to honour promises of 

open government?  Is it possible to have open government 

when no questions may be asked; when no answers are 

received?  How can the public and the opposition have a way 

of finding out what secret deals are being thrown together by 

the NDP?  When are the members opposite going to begin to 

take responsibility that comes with being government?  When 

are they going to stop blaming the former government for their 

own inability to run this province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP claim to be moving this motion because 

it will be the answer to what the public wants.  I would like to 

ask the NDP why they haven't honoured the answers given in 

the recent election if they truly desire to honour the wants of 

the public. 

 

What happened to the plebiscite on abortion funding?  Or 

balanced budgets?  I have received letters from constituents 

asking me to push the government to enforce the voice of the 

people.  But I'll tell you what has happened to the plebiscites, 

Mr. Speaker.  Nothing.  The answer is clear.  The NDP do not 

have the will of the people foremost in their agenda.  It is 

impossible. 

 

It is impossible for the NDP government to have the public's 

interest at heart and still ignore the basic fundamentals of 

democracy like they are doing today.  And they are ignoring 

the people, Mr. Speaker.  The NDP are wolves in sheep's 

clothing, waiting for their opportunity to pounce on the public 

purse.  They are like the child who has a hand in the cookie jar, 

only there is no parent to discipline the wrongdoing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are here to debate a supply Bill, a Bill that I 

have taken to heart.  And if my leader hadn't spilled a glass of 

water on my notes I'd know what . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the member would 

entertain a question. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- It's up to the member if he wants to 

entertain a question.  If the member wants to, he can say so.  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to ask the 

member whether or not that member from Maple Creek 

supports . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  It's up to the member to 

indicate whether or not he wishes to entertain a question. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- When I finish sorting out my notes I'll see if I 

feel like answering a question.  And I can assure you, sir, that 

when we form government we'll answer your questions. 

 

Now to get back to this business of entering a supply Bill and 

presenting it to be a hand-off for a budget.  We have many 

questions, Mr. Speaker, about this process.  I, for example, 

have many questions that I would like to ask of the member of 

Rural Development. 

 

We started this morning to discuss a question in question 

period about a very important matter to my constituents, the 

matter of receiving oil and gas lease money that has been 

owing for some time to some of these ranchers out in the 

country, money that these ranchers have to have in order to pay 

their own lease fees so that they can retain the land that they 

use to feed their cattle.  If these people don't get their lease fees 

paid, it will be impossible for them to be able to make their 

lease payments. 

 

We have questions like when will this money be paid, or is it 

available to be paid?  We have questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

with regards to whether or not this money has been allocated in 

the so-called excuse for what isn't called a budget, I guess we 

have to say. 

 

Are we going to allow these farmers to charge up their lease 

fees until this money comes through, or are we going to see 

them charged interest?  Or maybe they will lose their leases 

altogether.  Now this is not a question that should be taken 

lightly because the cash flow in the country is such that it is so 

tight right now, Mr. Speaker, that many of these individuals 

can't possibly pay their bills unless they receive the money that 

the Department of Rural Development owes to them. 

 

It's my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that unless we have what is called 

a regular budget where we can come in to debate and question 

where this money is and whether or not it is in this document, 

we'll never know.  And we may see a stalling tactic that simply 

follows the lines that they will not pay any money to the 

farmers and ranchers, hoping that they will in fact have to 

jeopardize their ownership of that land so that the government 

can take it back and perhaps allocate it to some of their NDP 

friends. 

 

It is a serious question, this matter of how moneys are held 

back from farmers that need the money in order to pay off their 

bills.  Is there some kind of a secret plan here perhaps for the 

NDP to try to take over this land and give it to somebody else?  

We want the right to ask these kind of questions and the right 

to have answers to them. 

 

(1600) 

 

In the area of rural development we've talked about a lot 

of things that we need to know fairly soon.  We want to know 

whether or not there's going to be money available to our rural 

municipalities that have had a problem with tax collections in 

the past year.  Tax collections have been poorer in some 

municipalities than they've ever been before.  We see a 

situation arising where some municipalities have collected less 

than half of the taxes that they have ordinarily coming in.  In 

those municipalities it is impossible for them to supply the 

goods and services that the people of those rural municipalities 

need to have -- roads that need maintenance in the winter time, 

that provide transportation not just to the people that live in 

those municipalities but transportation to all of the people of 

the province that want to travel through. 

 

But the more specific problem is the fact that without these 

taxes coming in, municipalities have had to curtail plans for 

snow removal.  And that gets down to the basic crunch of life 

for us.  And here we have a situation, Mr. Speaker, where an 

awful lot of school buses may not be able to travel this winter 

because there's no money for the municipalities to provide 

snow removal. 

 

Now it would seem to me that if we had the right to ask some 

questions about the funding in Rural Development and a 

budget were supplied to us so that we could present these 

questions -- in fact perhaps some mistakes have been made and 

some errors might have occurred where people have forgotten, 

and we all can make some mistakes -- maybe the minister 

would discover that he'd forgotten to include some of these 

very important things and he could make some adjustments.  

But we're not allowed to debate or discuss the thing.  We're not 

allowed to ask the questions to possibly bring these matters to 

the front. 

 

And if we are allowed to bring these matters to a focus, then 

the minister could take the appropriate actions and find the 

moneys perhaps to make sure that our school kids are able to 

get to school through the winter. 

 

It just seems to me that we've got too many important things, 

Mr. Speaker, that haven't been considered in the way that this 

proposal has been brought to us.  I don't suppose that the 

minister in charge of Rural Development really understood that 

some municipalities are in that much of a serious problem with 

tax collection. 

 

We want to have the right, Mr. Speaker, to ask such questions 

as the ones I've just proposed.  We also need to know things 

like, is there enough money to go around, or will we be running 

more of a deficit?  If we're going to be running more of a 

deficit, we have to get some indication for the people who have 

serious concerns about where the moneys should come from to 

pay for the things that we need in our province. 

 

And I've had a call from a man from Edmonton -- and I won't 

mention any names because obviously he has the right to some 

anonymity on this kind of thing -- but he wanted to know 

whether or not the NDP were going to introduce a death tax 

and whether or not this would be retroactive to the election 

date. 

 

It's very important to these people to know whether or not 

  



344 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

a succession duty will be placed in the province because many 

farmers and ranchers of course die every year.  It's unfortunate, 

but it's a fact of life.  And their families are left with the 

concern of how to settle estates. 

 

And we are very concerned that we have to know whether this 

approach is going to be taken.  And we have to have the right 

to ask the questions of the members opposite and especially the 

ministers, to try to ascertain for our constituents what they need 

to look for in planning in case such a thing would happen. 

 

If you're going to have a death in the family, you want to know 

are we going to lose the family farm because of succession 

duties?  Or would it just simply be better for us to walk away 

from the farm and not try to settle the estate and let the 

government have it.  We haven't had the ability to find out 

these kinds of things, and we want that right.  We're trying to 

preserve the right to see for our people the things that they need 

to know, the things that they have been asking us. 

 

I heard the other member discuss with you the need for money 

for farmers, and the plight of farmers is certainly near and dear 

to my heart.  I have worked with farmers, and I've been in 

many farm homes with many farmers.  And I can't say that I 

enjoyed doing that kind of work, but I have to say that I 

enjoyed getting the experience that I got because it makes me 

knowledgeable, at least to some extent, as to what people are 

facing out there other than just my own farm family. 

 

And having some record of knowing what people are going 

through, through that process, I have to say to this government 

that I am truly disappointed that you haven't come up with 

some type of an approach to get farm aid to farm families this 

year before Christmas.  And if you couldn't do it before 

Christmas, at least you could've come with a plan that could've 

given the folks some feeling of security, some feeling that 

maybe they'd have a reason to want to get up in the morning 

through January and February.  It's going to be pretty tough for 

some of the farm families to face the world through a bleak 

winter with no money and very little possibility of getting any. 

 

You've given no hope to these people when you could've done 

that.  It would've cost such a very small amount of money to be 

able to get quite a bit of money out of the federal government.  

I think it wouldn't have been that hard after taking a trip to 

Ottawa and spending all that time and money to get down 

there.  I don't think it would've taken much more effort to get a 

commitment from the federal government that they would turn 

the moneys that they've promised over to you in the springtime 

when they determine what they allocated. 

 

It wouldn't have been that hard for this Department of Rural 

Development or the Department of Agriculture or one of these 

other departments to find a few dollars by cutting back some 

place else and provide that kind of money necessary . . . to 

borrow the money and pay the interest so that it could've been 

paid out to the farmers and the farm families.  Or at least it 

could've been promised to them by January or February, some 

time in the future, when it would've given them some hope that 

at least they might be getting it.  You'd give them a reason 

to get up in the morning, a reason to want to continue to go on 

with the business of farming for next year. 

 

Certainly these kind of dollars aren't going to be enough to save 

a lot of the farms.  And I have to sympathize with an awful lot 

of farm families.  I'm sure of one thing, and one thing I'm very 

certain of -- I honestly believe that more farmers in this 

province are in serious financial trouble than any of the records 

show. 

 

The farm people are a proud people, Mr. Speaker.  They are a 

very proud group of individuals.  And that pride ties them to 

secrecy about being in financial trouble.  And sometimes, even 

though I admire them, I believe it would be better for all 

farmers if they'd simply come right out and say, we've got a 

bigger problem here than what shows to the public, and let it all 

sort of be known.  But that pride is important because it's the 

kind of pride in oneself and the pride in one's farming 

operations that keeps these people on the land and keeps them 

struggling through these very difficult times. 

 

Where else in society would you find a group of people as 

tough as farmers and ranchers at sticking with things -- things 

like depression and no profits and no income.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to be able to question the Minister of Rural 

Development and the Minister of Agriculture and the Minister 

of Finance to find out if there's any plan in this document to 

provide any funding for people so that they will have some 

hope for the future and for the next few months. 

 

It seems as though we've said in this province that we're simply 

going to write these folks off for three or six months, and that 

that'll be okay because we can say the past government didn't 

do its job right.  But that's not the point.  We're living through 

the future now.  And in those next few months it's going to be 

absolutely critical that these people find some hope to continue, 

or they're just going to simply throw their hands in the air and 

walk away. 

 

And I guess I'd have to say here that I don't want to be a 

pessimist, but some of them may not just throw their hands in 

the air; they may decide to end it all.  And that is the tragedy 

that we're in in this farming business today.  And we can't find 

out from anyone, by not having a question approach to a 

budgetary type of document, whether or not this government 

has any plan at all to help these folks out. 

 

We want to ask the ministers for things like their Estimates and 

how things are going to work.  We want to know the things 

about moratoriums, because even though moratoriums are not 

the kind of thing I would personally advocate because of the 

severe implications that are involved, for those people that it 

does involve, they have an absolute necessity to know if such a 

thing is even being contemplated. 

 

Now if we can't ask the questions to find that out, then how our 

are credit unions and our banks to know what kind of future is 

in store for them for the next winter?  Is it possible that there is 

a plan for a moratorium to come on that would cause credit 

unions and banks to have to take enormous losses?  Would I as 

a person who puts my 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

money in the credit union, from my monthly wage that I now 

receive for being here, will I stand perhaps one day to see that 

credit union door closed and my money gone?  Will my father, 

who is retired and has a little bit of money in the bank, 

suddenly find out that his little bit of cash that he kept in 

reserve is going to be gone because the bank may have to close 

its door as a result of having too many farm foreclosures 

dumped on it, and all of a sudden they find there isn't enough 

money to cover the losses?  Will I as a farmer, perhaps next 

spring, wake up and find that I don't have an operating capital, 

that perhaps the credit union or the bank won't any more give 

me operating money as a loan in order to operate my business? 

 

Those are questions that we can only find out if we have the 

ability, Mr. Speaker, to talk to these members and ask them the 

questions as to whether or not there are any financial plans for 

this type of thing to come into effect. 

 

Now there are some ways that you can do some moratorium 

work to help farmers, but I think you would have to go and say 

that a different type of wording would have to be used because 

an outright, genuine moratorium wouldn't be the kind of thing 

that our financial institutions could tolerate.  It just simply is 

not in the cards.  I didn't live through the Dirty Thirties, but I 

certainly heard a lot about them through the years.  A lot of my 

family lived through them and survived quite well. 

 

They talked about a type of moratorium that was put on back in 

those days.  And I don't know, from what I've heard, that it 

worked all that well.  I can't see any evidence in the history that 

I've been able to study, that a whole lot of people really 

survived as a result of that.  The conditions that occurred after 

the Great Depression sort of worked its way into a war, and I 

guess that probably had as much to do with straightening out 

the economy of Canada and the rest of the agriculture world as 

much as anything else. 

 

So if we get back to the point of the moratorium idea, then we 

can only scare off our bankers.  We can only probably cause 

our credit unions to go broke.  And yet we don't know if that's 

the kind of intentions this government has.  Because they won't 

allow us to go into a budgetary debate where we can ask 

questions and find out if these kind of things are being 

contemplated. 

 

We have a lot of things that could be done.  The lease to own 

option has been mentioned before, and I think it was a good 

idea, and I think one that perhaps the government ought to take 

up upon.  Maybe they could call it a different name or 

something to make it more plausible for themselves.  

Obviously they wouldn't want to use something that we had as 

an idea.  So maybe they could think of a different name for it 

and come up with the same idea.  And if they got the notion 

that it was their idea, they might be able to bring it in and 

actually help some folks.  And we wouldn't care about that.  

But it would be quite nice if you'd try to do something like that. 

 

We want to know a lot of things about a lot of different 

questions with regards to financing, Mr. Speaker.  In my 

constituency of Maple Creek we have a lot of tourism that goes 

on, and I haven't even heard that one mentioned yet. 

 

But here we have a situation where we have the great 

Cypress Hills, one of the finest tourism areas in the world.  

And the great Cypress Hills offers all kinds of cross-country 

skiing, good lodging.  We have a swimming pool that's modern 

and beautiful up there, and yet we don't know if there's any 

money being allocated for some new venture into winter sports 

in that area.  And we'd certainly would like to have the 

opportunity to ask the Minister of Parks and Renewable 

Resources whether or not there are any financial commitments 

in this document to help the kinds of parks that we have. 

 

And certainly there are more in this province than just the great 

Cypress Hills.  There are those types of parks all over our 

province.  And we'd like to know, is there any funding being 

made available to those parks so that they can operate through 

this winter and make a reasonable contribution to the recreation 

of our Saskatchewan people and for the people that might come 

in from outside of our country? 

 

It's possible that with the kinds of tourist organizations that we 

have in the south-west corner of the province, that an awful lot 

of money might be generated through this tourism.  And if we 

just had a little spark to kind of create it and to get started, it 

might all just sort of work a lot better.  And that can't happen 

unless, of course, we find the government having allocated 

some funds or maybe even have a plan of some kind to go in 

that direction. 

 

We don't know, for example, if any moneys have been allotted 

to even keep our highways' snow clear so that people can get to 

the parks.  And those kind of questions, Mr. Speaker, have to 

be answered, and we have to be the ones to ask them because 

that's our job. 

 

Now I could dwell on tourism for quite a while because in our 

area we also have the Great Sand Hills.  And here we have a lot 

of groups that have started tours and promotions to get people 

to come in and tour through The Great Sand Hills to see 

everything from the open sand dunes to the great ranches and 

productive pastures that we have through that region.  And we 

also have of course in that region the gas fields -- all things that 

are of interest.  We have things like buffalo jumps in that area 

where the native people used to run herds of buffalo over the 

edges of the cliffs.  And those buffalo were used for food, and 

we have the remanents of that still today in our area. 

 

And people go on tours with these bus tours.  And if we could 

get the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources to commit 

himself to some dollar funding to encourage that kind of thing, 

it would be a great thing through the winter and especially 

through the summer for our area. 

 

But we can't get to ask about the supply of money in this Bill 

from the minister, to find out whether he has given that any 

consideration or any thought.  And we believe that we should 

have the right, Mr. Speaker, to ask him these questions so that 

we can find out whether or not we in fact have any kind of a 

kick-start plan in place by this government to make tourism 

work in our area, so that we can get a few dollars maybe to get 

some of these projects going. 

 

If we just had the right to ask some of these questions, we 

might be able to not only find out the answers to what's 

  



346 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

going on but perhaps to stimulate some thought in that 

direction so that new plans could be made.  Even if those new 

plans weren't done right away this year, it might just possibly 

be, Mr. Speaker, that they might take up the idea and bring it 

into their plans for next year.  And that's what the whole 

process could be about, is that we might plant some ideas and 

seed some food for thought and get something going in this 

province from a government that says it wants to do something, 

has campaigned on that basis. 

 

Now it appears to me that what we've almost had happen here 

-- and I have no objection to this -- is that we seem to have a 

practice session going on here.  And certainly being new here 

it's all right for me to have some practice because I certainly 

need it, and so do a lot of the other fellows. 

 

But I'm not really that sure that that's why the people decided to 

elect us and send us here, was to practise all winter.  And the 

reason that I say that it looks like a practice session is quite 

simply that we don't have a budget, we don't have a plan, we 

don't have any direction.  We don't even have a decent throne 

speech to indicate any plan for the future. 

 

(1615) 

 

The only legislation that we have so far before us seems to be 

legislation that attacks the past government and attacks the past 

and tries to rip down and destroy the things that have been 

done in the province over the past years.  And where is the 

future?  We haven't seen one. 

 

So it leads me to believe that what we have here is a practice 

session.  And I'm enjoying the practice but I think maybe it's 

time we got down to some real business and some real work, 

present a real budget, give us a chance to ask some real 

questions from some real ministers that maybe will either say 

they can't supply us with the answers or perhaps that they will 

go home and do their homework and find out what's going on. 

 

And I know very well that they wouldn't want to stoop so low 

as to ask me for any advice, but I could certainly help them to 

find a lot of good folks that are not terribly political out there 

and they'd be quite willing to help to formulate a plan so that 

we could go on with the future in this province. 

 

The right to ask questions is a very important one to us, Mr. 

Speaker.  We've talked about all kinds of reasons why we need 

to have these things done, and in our constituency -- and I 

guess that's what I should dwell on because that's what's 

important to the people that elected me -- we've got a very 

thriving gas and oil industry and the gas and oil industry has to 

know what direction our province is going in. 

 

This is an industry that not only invests a lot of money in our 

province but it provides an awful lot of jobs; it provides a lot of 

hope for a lot of people.  In our area a lot of our young farmers 

farm sort of whenever they can and they work full-time with 

the oil or gas industry. 

 

Now those jobs are essential for these people.  I don't 

sometimes know why they do it, but what happens is that 

they'll end up making a great wage working in the oil and gas 

industry and then they'll end up putting that money into their 

farms, which are losing money, and keep them going so that we 

can supply cheap food for the world.  And some days I wonder 

if some people don't deserve to starve for the way they treat our 

farmers. 

 

But anyway those jobs are there, and they're very important 

because they give these young farmers the hope they need.  

And in this process that we're involved in we can't find out if 

that industry is protected through this budgetary process or not.  

We have to know whether the industry is going to be 

encouraged to expand, encouraged to continue to work, 

because the plans are long term, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can't expect a petroleum company to come into 

Saskatchewan and invest 100 or $200 million in drilling 

programs if they don't know what direction we're going to be 

going in.  They have to know a long time in advance what their 

profit potentials are or what their break-even potentials are or if 

they're going to, in fact, lose money.  And obviously if one of 

those companies realizes that before they start that they're 

going to lose money, they won't be here.  And if they're not 

here, we don't have the jobs and we don't have the economic 

activity that we will need. 

 

And this is very important to my constituency because we 

happen to live in an area where this, in fact, is a fact.  We have 

the petroleum industry, very active over the years because 

that's where the gas and oil happens to be under the ground. 

 

Now some of the other members here have got constituencies 

with exactly that same kind of condition.  And we've got to 

know through this winter whether or not there's going to be 

some kind of a plan that will encourage these industries to 

continue to work.  We've got to know, from our ability as an 

opposition to be able to ask the questions of the ministers in 

their supply Bill, which is the economic direction of our 

province. 

 

And it's passed off so quickly as being something that sort of 

doesn't matter, just a stopgap, something that's sort of going to 

just be used today and gone tomorrow.  And in reality it is the 

plan for the future for some very big industries that are so very 

important to so many of our people. 

 

These young farmers need to have the work and a lot of them 

run little businesses on the side.  I'm sure most of you know 

that a lot of these young farmers come up with good 

inventions.  Little things like a Texas gate for example.  A 

fellow decided one day that the way to keep cattle in the fence, 

rather than to open and close the gate every day, was to build a 

Texas gate.  He got the plan from somebody else obviously.  

He didn't think of the whole thing himself, but he perfected it, 

he made it better.  And he used some of the very basic raw 

materials that were around him -- worn out pipes . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well of course not.  We can't even see if it's 

going to encourage the industry to stay here -- that's the 

problem.  You see, we don't know whether this fellow's going 

to be able to stay here or not. 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

Now that was a question from one of the other members here, 

was whether or not this is going to help him.  Well it can't 

possibly help him.  Because he can't find out whether or not 

this industry's going to be encouraged to stay here. 

 

So anyway, these young farmers . . . and I'm thinking of one 

specific one here, but I again won't mention anybody because I 

think people want to be somewhat anonymous in their life's 

pursuit -- but he decided that the thing to do was to make these 

Texas gates out of old grill stem that was worn out and of no 

use to anyone else.  And he made these Texas gates and he 

markets them to the petroleum industry and they put them in 

where their roads go into the farmers' fields and the livestock of 

course is kept in.  Nobody has to open or close a gate and it 

became a very good thing.  The farmers liked it.  The 

petroleum industry liked it. Nobody forgot to close the gate. 

Everybody was happy because they could drive in and out 

without having to open a gate.  And this young farmer was able 

to found a lucrative industry. 

 

And these Estimates you see can't do anything for this fellow 

because we can't find out if there's any plan in this budget to 

encourage the industry to continue to work.  And what we have 

to know, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not the petroleum industry 

is going to be encouraged through the winter to stay in 

operation, so that young farmers that have these good ideas can 

stay in business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- One of the members asked if I had a 13-hour 

speech and of course I'll have to answer that because obviously 

I don't have, and if my illustrious leader hadn't spilled all that 

water over all my notes I probably would have been able to go 

for at least a little longer. 

 

But I wanted to talk to you a little bit more about what this 

budget, or this document rather, lack of a budget, is not telling 

us in terms of our ability to ask questions to find out.  Once 

again, we've got to go back to the plight of our farmers. 

 

I've talked about the petroleum industry and how important it is 

for us to have direction for that particular industry, but here 

again we find ourselves unable to find out from this 

government if it has any plan for agriculture and agricultural 

people. 

 

We have just got probably thousands and thousands of farmers 

out in the province of Saskatchewan who need cash, and right 

now in our constituency, we're no different than anyone else.  

We suffered through some of the worst droughts that you've 

ever seen.  We had grasshoppers so thick you couldn't get them 

washed off the windshield when you drove through The Great 

Sand Hills a few years ago, and they devoured crops like 

nobody's business. 

 

Those people, of course, had to go out and buy feed, and 

ranchers out in that country had to buy thousands and 

thousands of tons of feed in order to keep their herds intact, and 

we had some really good government programs that kept the 

herds alive.  We moved cattle to 

the north country and that sort of thing, and we managed to 

make those herds survivable. 

 

But the reality of life is that each time you go through a period 

of years like that -- where you have to buy a lot of feed to keep 

them through the winter, where you have to spend money to 

move them back and forth up north and so on -- people start to 

accumulate debt.  And it's not just a grain farmers' debt.  The 

ranchers in our country have got huge debts as the result of all 

of those years of drought.  And we can't find out from our 

Minister of Agriculture whether he has any plans to help these 

folks. 

 

What happens if we run into another drought situation?  What 

happens if . . . Do we have any contingency plans?  We don't 

see that any place here, and we have no way of asking or 

finding out. 

 

We don't know if there was an estimate for a possible plan to 

bring some feed into certain areas that may have had some 

problems this year.  And certainly while we had a good crop, 

there were also some misfortunes in our province where people 

didn't get a lot of good feed.  And it's important for us to have 

the ability to find out whether or not there has been a 

contingency plan in these Estimates. 

 

And we can't ask.  We can't even pose the question to stimulate 

the thought process so that the minister can go back to his 

drawing-board and say, hey maybe we should think about this; 

there's a possibility here we might need something.  So that's 

part of the process of debate.  That's part of the process of 

questions is to get people encouraged to use their minds to 

think about possibilities in the future. 

 

In the Rural Development . . . well I've talked to you a little bit 

about the problems that we have with no taxes coming in, and 

school kids need to get the roads open, and not having the 

ability to find out if any contingency plan is built into these 

Estimates.  And we have to dwell on that a little bit longer. 

 

What happens if we get a really tough winter?  You know 

we've got a government across the other side that doesn't think 

about providing answers to whether or not we can keep our 

school buses going and get some plough snowed.  And I pose 

the question . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Send snow blowers out to fight forest 

fires. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Forest fires, there you go.  We'll fight it that 

way.  Well the hon. member has pointed out that maybe we 

could do it that way and use a snow-plough attached to a water 

bomber, and instead of fighting fires we can blast the roads 

open with the water bombers. But I don't think that'll work, 

gentlemen.  I think we better have a little more serious 

approach to this problem and talk about the realities of getting 

kids through these roads. 

 

I wanted to mention that there's a lot of things in here that we 

need to know in order to be able to carry on the business of this 

province so that the people can survive through this long, cold 

winter. 

  



348 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

And certainly it will be a long, cold winter, Mr. Speaker, with 

no plans for assistance to our rural people -- a proud people 

that don't accept help willingly or easily, but have to have it 

through these terrible, difficult times. 

 

We've seen an attack by our Rural Development people 

through the Bills that they have presented, an attack on the 

grants to municipalities.  And here again I have to say that I've 

seen past governments do this sort of thing, cut these grants.  

But as a reeve of a municipality, I have to say to you that I was 

against those kind of cuts when they happened then and I'm 

certainly still against them happening now.  It just doesn't seem 

to me that the right thing to be doing is cutting back grants to 

municipalities at a time when the cash flow to them is 

decreased by the result of taxes not coming in. 

 

People need to have the kind of services that municipalities 

provide.  We don't just grade roads in the summer time and we 

don't just do a little bit of patchwork here and there.  We also 

take care of a road system for the full year.  And all through the 

winter months we try to find plans to keep the roads open so 

our kids can get through. 

 

Some municipalities, Mr. Speaker, actually employ private 

people to run snow-ploughs, and we would like to have the 

opportunity to ask the question of the Rural Development 

minister whether or not he's made any contingency plans for 

financing to be able to finance private snow-ploughing, in case 

the municipalities can't get enough money to get the job done. 

 

What would be wrong with having a contingency plan where 

you would put up some money so that people who have 

snow-ploughs that do their own road work, plough their own 

lanes open, could go out on the roads and be compensated for 

their work?  I don't think there'd be anything wrong with that at 

all. 

 

(1630) 

 

But how can we plant the seeds in the minds of the member if 

we can't ask him the questions whether or not he's already 

thought of it, or whether he's put up any contingency plan in his 

financing?  So it's important, Mr. Speaker, that we have this 

right to ask questions in a budgetary process.  Because if we 

don't have the right to ask those questions, we can't stimulate 

thought. 

 

We've got a lot of problems, Mr. Speaker, with this budgetary 

process also because we can't ask questions to find out what 

our contractors have to look forward to.  Here again, in our 

municipalities and in our municipal network, we've got 

hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people that depend on 

their living doing contract work for municipalities.  And this 

year with tax money not coming in and no contingency plan to 

provide moneys, these contractors are going to have to be laid 

off. 
 

Now it is traditional that a lot of the dirt movers and that kind 

of contractors are laid off in the fall and they naturally expect 

that they won't work a lot through the winter.  But you've got a 

lot of contractors that move snow, a lot of contractors that put 

up snow fencing, people that get out and do those kind of jobs.  

And we don't know if those people are going to be provided 

with 

an opportunity to work or not.  Are we just going to fire 

everybody in the province and lay them all off and put them on 

unemployment insurance and have nobody doing anything and 

all the roads closed shut -- everything shut down in the whole 

province?  I mean we just might as well pull a blanket over top 

of the whole province and shut her down till spring. 

 

It just about makes you wonder if there's any plans for 

anything, but we can't find out.  We know very well that we've 

already seen a Bill coming in that's going to retroactively 

reduce the moneys to grants to municipalities. And I've already 

told you how much I was against that coming in and how much 

I'm going to oppose any future attempt to do more of that sort 

of thing.  And we get the notion that there's going to be some 

more of that kind of thing. 

 

And the fact that there seems to be a cover-up here, that we 

can't ask the questions of the minister certainly enforces my 

belief that maybe we're heading into that kind of a direction, 

that we're going to have a total cover-up here, a lot of cut-backs 

in the spring.  Maybe next summer my local contractor who 

hires about five people to run his earth moving equipment to 

build roads, maybe he can just transport them all over to 

Alberta because that might be the only place he can find a job. 

 

Do we have any contingency plans?  Have we got any thought 

put into this process?  We've got to know, Mr. Speaker, and 

we've got to know fairly quick because people don't make their 

plans next spring for what happens next summer.  They start to 

plan through the winter. 

 

Municipalities do their budgeting through January and 

February for the most part.  An odd one will let it go until 

March of course because sometimes things get tied up 

financially, but the real big plans are in the people's minds now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I could tell you right now that most of the 

roads that we're going to do anything more to than just an 

ordinary grading for next summer has gone through the minds 

of my municipal council.  And they're back home thinking of 

the things that have to be done so that we can draw up a budget 

through the winter where it will be balanced by next fall.  And 

we won't run a deficit because we will have had an opportunity 

to plan through the winter and to plan our projects so that it 

will come out with a balanced sheet at the end of the year. 

 

Municipalities don't very often run deficits, although some do, 

and that's unfortunate.  But for the most part they do balance 

their books.  And provincial government might take a lesson 

from the way municipalities run their business.  And it might 

just be a good idea if the Minister of Rural Development would 

take a little time and tour around some municipalities and see 

how things are done.  We don't just come in here with 

Estimates that nobody debates and nobody questions and 

nobody can talk about.  We sit down and we hash it over. 

 

Rubber stamps -- that's what the minister says we're  

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

supposed to be.  Well I don't just feel like laying down and 

rolling over and being a rubber stamp today.  And I think it's 

about time that we did some forward planning in this province.  

It might just be time for some of the ministers to go out and 

find out what's happening in the real world with planning and 

development.  What we do in this country is go out and plan 

what we're going to do, and then we plan it according to how 

many dollars we're going have come in and we don't end up 

with a big deficit. 

 

So what we've got to do is get back to the basics here.  We've 

got to start thinking out things the way the RMs (rural 

municipalities) are doing.  But we've got to think out how 

many miles of road are we going to build next year and what's 

it going to cost?  And we have to be able to have the ability in 

this legislature to be able to ask those kinds of questions, Mr. 

Speaker.  Because if we can't find out what the direction is 

going to be for the winter, what hope do we have to ever find 

out what we're going to do next year through the summer? 

 

Will there be a grant for municipalities, for example, so that 

3-D construction can apply for some contracts to build some 

road.  Or does he ship off to Alberta right now?  Maybe he 

should be ordering in a truck and loading up and getting out of 

here while the getting is good because we can't find out if 

there's any possibility that he will be protected to get some 

work for next year or not. 

 

So we have to know these things, Mr. Speaker, to protect the 

people of our province, not only the young farmers that work 

for these construction crews, that work for our gas and oil 

industry . . . these industries need time to plan. 

 

If you think it's tough to plan for road building in a 

municipality, I suggest somebody over in the other side take a 

look at what it takes to run an oil company.  You're talking 

hundreds of millions of dollars of planning.  And you don't just 

walk into the province of Saskatchewan and start drilling oil 

wells tomorrow morning.  You plan this for a year or two or 

three ahead. 

 

Why do you think that the Department of Energy and Mines 

issues leases that are three years in advance?  Because this kind 

of thing needs budgetary planning -- the kind of planning, Mr. 

Speaker, that we can't find out anything about because we're 

not allowed to ask the questions because we don't get into a 

budgetary process that is in fact a budget.  And it's about time 

maybe that we did have a budgetary process. 

 

And maybe we should take one step back instead of . . . two or 

three back and just take a look at what's going on here.  And 

maybe the government should replan its thinking here and 

throw this thing in front of us tomorrow morning and say, okay 

boys, we'll take a look at what you guys have suggested.  We'll 

take our leader, Grant Devine's idea, and we'll go into this 

thing. 

 

And here it is. I've got it laying here on my desk amongst all 

these water-soaked papers.  And it says here that the opposition 

and the government would agree to have the motion which 

suspends the constitutional requirements of presenting a budget 

and submitting Estimates without a vote here. 

The Minister of Finance would present a budget.  It can basic . 

. . I got to have a drink of water and get my mouth limbered up.  

It can be basically the budget document he is trying to present 

as a financial report.  And the opposition will agree not to 

debate the budget speech on condition that the speech itself 

would not be inflammatory or political. 

 

Now that's not too much to ask.  I mean to take the partisan 

politics out of a budget.  I mean a budget is talking about 

dollars and how you're going to spend them and where you're 

going to put them.  It's the future of the province, to be exactly 

correct.  And we've offered to do it without obstruction and 

without debate, and it wouldn't take as much time as what it's 

going to take to debate the principles that we're losing by not 

having it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Now I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that 

the area of taxation comes into play every time we talk about 

any kind of a budget.  And when we go back to our municipal 

experience . . . And I'm certain that it has to play over into our 

process here at the provincial level.  Certainly the rules that 

apply at the junior levels of government must also apply at the 

senior levels of government. 

 

And I want you to know that I don't like taxes any better than 

anybody else does.  I'm sure that nobody really likes to be 

taxed, but death and taxes are the realities of life that we have 

to face.  But it's so much easier to live life if you have some 

idea what's going to hit you next.  If you happen to know that 

you're going to be taxed, then you can prepare for it; you can 

budget for it. 

 

But the way this process is being presented to us, we aren't 

going to be able to determine whether or not we're going to 

have to have more taxes.  We've just seen the provincial 

government go through an exercise to eliminate the expanded 

part of the PST.  And for those folks that might take the time to 

listen to this, I emphasize expanded portion because there are a 

lot of people in my constituency that still believe that the entire 

PST, the entire health and education tax is going to be 

eliminated by this government. 

 

They were, as an expression was put to me a long time ago, 

they were snookered, Mr. Speaker.  They thought they were 

actually going to get rid of all the tax that they were paying for 

health and education and that this government was going to 

protect them from the entire 7 per cent on everything they 

bought.  And that turns out not to be true. 

 

But even taking away the expanded part of that PST, Mr. 

Speaker, means that the government will fall short on its target 

for revenues to run this province unless we can ask specific 

questions of this document, Mr. Speaker, to find out where the 

money's going and why it's going there.  And what's happening, 

we can't determine where the government's going to get the 

money to pay for the bills it's encountering.  And if we can't 

determine that, how can we forecast a prediction of what kind 

of taxes to expect? 

  



350 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

Do we expect for example, a payroll tax for our employees 

through this province?  Now people have talked about maybe 

we would have the minimum wage go up.  But even if their 

minimum wage goes up, what good is it going to do them if we 

right around stick a payroll tax on them and maybe take the 

whole thing back away from them. 

 

So how do we know if the government is planning these kinds 

of things?  And certainly they must have some kind of a plan of 

how they're going to pay the bills.  They took all this time for 

the last two years and all through this election campaign to tell 

us that they were going to balance these books, that they're 

going to show us how to run this province without a deficit.  

And if they're going to do that without having a printing press 

in the basement of this building, then they're going to have to 

tax somebody. 

 

Now who are they going to tax and how are they going to tax 

and who's going to make the plans of how you're going to live 

with this?  That's what we have to know.  That's why we have 

to have the right to ask these questions of the ministers with 

things that are as basically fundamental as a budget. 

 

And this is not a budget. This is a statement.  And we can't get 

to the questions that have to be answered in order for the 

people of this province to be able to plan their futures and to 

plan their direction.  So, Mr. Speaker, this is extremely 

important. 

 

We've had quite a lot of time to discuss the questions that relate 

to me directly as to why I feel we should be going into this 

process.  But I think maybe that we should emphasize a little 

more the idea of our leader, Grant Devine, when he said that he 

would actually . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member may not be aware 

that we do not refer to people by their first or last name, but by 

their constituency. And I'm sure it was just a slip of the tongue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, certainly a slip of the tongue.  I 

just had a piece of ice caught in my teeth. 

 

The member from Estevan has proposed for us an easy way out 

of this whole predicament, an honourable way, a face saving 

way, no egg on anybody's face.  The member from Estevan 

happens to be one of the brighter individuals that I've ever 

encountered in my life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And it has been my experience, Mr. Speaker, 

that this individual would not suggest to this Assembly 

anything that he would not himself do.  When he makes you a 

commitment, you can bet the bank on it, you can bet your farm 

on it.  He's going to stick to his word. 

 

And he said to this Assembly that he would commit this group 

of people to not obstructing the budget in the budgetary 

process.  And when he said that, he meant it.  And we could do 

this and we could do it in a relatively short period of time, and 

we could get the answers that 

people need to plan their future.  And that's what we have to 

have. 

 

And I suggest to the folks across the way that maybe you 

should reconsider tomorrow morning.  Come in here and say 

let's take the boys up on this option.  Let's all save a little face 

and save a little time.  Let's do the job right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- A supply Bill might have seemed like an easy 

alternative when it first came out.  It's altogether possible, Mr. 

Speaker, and we're willing to concede the possibility that 

perhaps the members opposite didn't really think through the 

implications of what they were doing.  It might have been a slip 

of the pen or a slip of thought and maybe sometimes you have 

to concede that we did things in a hurry and we shouldn't have.  

It may have far more reaching implications than we ever really 

thought it would have. 

 

But in light of the fact that it does have such serious 

implications, in light of the fact that the media people have 

actually been writing some articles about the fact that it is a 

serious question and other people in the rest of the country are 

taking a look at this process -- they too are adding their little 

bits now in the media, pointing out that they too show some 

concern for what's happening in this House, not just with this 

particular document, but with many of the other things that 

we've seen happen throughout this past few weeks. 

 

And when the rest of the world starts to take note of the 

parliamentary procedure, Mr. Speaker, in this House in 

Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker, we must be in a situation and 

at a point where we should take a second look at what we're 

doing.  And we would fully be willing to go along with the 

suggestion by our leader to give you folks an easy option and 

an easy way out, the right way out and the right way to find the 

questions and answers that need to be answered. 

 

We've talked about the need to get farmers some money, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it is so imperative that we have to repeat it 

again.  If we don't do something to help our farmers and 

ranchers through this winter, a lot of them won't be there next 

spring. 

 

I wonder if a lot of folks here that maybe come from 

backgrounds other than agriculture have any idea what a family 

farm is really all about and how we will be affected if we can't 

find out through this budget whether or not there's any plan to 

help the folks on the land. 

 

If this process, this supply Bill has some money allocated 

somewhere to help the people to keep their family farms, then 

we should know about it.  And we can't find out because we 

can't ask the questions.  The Minister of Agriculture is not 

going to be answerable to where his money is being allocated.  

And we want to be able to find out whether there's any plan at 

all to try to help folks to save those family farms. 

 

(1645) 

 

And it's important that we save those farms, because it's 

  



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

like having a member of your family die in the psychological 

effect that it has on people when they lose their land.  It's not 

only the backbone of the economy, it's something that you live 

with.  And the land to a lot of people -- and not to everyone, 

but to a lot of people -- it becomes a part of your heart and your 

soul.  You live with it, you do everything with it. 

 

There is no better person to protect the land and the 

environment than a farmer or a rancher who has had to pay 

money out of his own pocket in order to own a piece of land, 

except for one case, and that's for the one that inherits it from 

his grandfather that was there for three generations before him.  

And that need to protect that land is there. 

 

The whole economy, Mr. Speaker, of this country is dependent 

on agriculture.  Not only that, but the actual ability for people 

to live is dependent on farmers to produce the food that we 

need.  If you don't have food, how are you going to live?  

Somebody will say, well gas and oil is pretty important, but 

food is important.  And people that produce food with a 

negative income are hard to come by. 

 

And we have to find out, Mr. Speaker, if there's anything in this 

supply Bill that will help to preserve those family farms that 

are willing . . . People that are willing to work their lives away 

in this province with no profit and no income are going to be 

hard to replace, and we've got to find out if there's anything in 

here that those folks can depend on to continue with their 

life-style and to continue serving mankind in the way they are 

doing. 

 

We wonder, Mr. Speaker, after we look at this supply Bill, 

whether or not the gas and oil industry will in fact even be here 

next spring.  Will they perhaps just simply say, it looks to me 

like this government's going to run out of money; they have no 

plans for any taxation to cover their financial needs . . . I was 

going to say something else.  But they have no plans that are 

apparent. 

 

The opposition in this legislature, they will say, has not had an 

opportunity to be able to question the reports that are put on the 

Table.  We can't question the ministers to find out whether or 

not there's any plans to pay the deficit or to balance the books 

or to balance the budget.  You can't find out if there's any 

incentive for the petroleum industry.  And the first thing that 

they're going to start to wonder is, are we going to be the 

targets?  In that question what they're saying is, are we going to 

be the targets so that the province running out of money will 

start putting on new royalty taxes onto our industry in order to 

make up for the loss? 

 

Then you know very well the answer has to be that there's a 

good likelihood that that will happen.  They're a target of 

industry because they handle a lot of money.  And if you tax an 

oil industry 1 per cent, you're going to get a lot more money in 

the form of revenue than if you happen to tax me as an 

individual.  Because obviously they're dealing in millions and I 

deal in dollars.  And so they see themselves as being a target 

and they're worried, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They're very worried out there that this government may 

decide to turn on them as the cash cow that will be milked in 

order to fund the needs of this province; to balance the budget; 

to come through with the election promises that were made 

perhaps somewhat frivolously at times. 

 

And we have to wonder, looking back, hindsight being what it 

is -- it's pretty good -- you'd have to wonder if the NDP would 

have had to make such costly promises in the last days through 

the past year because most likely they would have formed 

government without doing that.  But now they're committed.  

They're committed to an expensive program of promises and 

the gas and oil industry are certainly going to feel that they 

may be the targets. 

 

We happen to have gone through . . . We went through a 

situation, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency where people came 

to debates during the election process and they said things like, 

we're going to overhaul the entire revenue process with the 

petroleum industry. 

 

If they're planning on doing something like that, Mr. Speaker, 

we as an opposition have to have the right to study the supply 

Bill, to find out in fact if that is what's happening.  The 

Minister of Energy and Mines has got to be accountable to us 

as an opposition so that the industry out there can know what's 

going to happen to them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We know for a fact that in the past this great 

industry has been the target for people desperate for cash, 

especially in governmental areas.  And we know the result, Mr. 

Speaker, was that an awful lot of the gas and oil industry 

people did in fact pack up their bags and they went home -- 

home is either in Alberta or in Texas, but it's not in 

Saskatchewan.  They only come here to explore when it is 

advantageous to do so. 

 

And if we can't ask the questions from the Minister of Energy 

and Mines, then how are we to know whether or not these 

people can be encouraged to come in with their dollars to spend 

through the next winter.  We have some indication, no 

guarantees obviously, but some indication that 2 to 300 gas 

wells could be drilled in The Great Sand Hills over the next 

winter. 

 

Right at the moment my understanding is that those wells are 

not being drilled because there's a fear out in the area out there 

with the industry.  They're afraid that they will lose whatever 

advantage they could gain by drilling those wells.  And I know 

that to many members in this Assembly, that profit is a kind of 

a dirty word.  But the reality of life is that with the gas and 

petroleum industry, if they can't see a bit of a profit coming, 

they won't be here.  They're going to just not drill.  They'll just 

keep their money and go somewhere else. 

 

There's offshore drilling and all kinds of things where they can 

spend their money.  I mean you've got all kinds of situations 

around the world where there's a lot better supplies of gas and 

oil than what we have in Saskatchewan -- better in terms of 

economy at least.  We have a lot of it, but it's very expensive to 

get and it's very expensive to process. 

  



352 Saskatchewan Hansard December 18, 1991 

We have a situation with environment out in the Great Sand 

Hills, and the environmental assessment programs that have to 

go on before these industries can continue their work.  It costs 

them hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, in order to 

protect that fragile environment. 

 

And I want to pass a bouquet, if I might just in passing here, to 

that industry for the beautiful job that they have been doing in 

protecting the environment in those Great Sand Hills and 

surrounding area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- One farmer told me that if his fields had been 

as well protected during the sand storms that we had in the past 

few years -- in 1988 and '89 -- he would have been a very 

happy man because his land wouldn't have blown at all.  The 

actual fact is that the petroleum industry has gone out there, 

they've reseeded grass, they put up snow fences, they haul 

water, Mr. Speaker, to do this.  But they have to know what 

their future's going to be. 

 

And they can't tell, Mr. Speaker, if they have a future if we 

can't find out from the Department of Energy and Mines 

whether or not there's any contingency plan for a new taxation 

or even the threat of a new taxation for them. 

 

That's what the questioning process, Mr. Speaker, is all about, 

is to find out what the plan is, what people can expect in the 

future.  Can they have a future or do they simply pack up and 

leave?  Do they provide the jobs that we need or do they run 

away? 

 

I want to talk just for a minute about the people in our 

constituency and the kind of plans that they have and the kind 

of things that they do based on what we do here in this 

Assembly.  Based on what they can predict the future to be, on 

the kind of questions that we would ask and the kind of 

answers we could get, they base their determination on what 

they're going to do in the future.  And the kind of moneys that 

they think that they can spend on the land itself, protecting the 

land, is largely hinged on how much taxation they feel they 

may have to be prepared to pay. 

 

For example, if a farmer knows that he's got to pay a whole 

bunch of taxes, then he's going to naturally save his money to 

pay those taxes because he doesn't want to lose his farm.  But if 

he doesn't have to pay so many taxes and he can see this in the 

future, that those taxes won't be so high, he can take some of 

those very precious dollars in this tough economy and he can 

put them back into the land. 

 

So who becomes the best preserver of the land out there than 

people who are in the agricultural industry? The ranchers and 

the farmers that know and love the land.  And if we can have a 

plan that allows these people to know how to budget for the 

next few years, they can put into programs things like 

grassification and reseeding some of their soils down that are 

lighter, might blow.  But instead of having those big black 

clouds that came roaring through here in the '80s, we can stop 

that because we can assure those farmers and ranchers that 

they'll have the money to work with to be able to go to work on 

their land. 

And we can't find that out, Mr. Speaker, because in this 

document we can't find out if there's any plan by the 

Department of Agriculture to put up some moneys so that we 

can have programs like tree seeding.  Out in our country 

shelter-belts are extremely important.  But we don't know if 

there's a plan at all for the future for Saskatchewan with that 

sort of thing.  All we can find out is that we're going to spend 

one-point-whatever millions of dollars fighting forest fires. 

 

Now maybe we can put that to some good somewhere by 

dropping some water on some of the land out there, and maybe 

we can get something to grow and make some use of this after 

all.  But it is kind of silliness to think that we could do that. 

 

And what we ought to do is have the right, Mr. Speaker, to 

question this document as a regular budget, so that we could let 

the minister know of our concerns in that process instead of 

this process.  And if we could do that then he could rethink his 

plan.  He might take that section out of the budget and switch it 

over and say hey, we'll go along with providing farmers and 

ranchers with some cash. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- And maybe they could inform the people over 

at Indian Head that grow all of the little trees and things like 

that that they'd have a big program coming next year and they 

ought to get ready for that.  And those farmers could use that 

money to plant some shelter-belts and some trees out in 

south-west Saskatchewan where we certainly could use a few 

more trees. 

 

Now you know, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about things 

like grassification and shelter-belts it leads right into 

wondering what the Minister of Parks and Renewable 

Resources has got in mind for wildlife in our area.  We've got 

the situation where we've had to have extended hunting 

licences in order to control our wildlife.  And we've got to 

know whether there's any contingency plan in this supply Bill 

to finance that kind of thing.  Right now we had . . . The 

hunting season's just closed down and there were some 

extended licences, and we can be thankful to the former 

minister for recognizing the problem. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But we don't, Mr. Speaker, at this point have 

the ability to question anybody to find out even if there's a 

contingency plan to go out and count those animals, to see if 

there's still a problem or not.  We've got one of the members 

suggesting that Crop Insurance could use a little more money 

probably to compensate farmers, and that's certainly a fact.  An 

awful lot of these ranchers and farmers have lost their feed 

supplies from these large herds of animals and it is important 

that perhaps somebody take a look at the idea of giving a little 

bit of compensation. 

 

You will recall a few minutes back that I referred to the kinds 

of debt load that some of these people have incurred having to 

buy feed.  This is another reason why 



December 18, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

they've had to incur these feed costs. 

 

Wildlife has come in there and multiplied, not because the 

wildlife's done so well by themselves but mostly because the 

farmers and ranchers have dug dug-outs and supplied a water 

supply so that the wildlife, in fact, can multiply.  You can't 

multiply anything without water.  You have to have water to 

drink as well as to grow things, and as soon as the wildlife 

populations had water supplies, then they were able to 

multiply.  And they've multiplied to large numbers where they 

eat up a lot of the feed that the ranchers depended on for their 

livestock.  And then if you happen, Mr. Speaker, to hit a 

drought period, you get into a situation where you have to have 

a contingency plan to provide some help for those ranchers. 

 

Now what we've got to know is, will the minister come forward 

through a budgetary process and show us whether or not he has 

moneys available for a contingency plan?  We can't ask that 

question in this process.  We have to stand here and ask it now 

and hope that he will consider it and maybe do something and 

maybe we've sparked some thought through this process of the 

debate, rather than the debate that we should have been doing 

through the budgetary process. 

 

Now the numbers of wildlife out there, Mr. Speaker, may not 

be such with the measures that were taken by the previous 

minister.  And yet we don't have any way of knowing whether 

or not any counts have been taken.  We haven't had a chance to 

talk to our ranchers to see if there are still herds of vast 

numbers. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


