




















































Hansard: December 17, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 299 

 December 17, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Municipal Law 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Ms. Hamilton, from the Standing 

Committee on Municipal Law, presents the first report of the 

said committee which is as follows: 

 

 Your committee met for organization and elected Ms. 

Hamilton as chairperson and Mr. Serby as vice-chairperson. 

 

 The committee makes the following recommendations: 

 

 That the Standing Committee on Municipal Law be granted 

power to hold meetings away from the seat of government. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Moved by myself 

and seconded by Clay Serby, the member from Yorkton: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on Municipal 

Law be concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you Todd 

Korol.  He is sitting in the west gallery.  Todd Korol is with 

First Light Associated Photographers and is from Saskatoon.  

He's well-known with the local media in Saskatoon and is an 

up and coming photographer with National Geographic 

Magazine and I welcome him here to the House today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

have a question for the Minister of Finance.  Mr. Minister, last 

evening the opposition submitted a proposal that would achieve 

the objectives of the government for money with some dispatch 

and the objectives of the opposition to maintain the 

constitutional order of this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you: have you had an opportunity to 

consider those proposals and are you prepared to comment on 

them now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I 

welcome the member's question and I want to say to him that's 

what most important of all here is what is the 

objectives of the public of Saskatchewan.  And the objectives 

of the people of this province is to put the past behind them, to 

begin to develop the future, for this government which is a new 

government to begin to develop the four-year plan to deal with 

the debt and the deficit.  That's what this government is 

intending to do. 

 

All we can do with the present situation is put in place the 

former government's budget because of the situation that was 

created by the special warrants and by non-passing of the 

budget.  I still think that that is the most appropriate course to 

do.  And I leave it to the legislature to decide when the 

resolution comes up for consideration at a later time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Minister, 

you are obviously not going to answer my question as to the 

appropriateness of the motion that we put forward, the 

amendment.  Mr. Minister, it is apparent to the people of this 

province that there has been a mistaken report saying that the 

opposition is demanding that you come forth with a 

full-fledged budget.  You have been using that argument and 

that statement as an excuse for saying that you have not had 

time to prepare such a document.  And even our independent 

member in the House here, in her expert opinion, is suggesting 

that you do not have time to prepare such a document. 

 

Mr. Minister, for the edification of the opposition, would you 

now explain how the document that you have tabled is 

anything other than budget Estimates? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is clear and the 

members opposite know, because in 1982 when they were 

elected for the first time, it took them seven months to prepare 

a budget, from April until November.  It's the magnitude of that 

kind of the time that is required in order to put together a 

budget.  That's why what we have before the House today -- 

introduced yesterday -- is not a budget; it is a financial 

statement.  It is a report on the special warrants and the interim 

supply Bills that have provided funding in the past, which was 

an option for this government to employ for the final three 

months.  And we decided that we should not. 

 

It also provides an opportunity for the legislature to vote supply 

for the final three months.  And therefore because it is not 

possible to have a budget, all we can do is implement the 

former government's budget with all its flaws and its 

weaknesses and its huge deficit.  We can only ask the 

legislature to do the correct thing and vote supply for the 

remaining last quarter of this fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  The minister has in fact presented a budget, and I 

hold it in my hand.  You take a look at this document, Mr. 

Speaker, and you will find it being identical to any other 

documents and budgets that have been tabled in this House.  

But you have chosen to table it  



300 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

under a different name and you call it a financial report. 

 

Mr. Speaker, given the fact that it is a budget, Mr. Minister, do 

you not agree that the only thing that you are changing is the 

requirement for having individual ministers getting up and 

being responsible and accountable to this Assembly for their 

individual departments?  Is that not your intent, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't wish to be 

unkind but it takes more than the picture on the cover to make a 

budget a budget. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the member needs to 

understand that a budget includes much more than a request for 

supply for three months of a year.  A budget provides an 

outline of tax measures and revenues and many other things 

which . . . and borrowings, which is not included in the 

financial statement because that was done by the former 

government.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it would take a great deal 

more to put together a budget than what the member would like 

to suggest to the House it would. 

 

Because the election was not held until October and because 

there was no budget presented . . . or was not passed in the 

spring of this year, the government and this legislature is faced 

with the difficult situation of not having time to prepare a 

budget, of the need to prepare a budget for 1992-1993 which is 

initiated and will take a considerable amount of time because 

of the circumstances we face.  And that's why today we are 

faced with a financial statement and the request for a supply 

vote on the final three months. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that is 

a bunch of nonsense and you know it.  And so do the people of 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new question and I will direct this question to 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, is it the position of your government 

that you are going to renege on the principle of ministerial 

accountability, where this opposition will have the opportunity 

in this House to question individual line by line of the 

departments so that the ministers are going to be responsible 

for their action? 

 

Is it your intent now to renege on that because you are afraid of 

the group of 10, that the ministers are not going to be able to 

answer the questions?  That is what I asked you, Mr. Premier.  

What is your real intent here in hiding the new ministers from 

public scrutiny? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, as I've answered 

many times before, both today and yesterday, that it is not a 

question of ministers responding to estimates because there are 

no estimates. 

I, as the Minister of Finance, will take this financial statement 

and the Appropriation Bill to committee and be prepared to 

answer the members' questions that they may have, within the 

context of the information that's provided.  There will be that 

kind of an opportunity, and there is no other choice because of 

the crisis that the former government and the former leader of 

the opposition, when he was the premier, put this province into 

by running from this legislature, by not passing a budget, and 

then delaying an election until October, leaving no time to 

prepare a budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question to 

the Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, what 

people in this province want is a government that follows the 

rules. 

 

You have said, Mr. Minister, previously in opposition and 

again on the campaign trail, that this New Democratic 

government will be the one that follows the rules in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And yet you seem to be, sir, you 

seem to be willing to suspend the rules of this Assembly and 

suspend the constitution of this province to allow . . . so that 

you don't have to allow your ministers to answer for their 

spending plans. 

 

My question is, Mr. Minister: considering that you have said 

that you do not think your ministers should have to answer for 

the previous government's budget, are you saying that from 

November 1 of this year until March 31 of '92, that your 

government has and will take no spending decisions that are 

inconsistent with the spending plans of the previous 

government?  A simple yes or no, Mr. Minister, somewhere in 

your answer will be fine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the member is correct.  

What the people of this province want is a government that 

follows the rules. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that 

because the people want a government which follows the rules, 

is precisely the reason why those 10 members are seated on 

that side of the House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All of the requests that the member 

makes opposite in his question is covered by the resolution and 

motion that is presented before the House today.  That 

resolution asks the House, as should be the case, this 

legislature, to vote on a supply of money for the final quarter of 

this year so that the government can complete this fiscal year 

and implement the budget that was presented by the members 

opposite. 
 

And in the mean time, get on with the future, get on with 

preparing the budget of 1992-1993, and get on with developing 

a strategy on how we will deal with the deficit and the debt 

over the next four years and beyond,  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 301 

because that has got to be a major priority of this government 

and this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it was obvious by the member's answer 

that he did not wish to answer the question asked. 

 

Mr. Minister, it has been obvious to everyone in this province 

that your government has been making spending decisions that 

were different than that considered by the previous 

government.  And I say to you, sir, those are spending 

considerations tied to your political agenda.  You've already 

committed $10,000 a month for Donald Gass.  That is a fact.  

You've committed $300,000 to the Gass Commission.  That's a 

fact.  You have hired new people in SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) to do your political work.  

Those are facts, sir.  Those are spending facts. 

 

Mr. Minister, if these are your spending plans, if these are your 

patronage activities, do you not believe that it is proper for the 

opposition to stand in this legislature and ask individual 

ministers about those plans on a line-by-line basis?  Do you not 

agree, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is quite proper for 

the members opposite to ask any question they want.  They've 

had an opportunity in question period to do that.  Today is 

private members' day.  The members opposite will have an 

opportunity to introduce debate on issues that are considered by 

the members of the opposition to be important. 

 

The administration of government has to continue.  The 

employment of people in the establishment of an 

open-the-books commission is something that is required.  The 

people have demanded it, and they're going to have what they 

have asked this government to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, because there is no opportunity to present a 

budget, a situation created by the members opposite, all that 

this government can do in this short period of time is to ask this 

legislature to provide supply so that we can complete this fiscal 

year while the work is being done to prepare the budget for the 

next fiscal year and a strategy for the next four years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, there are two points here that are very 

pertinent.  First of all, you want to know that the motion that 

you brought before this Assembly does in fact suspend the 

rules of this Assembly as it has been the past practice.  You 

have eliminated basically all the rules of this Assembly. 

 

Secondly, sir, you have in all respects presented, if you will, a 

mini budget to this legislature, a mini budget which is 

consistent with that practice all through the British 

parliamentary system. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you cite in any precedent or any jurisdiction 

in Canada, other than Trudeau's invoking of the War Measures 

Act, where a similar circumstance has occurred?  Mr. Minister, 

can you answer that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't think I could 

cite another situation where a government of the day, as was 

the case in June of 1991, provided a budget, without even 

completing the passage of that budget, abandoned the House 

and then stayed out of the legislature for several months, 

governing by spending money by special warrant, leading to a 

situation where it's not possible to prepare a budget for this 

fiscal year.  I don't know of any other precedent that ever 

happened like that before, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And as a result of that irresponsible 

action, Mr. Speaker, we are faced with an extraordinary 

situation today.  We face the situation where the legislature, 

this Assembly, will have to decide on a system by which this 

Legislative Assembly can vote a supply for the government for 

the final quarter of this fiscal year.  That's why there is a 

resolution before the Assembly, so that this legislature can . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 

Agriculture.  I point out to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the 

members of the media, that in this financial document, 1991-92 

financial report, section 3, it's got fourth quarter expenditure 

requests.  That is the new administration's expenditure requests, 

the money that they plan to spend.  In here, Mr. Speaker, on 

pages 22, 27, 31, 36, 38, 43, and 45, they plan to spend almost 

$3 million on advertising in the last quarter. 

 

My question to the Minister of Agriculture is: if you can 

forecast that you're going to spend $3 million in advertising in 

this last quarter, which is your responsibility, don't you think 

you can come up with the money to get dollars in the hands of 

farmers before Christmas? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I didn't hear any interruption 

when the Leader of the Opposition asked his question.  I don't 

want any interruption when the Minister of Finance answers. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, any expenditures for the final quarter of this year that 

are being requested in a supply Bill are there 

  



302 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

because of either commitments made by the previous 

government -- therefore they cannot be changed -- or they are 

there because the previous government underestimated the 

amount of money in order to make their deficit look better. 

 

But I want to say to the Leader of the Opposition that in 

committee when this supply Bill is considered, he can get up 

and to the best of my ability I will provide him the answers that 

I can in the committee when the time comes to that point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, and I say to the media and the 

public, I believe we've made our point.  I want to raise one 

other example, and there will be several. 

 

In this section 3, you forecast for the next quarter to spend $1.7 

million fighting forest fires in February.  Now if you can afford 

to come up with the money to fight forest fires in the middle of 

the winter, don't you think that you could say to your Minister 

of Agriculture, or indeed to the Premier who promised more 

money for farmers before Christmas, if you can come up with 

$4.7 million fighting forest fires and advertising in the next 

three or four months, don't you think you can come up with the 

money for farmers and put some hope in their hearts before 

Christmas, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the problem with the 

budget that we are dealing with -- the former government's 

budget -- is that there was an underestimation of program 

uptake, an overestimation of revenue, and therefore some of 

those corrections have to be made in the final quarter because 

the government in some cases quite unconsciously -- but in 

some cases deliberately -- put errors into the budget, just like 

they did with the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I know the minister knows that that is 

unparliamentary language, and I ask him to withdraw.  

"Deliberately putting errors into the budget" is 

unparliamentary, and I ask the minister to withdraw those 

words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I agree, Mr. Speaker.  I withdraw 

that comment. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, again I go back to the minister.  If 

he believes that there should be additions and deletions and 

errors and corrections and he's going to be spending money on 

whatever he chooses, it is the tradition of this Legislative 

Assembly and assemblies all across Canada in the British 

parliamentary system to put the ministers on their feet and 

explain what they're going to be doing with their agricultural 

budget, where they're going to be getting the money, and 

allowing us, Mr. Minister, to have access to those ministers and 

say why did you choose to do this or chose to do that. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've been in government November and 

you will be December, January, February, March -- five 

months.  You can't just dump it off on anybody else, Mr. 

Minister.  Why don't you allow this Assembly to ask your 

ministers questions about these Estimates in the last quarter of 

1991-92? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, one hour from now, 

this evening . . . I'm prepared to stay here until midnight tonight 

to answer the members' questions if the member of the 

opposition has some questions.  I was prepared to answer those 

questions yesterday, last night, while the members rang the 

bells and did whatever they were doing. 

 

I'm prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker.  I ask the members 

opposite to carry out the responsible desires of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Let's get on with the resolution.  Let's get on 

with the consideration of the supply Bill and then the members 

can get on with asking their questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the minister.  

We've watched your ministers duck questions here today again 

and in question period because it looks like you're going to 

have six months of kindergarten and prep school for these new 

ministers because you won't let them address the questions.  

The members of the public are asking why can't the ministers 

stand on their feet and defend themselves. 

 

You put forward these last quarter Estimates which will tell us 

what you will plan to spend, and you have no idea where you're 

going to get the money.  We want each minister to stand in his 

place to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want the minister to tell this legislature again:  

why won't you put your ministers up and let them defend their 

departments, department by department?  Why are you hiding 

your ministers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, because under the 

circumstances, that is not the correct way for this process to 

take place.  The member opposite should answer the question 

to the public of Saskatchewan: where was he and his ministers 

in June of this year when they would not allow their ministers 

to answer the questions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- They should answer the question 

why one of their ministers, the House leader, the minister of the 

Environment, was so frustrated with what they were doing that 

he resigned in the spring of this year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I hate to interrupt, but the Leader of 

the Opposition had his opportunity to ask his question, and I 

wish he'd allow the Minister of Finance to answer. 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as I 

said, the member from Melfort was so concerned about what 

that government was doing with democracy that he resigned 

from the cabinet and did not run again for this legislature. 

 

What we have here is not a budget.  That is not our 

responsibility.  That is the responsibility of the members 

opposite.  But it is our responsibility to have the legislature 

vote a supply of money for the final quarter, and that's what 

we're presenting here for consideration. 

 

Scrutiny of Order in Council Appointments 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct my question 

to the Premier.  In a document published by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party caucus in 1987, the NDP said the 

following with respect to public review and cabinet 

appointments, and I quote: 

 

 That a Standing Committee of the Legislature be empowered 

to review major Order-in-Council appointments . . . with 

public participation. 

 

My question to the Premier is: when will this committee be 

formed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the position of the 

government is, as we've indicated in the Speech from the 

Throne, that the package -- the full range of democratic reform 

packages -- will be dealt with some time early in the new year 

upon the completion . . . or whenever this session happens to be 

completed. 

 

As part of the democratic reform package we are proceeding 

with the matters of the six-month by-election provision, maybe 

one or two others.  The remainder will require consultation 

with the public and members of this House before we 

implement them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  It's common 

knowledge that governments make their major appointments 

shortly after taking office, Mr. Premier.  Do you not think that 

your failure to form such a committee to date has compromised 

your party's commitment to allowing this Assembly and the 

public to review major appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The answer 

to that question, shortly put, is no, I do not think so.  I think the 

committee, if and when it is established, will have the full 

freedom and option to review appointments.  And comments 

and recommendations made at that time can be made at that 

time as they will be at any a time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary.  This is to the Premier.  

How do you propose to ensure that the public really believes 

that things are going to be any different under your 

administration, sir, with respect to appointments, if they're 

unable for six months to be able 

to understand how you're going about doing these and why it is 

you're making these appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, this of course will 

be for the public to judge.  But as far as the government is 

concerned, what we have done by virtue of even calling this 

session and the way we've handled the matter of supply -- the 

subject of some debate between some of the members of the 

official opposition and the Minister of Finance -- for example, 

indicate this government's commitment to doing what we think 

is right, namely using this legislative body and its various 

emanations, the tabling of documents in a timely fashion, the 

answering of questions in an appropriate fashion.  We'll be 

judged on this once the reform package is fully in place. 

 

And I invite the hon. member to make her comments known to 

us as to how she likes or does not like some of the provisions.  

I think the actions will speak the loudest.  And in this regard, 

I'm quite confident we'll do very well over the period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Tabling of Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

make a brief comment on an important matter.  I am pleased to 

rise in the House this afternoon and table the Public Accounts 

for 1990-1991.  This is in keeping with the new openness and 

accountability that is being established by this government. 

 

And I want to reinforce that by saying, Mr. Speaker, that this is 

the first time that the Public Accounts have been tabled in this 

legislature in the month of December since the last time that I 

was a Minister of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Pay-outs to Farmers 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, today I am pleased to 

announce early pay-outs to farmers under the general revenue 

insurance program are almost complete.  So far the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation has issued almost 

43,000 cheques totalling $359 million in interim GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) payments. 

 

Of this amount, 58 million has been applied to premiums and 

outstanding balances.  We expect that by December 20 the 

remaining cheques will be mailed representing an additional 

$20 million in payments.  The early interim GRIP payment is 

the first of three payments under this program.  The second 

payment is scheduled to be mailed prior to spring seeding in 

1992.  The third payment will be made after final grain prices 

are established for the 1991 crop year. 

 

Western farmers are grateful to receive this money as they 

would be for any cash pay-out.  But we want to stress this does 

not abrogate the federal government's responsibility 

  



304 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

to come up with more money for our struggling farmers. 

 

To date almost 68,000 in premiums have been paid.  This 

leaves an estimated 245,000 in GRIP premiums yet to be 

collected. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Just a brief comment, Mr. Speaker.  The 

minister is talking about money going into the hands of farmers 

from the GRIP program. I would only say to the hon. member 

that while we're in the process of making some positive 

changes to GRIP, that the government, the new government, 

could stand in its place and allocate some of its advertising 

money towards putting dollars into the hands of farmers before 

Christmas. 

 

I point out, Mr. Speaker, that advertising -- $3 million worth of 

advertising, the Premier wants to know where it is, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'll . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The Leader of the Opposition is 

to direct his comments through the Chair and not . . . to simply 

ignore the comments of other members in the House. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure a lot of the 

farmers are going to ignore the Premier as a result of his 

inaction.  I point out, Mr. Speaker, to the minister opposite that 

on page 22 of your new budget it has $759,000 for advertising.  

And then you go on to page 27, communications, it's $1.189 

million in advertising.  I go on to page 31, information 

services, $153,000, and on and on. 

 

And I just point out to the hon. member and to the Minister of 

Agriculture that in the last quarter if you can come up with this 

kind of money then, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the hon. 

members they could allocate some of that money in getting the 

3 or $400 million from Ottawa and put it into the hands of the 

farmers in Saskatchewan before Christmas, which I believe 

they would appreciate much more than a ministerial statement 

at Christmas time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Act to amend 

the . . . pardon me, to move first reading of a Bill to amend The 

Municipal Board Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to 

establish the Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 

Corporation be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that an Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to Provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in 

Crown Employment on Contracts governing Payments and 

Benefits on Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, 

to Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting those 

matters and to Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to 

Compensation for any Loss or Damage resulting from the 

Enactment or Application of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to Provide for the Public Disclosure of Crown 

Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in Crown 

Employment Contracts governing Payments and Benefits on 

Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, to Void 

Provisions in those Contracts respecting those matters and to 

Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to Compensation for 

any Loss or Damage resulting from the Enactment or 

Application of this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and the Bill ordered to be read a 

second time at the next sitting. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would seek leave of the House to proceed to item 21 under 

motions, which if passed is going to allow me to participate 

more fully in the proceedings of this Assembly. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 

question put by members, no. 24, be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that a 

question put by members, no. 25, be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would table the 

answer for question no. 26. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that question put by members,  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

no. 27, be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Government Financial Accountability 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it is my pleasure to stand in this Assembly for the first 

time since the good folks of Moose Jaw Palliser decided to 

return me as their representative.  And in doing so, Mr. 

Speaker, let me begin by offering my congratulations to you on 

your democratic election as Speaker of this House.  Mr. 

Speaker, we all look forward to you serving this House by 

acting in defence of the principles and the procedures of 

democracy, and I'm sure that that will be your intent and your 

action. 

 

It is in the spirit of the defence of the principles of democracy, 

Mr. Speaker, that I stand in this House today with this motion 

that I will introduce, Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my 

remarks, and let me simply give it notice of the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the new government for its 

commitment to financial accountability and its respect for the 

fundamental tradition that public funds must be appropriated 

by the legislature; and further that it condemn the 

unprecedented practices of the past nine years including the 

public spending by special warrant, government waste and 

financial mismanagement, and the accumulation of a massive 

provincial deficit. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I sat in this House today and yesterday 

and watched the goings-on in this House, in particular the 

conduct of the members of the official opposition, it was truly 

two days of amazing events, Mr. Speaker.  And my amazement 

grew as I saw the PC (Progressive Conservative) response to a 

practical and a responsible motion by the Minister of Finance 

as they shouted from their seats: we want a budget, we want a 

budget -- an incredible statement coming from that opposition 

on that matter at this time. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, reflecting on the events of yesterday and 

today and being somewhat inspired by the poetry of the season 

and in particular the poem A Visit from St. Nicholaus by 

Clement Moore, which has become a bit of a family tradition in 

our house to be read by dad on Christmas Eve, I reflected on 

what I saw, Mr. Speaker, and would like to share with the 

Assembly these poetic words. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 T'was the week before Christmas 

   and all through this House 

 Not a bell was ringing to awaken a mouse 

 When across the floor there arose such a clatter 

 I sprang from my seat to see what was the matter 

 When what to my wondering eyes should appear 

 But a miniature caucus whose mind is not here 

 With a frenzied old leader, the head of their band 

 We know him, the member, here from Estevan 

 More rapid than eagles (not the buses) did come 

 Heckles and catcalls from Tories so glum 

 "Now Budget! Now budget," 

 went their raucous parlance 

 "On spending Estimates and provincial finance!" 

 So up to their tiptoes those members they flew 

 To call for democracy as my amazement it grew. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I watched my amazement it grew, it 

grew.  And when I listen to the members from the opposite 

benches, Mr. Speaker, express their so-called concern for fiscal 

responsibility, I can only conclude, Mr. Speaker, that what I 

was seeing was incredible -- incredible in the sense of not 

credible.  In fact someone suggested, Mr. Speaker -- and I think 

accurately -- that the phrase, PC fiscal responsibility, is an 

oxymoron.  And I would agree.  I would agree. 

 

So let me review just briefly, Mr. Speaker, the PC record on 

provincial budgets from this band that we heard over the last 24 

hours shouting we want a budget; we want a budget.  Let us 

just simply review -- let us review their record on provincial 

budgets and the use of special warrants that their Finance critic 

recommended to this Assembly yesterday. 

 

(1445) 

 

But first of all, Mr. Speaker, the issue of special warrants.  

What are special warrants?  There is a fundamental principle of 

democracy, Mr. Speaker, that has been respected in this House 

for some time, that requires that a government must account for 

its use of public funds by submitting to the scrutiny of the 

Legislative Assembly.  And special warrants for years have 

been provided for and given legal authority for spending 

money to pay for emergency expenditures or unanticipated 

expenditures. 

 

For example, Mr. Speaker, a special warrant was used in 1896 

to provide emergency roof repairs to the Parliament Buildings.  

That's where special warrants began.  They're not used in this 

Assembly or elsewhere, Mr. Speaker, as a means to avoid the 

scrutiny of the Legislative Assembly but to deal with 

unanticipated expenditures.  And in fact that has been the 

tradition here in Saskatchewan, where special warrants have 

been used at fiscal year end to provide for expenditures that 

were not foreseen and then approved in the subsequent budget 

of the spring sitting. 

 

And so what's been the historical use of special warrants from 

this band of fiscally prudent people, we're supposed to believe?  

Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, special warrants were first 

used in 1906 prior to the first session of the first Legislative 

Assembly in order to provide spending and then again in 1908 

to provide for late-year expenditures that were over budget.  

And then, Mr. Speaker, not until 1982 . . . 1906, 1908 and then 

1982. 

 

After a government, the NDP government, had introduced a 

budget, but then went to an election before the budget was 

carried, special warrants were required in order to meet 

government expenditures until the new PC government came to 

office and introduced its own budget seven months later. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we saw special warrants used by this  



306 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

government again in 1987, again in the year following the 

election.  The election of 1986, October 20, 1986 when this 

government was re-elected, when the PC government was 

re-elected, they went to the end of their fiscal year, and then 

from April 1 till June 17, eight months after their re-election as 

a government, they used special warrants, Mr. Speaker, until 

June 17 when we came into this Assembly, and as I recall the 

incident, Mr. Speaker, largely in response to the fact that the 

official opposition had said that they would take this 

government to court for operating on special warrants.  That's 

what brought them here -- the embarrassment of yet again what 

would have been the first of what became many visits to the 

courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government over the last five years since I've 

been in this House has spent more time in court than many 

promising and profitable lawyers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so what happens here in 1991?  Here we come to 1991 and 

the PC opposition is recommending that we should be using 

special warrants again, they say.  Well the Minister of Finance 

outlined it briefly earlier this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And let me just remind the members of the Assembly the 

events of this summer.  June 17, the House Leader of the PC 

government of the day stood in his place in this Assembly and 

resigned.  He said that the government was on the verge of 

bankruptcy.  He could no longer associate himself.  He not only 

resigned his position in the government, he resigned from the 

PC Party. 

 

On the next day, on June 18, 1991, the opposition, the New 

Democrat opposition, moved a motion which would have led to 

a vote in a non-confidence motion.  That's what happened in 

this Assembly.  The bells rang until the time elapsed without 

the government being able to muster up enough members to 

defeat what would have been a non-confidence motion by the 

New Democrats. 

 

And then we broke for supper, Mr. Speaker, and I will never 

forget walking back into this Assembly at 7 o'clock that 

evening with the Lieutenant Governor coming through the 

doors of this Assembly.  Because in response to their inability, 

to their inability to defeat a government non-confidence 

motion, without a single minute, without a single second of 

debate on the Estimates of the budget introduced by the PC 

government of the day, this House was prorogued and the 

Premier said, it's time for all of us to cool down and go home 

and we don't need to operate with a budget and they prorogued 

the House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we went home but we didn't cool down and 

the people of Saskatchewan didn't cool down and on October 

21 they said, no more of this kind of government; that band is 

gone; it's time for a new form of government in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hagel: -- And yet they promote that shameful display to 

spend the taxpayers' money by special warrant and the Finance 

critic for the PC opposition stands in his place yesterday to say 

that. 

Mr. Speaker, that was clearly not the intention of special 

warrants and it was contradicted by an opinion put forth by 

Merrilee Rasmussen, former legislative counsel to the 

Legislative Assembly on July 5.  I draw the attention of 

members to the conclusion of her legal opinion provided at that 

time, Mr. Speaker, and she said and I quote: 

 

 As a matter of law, the power to issue special warrants is 

only available when there is no Legislature in existence to 

consent to an appropriation or when an emergency arises in 

which delay would result in irreparable harm.  Convention 

clearly authorizes the use of special warrants at the end of a 

fiscal year to top up appropriations when funds are 

exhausted.  As a matter of convention and law, special 

warrants are NOT (in capital letters, NOT) authorized when 

the Legislature is available to provide its consent to 

government expenditures.  Thus, special warrants are illegal 

when they are resorted to because it is more convenient for 

the executive to use them than to call the Legislature to give 

its approval . . . 

 

And she goes on. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the PC opposition opposite says that we 

should continue with this illegal act -- in the mind of the 

legislative counsel, previous legislative counsel to this 

Legislative Assembly.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that was 

shameful when this government . . . when the PC government 

chose to do it; it would be shameful to continue it, and it will 

not be done. 

 

Well when we come to fiscal integrity, what is the record of the 

PC government who now sit in opposition?  Mr. Speaker, there 

was nothing new, there was nothing new about the revelation 

of the true state of the finances as released by the Minister of 

Finance earlier this fall, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me remind the members of this House, the previous record 

for forecasting deficits by PC ministers of Finance.  Back in 

1986 PC minister of Finance, Gary Lane at that time, stood in 

this Assembly in the spring of the election year 1986 and he 

said there would be a deficit of $389 million.  That's what he 

said. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, then in January he said, well maybe it's 

going to be a little larger than that.  And later that year, Mr. 

Speaker, in 1987 on March 5 he formally stated that the 

1986-87 deficit would not be the $389 million that the PC 

minister of Finance had previously forecast; he said it would be 

$1.2 billion. 

 

Whoops, he said.  Whoops!  We made a 250 per cent error in 

election year.  And then how did he explain it?  He said the 

explanation was very simple.  He said, what do you expect?  

We're politicians, he said. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, he made an error when he 

made that statement too.  He should not have said: what do you 

expect, we're politicians.  There is a new breed of politician in 

government today.  He should have said, what do you expect? 

we're Tory politicians.  And that would have been his honest 

statement, Mr. Speaker. 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well now we come to 1991, and Lorne 

Hepworth is the minister of Finance.  And he stands in his 

place this spring and he says, we're going to have a $265 

million deficit.  That's what he says the Tory government's 

going to have.  Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, as we all 

know, as was released by the Minister of Finance about a 

month ago, the honest statement of the deficit of this year, Mr. 

Speaker, not the $265 million forecast by Lorne Hepworth.  

But once again, Mr. Speaker, if we are to believe a PC minister 

of Finance we have to begin the statement again with the big 

whoops, another 250 per cent error.  Mr. Speaker, the forecast, 

the honest forecast would be some $960 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when I look at the track record of the PC 

government when it's been in power in Saskatchewan, it's 

interesting to note that since 1944, Mr. Speaker, in the province 

of Saskatchewan there have been only 12 deficit budgets.  

Since 1944, in the last 47 years, there have been only 12 deficit 

budgets.  Mr. Speaker, 10 of those 12 deficit budgets in the last 

47 years came in 1982 and 1983 and '84 and '85 and '86 and '87 

and '88, '89, '90 and '91 -- compliments of the PC government 

of Saskatchewan.  That kind of fiscal responsibility is also part 

of the history of the province of Saskatchewan as decided by 

the people on October 21. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, I remind the members of the 

Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that the approach of 

fiscal prudence and responsibility is nothing new to New 

Democrats, nothing new to New Democrats.  New Democrats . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time is up.  Does the 

member . . . has he got a motion?  All right, the member move 

his motion. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, there will be others who will 

wish to address further this topic, Mr. Speaker, as per this 

motion.  And I move, seconded by my friend and colleague, the 

member from Humboldt: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the new government for its 

commitment to financial accountability and its respect for the 

fundamental tradition that public funds must be appropriated 

by the legislature and further that it condemn the 

unprecedented practices of the past nine years including 

public spending by special warrant, government waste and 

financial mismanagement, and the accumulation of a massive 

provincial deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that, seconded by the member from 

Humboldt. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was going to start 

out my little talk here today by saying: and as I was saying 

before and was rudely interrupted in June . . . And I guess that's 

sort of the point of this whole 

thing, this whole exercise we go through.  We're talking about 

managing the province.  We're talking about managing the 

province for the people, by the people, through the 

government, with no surprises. 

 

This government, Mr. Speaker, had surprises.  The people 

didn't want surprises.  And as my colleague pointed out just a 

few minutes ago -- and this will be repeated many times in this 

legislature I'm sure -- that in 1986, the minister of Finance was 

out by 200 per cent in his budget.  What a surprise.  What a 

surprise! 

 

This year, Mr. Speaker, the estimated deficit was 265 million, 

and now we find out it's going to be closer to 960 million -- 

near a billion dollars.  What a surprise, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, people in this province don't like those 

kinds of surprises.  But I'll tell you, it was a surprise to the 

people, but I ask, was it a surprise to the government and the 

minister of Finance who concocted the figures?  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I say it was no surprise.  It was a planned surprise.  A 

planned surprise to keep government and not think about the 

people of this province as they piled up the debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will govern for the people.  I'll 

give you an example.  Previous to the change in government in 

this province, the minister of Agriculture who was the premier 

would go down to Ottawa saying, I'm going to get some more 

money for the farmers.  He'd walk down there. 

 

Well I'll tell you, every time he went down there, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, he gave something away.  And he'd come back and 

say,  well I got a few more dollars for the farmers; aren't I a 

great guy.  But every time he went down . . . I recall one time 

he was going to go to fix the interest rates.  He jumped on his 

plane and took off to Ottawa.  By the time he jumped on his 

plane and came back to Saskatchewan, farm credit interest 

rates had increased by one and a half per cent.  He did a 

wonderful job. 

 

I remember the free trade deal -- took away $250 million to 

grain farmers.  But he was marching down to Ottawa.  And 

every time he went down, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every time he 

went down, he gave something away and said, aren't I a good 

guy. 

 

Well this is a different approach now.  We have a Minister of 

Agriculture who is doing a couple of things right for a change 

in this province.  Went down to Ottawa and didn't give the farm 

away; went down to Ottawa and talked to the people in Ottawa 

and took a delegation down, the Premier of this province and 

the Minister of Agriculture, and made a tremendous impact.  

And all you have to do is read the stories or talk to your MPs 

about the impact that was made in Ottawa. 

 

Because they went down for a purpose, to try to help the 

people.  And every time that ex-government went down, their 

purpose was to try to get the Tory government re-elected.  And 

that's a change, that's a definite change, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And it's a change because the people of this province expect the 

government to govern for them, not to govern using them, and 

that's the 

  



308 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

difference. 

 

(1500) 

 

The Tories governed for their friends and to govern for 

government.  Five years and a day.  Can you imagine, if there 

hadn't been a rule that we couldn't go longer than five years, 

how long they would have gone trying to fill the pockets of 

their friends? 

 

And then we see them stand up and ask about the dismissals 

and what's going on.  Well the people of the province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, dismissed the government.  It just flows 

through that the attitude -- and this is what we're talking about 

-- the attitude put forward by the government will be 

maintained in the upper levels of government.  It's not 

personnel we're dismissing or changing, it's attitude. 

 

And that's why the people of Saskatchewan elected a New 

Democratic government, because they saw an attitude of 

honesty and integrity, an attitude that would bring forward in 

this province a change whereby people would not have to be on 

the welfare lines and people would not have to be running off 

their farms, or people would not have to be leaving this 

province to find work.  A change in attitude -- and that is why 

this government was elected and that government has been put 

out. 

 

This attitude -- I'll give you another example -- $250 million, 

we heard yesterday, that was supposed to be coming from CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) to the 

government.  The money wasn't there.  And in other years, CIC 

paying dividends to the government and the Crown 

corporations digging down and borrowing more money, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in order to pay to keep their operation going.  

But who pays in the end?  It's the people who pay in the end, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Tories bailed out.  They ran in June from the legislature; 

they didn't even pass the budget where they were telling the 

people mistruths about how much money was in CIC and 

where it was going.  Now we see this great metamorphosis.  

All of a sudden we stand up in our places and we say, where's 

the budget?  We want to ask individual ministers about the 

budget. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just consider somebody sitting 

at home, watching the question period of this House, when they 

know that that ex-premier of this province bailed out, didn't 

pass a budget when he had ample opportunity to, when it was 

his mandate to, and now all of a sudden he's saying, where is 

the budget? 

 

An attitude, an attitude where he's trying to fool the people 

again.  He got defeated on that attitude.  This government will 

not maintain that attitude.  We have a changed mandate and 

attitude in order that we can deliver programs.  We bring 

forward a motion to deliver the program. 

 

We bring forward a Minister of Finance who is ready to answer 

any questions on the budget -- Estimates that they had put 

forward.  And actually this is real funny.  I mean, they put us in 

the position where they could be asking and 

they want to ask questions on their own budget.  So what are 

they going to do -- ask a question and then stand up and answer 

it? 

 

This is the attitude -- trying to fool the people, trying to say that 

the new government is the same as the old government.  It's 

very different because it's a very different attitude.  The people 

of this province saw a vision, a vision of a government with 

some competence, a vision of a government with an attitude 

that will put in place policies like democratic reform, that will 

put in place an instrument of the people which is called this 

legislature, that will bring forward Bills in a fashion that will 

provide laws in this country that help people maintain their 

lives and their dignity and their place in the province.  That is 

what we're talking about. 

 

The past government had no respect for this legislature, no 

respect for democracy, and therefore no respect for the people.  

And that was seen clearly on election day.  The people came 

forward because they said, this government is incompetent.  

And I say, well yes it was incompetent for the masses of the 

majority, but I know a few people who thought this 

government and this past government was very competent 

because they filled their pockets of their friends and 

themselves.  That has to change and it will change, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have people in this 

province who are in very dire straights -- very dire straights.  

They work day and night, two and three jobs.  If they're on the 

farms, they're working on the farm and off the farm, the 

majority of them; they are struggling to try to make a living 

and pay their taxes to the government in return for the 

government to provide services for them to live in this 

province. 

 

Can you feature the desperation that some of these people are 

going through to try to find money and to pay their taxes and to 

work their jobs, whether it be any from a waitressing job to a 

lawyer or anything you'd want to talk about.  But these people 

are working and the taxes keep going up and the services were 

going down. 

 

We will change that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because we will not 

allow people in this province to be put through a wringer like 

they were put through in the last nine and a half years. The 

people know it's going to take a little bit of time to start the 

change.  People know that this change is going to be a positive 

change because of the comments that are coming from the last 

few days of this House and this session.  And they have 

patience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I tell you that this government is a government 

with compassion, a government with a new attitude, and a 

government that will allow the people of this province to 

partake in democracy as it was set out in the beginning.  And 

we will carry it through as long as we will be government. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I rise in my chair to propose an amendment to the 

motion.  At the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

proposing a motion, and I move: 

 

 That all the words following "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following words be substituted: 

 

 Condemns the provincial government for attacking the basic 

principles of parliamentary democracy by (a) suspending all 

rules and procedures of the Assembly in an attempt to obtain 

supply without accountability; (b) refusing to place a budget 

before the Assembly, effectively suspending the province's 

constitution; (c) refusing to table Estimates to avoid 

scrutinizing en masse firings and political hirings; and (d) 

using the Assembly to target individual citizens, thus placing 

the Assembly in direct personal conflict with individual 

human beings. 

 

This is seconded by the member from Maple Creek, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment before this House is very 

important.  For the members on the opposite side of the House 

to stand up and pat themselves on the back pretending to be 

open and honest, is totally unacceptable. 

 

In only two short months we have seen everything but open 

and honest government; everything but accountability to the 

people.  I think about what the NDP have done since being 

elected in October.  They established a partisan committee to 

review the practices of the former government under the guise 

of a non-partisan group attempting to restore honest 

government to Saskatchewan. 

 

Well we all know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this just isn't the case.  

Firstly, the tribunal is only reviewing those transactions that 

have taken place since the NDP were ousted from power.  

Secondly, if the NDP truly wanted an objective, open and 

honest, non-partisan look at former governments, why not 

review the nationalization of the potash mines under the NDP 

government?  Or the former Liberal government's financial 

transactions?  Maybe then the NDP story about open and 

honest government would gain an ounce of credibility; maybe 

even a gram of accountability. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, does any member here believe it possible to 

have a tribunal with three out of four members are long-time 

contributors to the same political party and still remain 

non-partisan? 

 

I don't think so, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's impossible.  The 

NDP want the public to think it is a coincidence that the three 

Gass tribunal members donate to the NDP on a regular basis.  

Thank goodness, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public is smarter 

than that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, an open and honest government would 

not promise to eliminate the provincial sales tax while all the 

time knowing they were not going to do it.  An open and 

honest premier-to-be wouldn't say to the 

people of the province two weeks before an election that at 

midnight October 22, don't pay the PST (provincial sales tax), 

then shortly afterwards remove the provincial sales tax only on 

a cup of coffee or a Christmas sweater.  And, Mr. Speaker, an 

accountable government wouldn't try to do this . . . what this 

government is trying to do their hardest today. 

 

The NDP want to stand before this Assembly, hand over a 

document that vaguely explains where the province's money 

will be going for the next while, without answering any 

questions about the document or the funds.  How is this 

Assembly and the rest of Saskatchewan going to find out where 

the $300,000 that funded Sask Works program went?  How can 

we find the details on the firings of innocent people?  How can 

we question the minister on why the NDP have allotted a few 

million dollars to fight forest fires in our province in the middle 

of the winter?  And, Mr. Speaker, how can the people have a 

way of finding out what secret deals are being thrown together 

behind closed doors by the NDP? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's not a hard answer.  We just can't find 

out.  They won't tell us.  The public will not be able to learn the 

details of important issues and concerns because the NDP 

government wants to suppress the constitution and suppress all 

accountability.  And that happens to be the fact. 

 

The NDP are using their swollen majority to railroad the 

opposition and the people they were elected to serve.  This is 

an open and honest government?  This is open the books?  

Well the NDP will try to say they're doing what the people 

want and what the people need.  Mr. Speaker, what the people 

want has absolutely nothing to do with what the NDP are 

giving them. 

 

The members opposite claim to have the public's interest at 

heart.  If this is true, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the 

members opposite, what are their plans for the plebiscite 

results?  The people have cast their ballots, they have made up 

their minds.  I would like today to ask the NDP, what are you 

going to do about the abortion funding and how about a 

balanced budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could ask these questions many times, knowing 

all the time that I will not receive an answer.  There are many 

other questions that need to be answered by the NDP, Mr. 

Speaker, but they are doing their very best to duck them.  We 

see this in question period all the time. 

 

The NDP want to be above reproach -- not just to the members 

of this Assembly, but to every person in the province.  And it's 

wrong, Mr. Speaker, it's terribly wrong.  It is reprehensible, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I will not allow this to happen to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Principles of our constitution are built around freedom of 

speech and the rights of the individual.  These principles also 

include accountability -- accountability of those persons elected 

to serve the people.  Long-standing traditions of grievance 

before supply must be observed if a government is to remain 

responsible. 

 

These are very basic rules and they date beck to the 

  



310 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

Magna Carta and are a fundamental right, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And I was elected to preserve these rights, Mr. Speaker, and I 

will do so.  And that is why I bring this amendment before the 

Assembly today.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Maple Creek. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm happy 

this afternoon to second this motion.  After the actions taken by 

the Minister of Finance yesterday, I'm pleased to speak to this 

Assembly in favour of this amendment. 

 

The NDP government has carried out unprecedented tactics 

that are a grave concern to this Assembly and to the people of 

Saskatchewan.  The very principles of democracy are at stake 

here, Mr. Speaker, principles of our constitution dating back to 

the Magna Carta, principles like freedom of speech and 

long-standing traditions of grievance before supply.  These are 

principles that must be observed if a government is to remain 

accountable to the people it serves. 

 

What the NDP government have done, Mr. Speaker, is suspend 

those very rights.  They have tried to eradicate accountability 

of the government, stifle the opposition's right to voice their 

opinions, and, Mr. Speaker, undermine the very essential 

liberties granted to us through democracy. 

 

Principles set before us through the constitution include 

holding the government accountable for the spending of public 

funds.  And, Mr. Speaker, in order to do this, accountability is 

necessary.  The government must outline where the moneys are 

to be spent.  The government must answer questions about 

where the funds are to be allotted and why.  That's 

accountability.  That's why we're here -- to make you 

accountable for your actions and for what you plan to do to the 

people's money. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, every member in this House is allowed 

ample time to speak and to seek answers to their questions --  

to exercise one of our most precious, important freedoms -- 

freedom of speech. 

 

The NDP government has done away with questionable things, 

Mr. Speaker, and, Mr. Speaker, questionable actions without 

allowing questions.  The NDP do not want to be held 

accountable for what they are doing as a government.  They 

want to pass a motion that would strip this Assembly of some 

basic rights, that would place themselves above reproach. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what the NDP have tried to do over the past two 

months is unacceptable.  They have tried to take precedence 

over the rights of the people, over the rights of the members of 

this Assembly.  They have fired hundreds, and I say hundreds 

of innocent people, appointed partisan committees to carry 

through their political vindictiveness, posed an inflated deficit 

before the public, and then refused to table the budget.  And the 

list goes on and on and on. 

Mr. Speaker, never before has a government in Canada 

attempted to strip the basic rights of democracy from the pages 

of the very constitution.  And why?  In order to erase any 

questions of why hundreds of innocent people have been fired 

by the NDP and, Mr. Speaker, in order to dismiss questions 

that would expose the NDP government for using totalitarian 

tactics to fulfil their socialist mandate. 

 

The NDP government is trying to take money directly from the 

pockets of taxpayers and excuse themselves from telling the 

people where it is going.  It's not good enough to point to the 

mistakes of the past government to justify your own mistakes.  

That just simply won't do.  You've been elected now to be the 

government, and you have to show some leadership and to 

present to the people what they expected when they went to the 

polls.  They expected you now to take over and do a job, not to 

simply point backwards and always say the other guys did it 

wrong, so it's okay for us to do whatever we please. 

 

This sort of thing might be standard and it might be acceptable 

in countries like Cuba and China.  But it is not acceptable in 

Saskatchewan because here we have a democracy and here we 

have people with long memories, and they will remember four 

years from now what you are doing here in this session. 

 

And not after the NDP travelled around this province shouting 

promises like, open the books; honest and open government, 

they said.  And here we've got . . . what we have as an example 

of what they think honest and open government is: dodging the 

issues, covering things up, not allowing anyone to see what's 

going on, secret commissions, tribunals, a handful of people 

running the whole province, unaccountable to anyone.  This is 

what they call open the books.  This is what they call open 

government. 

 

I would like to ask the members opposite just who the 

government is open to.  Open to yourselves maybe, back in the 

back lounge somewhere.  It is not open to the members on this 

side of the House, that's for sure.  And it's not open to the 

media.  We've seen an example of that already.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, it certainly is not open to the public because the 

public will be the last to find out anything that really goes on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is open to no one but the troika who is running 

our province.  This is open and honest government.  This is 

what NDP and the NDP troika calls its open-the-books policy. 

 

I challenge this government to hold true to its word.  I 

challenge this government to truly open the books, to truly 

provide accountable government.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

challenge this government to start taking measures they 

promised to the people of Saskatchewan through the electoral 

process.  That is why I stand in favour of this amendment 

today.  And I want to thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise 

today to support the motion put by the member from Moose 

Jaw Palliser under rule 16.  This government has 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

given our province a new beginning, and it is in sharp contrast 

to the ways of the previous government, the Conservatives, 

where their policies were of waste, mismanagement, secret 

deals, and misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Tory record of accountability -- disrespect for the 

legislature.  The fact that the members opposite walked out of 

this legislature yesterday is indicative of their style of 

government.  It was a government of secret deals and special 

warrants.  And now to stand up and say, with three months left 

in this year, that we should bring in a new budget so that they 

can question the ministers and their departments, I think it's 

laughable, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we take a look at what happened in June when we were 

supposed to be going through the Estimates and finishing the 

spending Estimates for the government, what did they do?  

They just packed their bags and walked out and closed down 

this legislature. 

 

What a sorry state that opposition must be in right now to come 

up with this type of an attitude, that they want to now force the 

government to bring in a budget.  I say that this is wrong, and 

it's just not the way that you should be operating as an 

opposition in this House. 

 

I say, Mr. Speaker, that there will be many more budgets to 

come, and you will have an opportunity to properly debate 

budgets as they are put forward in March.  And you can debate 

them.  You can debate all the ministers.  And you will have lots 

of time to do that, the opposite member, Mr. Speaker, in the 

next four years to come. 

 

And this is the way they went.  They spent without legislative 

approval.  They operated this government on special warrants.  

Then they ran from the legislature to avoid a non-confidence 

motion in June. 

 

They ran from the legislature yesterday to avoid addressing the 

state of the province's financing -- the confusing state of affairs 

that the Conservatives left this province in when they left 

government. 

 

I say to the members opposite, just slow down.  You'll have 

lots of time in opposition to question the government's 

spending because I suspect, as other people suspect, that you're 

going to be on that side of the House for many years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Mr. Speaker, our record will be one of 

accountability.  We are following the traditions that the 

legislature has a right to approve of appropriation of the 

government prior to expenditure, NDP traditions to open and 

accessible government. 

 

The new government has set a new direction for this 

legislature.  It has moved in the direction of open, accountable, 

and accessible government.  It has set new priorities, Mr. 

Speaker -- priorities that put people first, not the large 

corporations and the rich friends of the Tories. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Thompson: -- I want to talk about the contrast of the 

priorities of a New Democratic government and what the 

priorities were of the Conservative government and their 

preferential treatment for Weyerhaeuser. 

 

In 1985 the Weyerhaeuser corporation of Tacoma, Washington 

acquired assets in this province without any money down.  That 

was in 1985.  They acquired eight million acres of 

Saskatchewan's prime forest land -- saw mill in Big River, pulp 

mill in Prince Albert, and a chemical plant in Saskatoon.  But 

not one cent down. 

 

And here we are in 1991, at the end of 1991, and they haven't 

paid one cent, not one cent on the principal of the $236 million 

that they owe this government -- that they owe the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

What the Conservative government did opposite, they turned 

over control of the provincial forest industry to individuals or 

individual corporations like Weyerhaeuser and they came in 

and they took right over.  The citizens of Saskatchewan had 

access to those forests; they no longer have that.  Roads are 

blocked off; roads are closed for hunters and trappers and 

tourists who want to go up into the North. 

 

They had other priorities also, Mr. Speaker -- secret deals and 

no-cut contracts.  George Hill, with his no-cut contract, and 

then they want to pay him $1.2 million in a severance package.  

I say that's just not acceptable in this province. 

 

The last Conservative member who just spoke in this House, he 

was talking about individuals getting fired.  Well I just say, you 

should know about firing individuals in this province.  Your 

government in one night, just after the 1986 election -- and 

they didn't campaign on this platform -- took it upon 

themselves to fire 423 dental nurses and dental therapists and 

dental assistants; 423 young women that your government just 

destroyed with one stroke of the pen.  And you can stand up 

and defend that type of a policy.  I say that that is a shame, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that's just the beginning.  That's just the beginning.  What 

about the Highways' workers -- 237 Highways' workers all of a 

sudden one morning, all got fired.  With the stroke of a pen 

that's what the Conservative government did.  They destroyed 

the lives of those families. 

 

That's the kind of a government that has no compassion, 

absolutely no compassion for the family, for the citizens of this 

province, and that's why you're sitting over there.  And that's 

why I have said prior to this legislature sitting now in the 

House, that history would repeat itself.  And I suggest that it 

will be more than 50 years before you'll ever see a Tory 

government in the province of Saskatchewan again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- And what did their policies have for 

northern Saskatchewan?  I say, Mr. Speaker, they had nothing 

for northern Saskatchewan.  They took out the 

  



312 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

fresh food subsidy to northern Saskatchewan.  They just cut 

that right off.  They brought in welfare reform programs, 

welfare reform programs.  And what were they?  They created 

jobs for 20 weeks so that the citizens in northern Saskatchewan 

could work for 20 weeks and then they would get laid off; then 

they would go to the UIC (Unemployment Insurance 

Commission) department so they could draw unemployment 

insurance. 

 

Well I tell you, you didn't do that to George Hill, and you didn't 

do that to the president of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan who you paid $740,000 a year.  No, that's not 

the type of compassion that the Conservative government uses.  

And let me tell you that you are paying for it now and you're 

going to pay for it for many years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Peter Pocklington, no problem giving him 

$21 million.  But when it comes to putting sewer and water 

systems in the communities that the NDP had not finished 

doing in 1982, like Stony Rapids and Patuanak and Poplar 

Point and La Loche, you had no money for that.  St. George's 

Hill, Michel village, no money for that. 

 

But you had money for Peter Pocklington; you had money for 

Millar Western; you had money for Weyerhaeuser.  Let me tell 

you, you had money for your rich corporations and your rich 

Conservative friends, but nothing for northern Saskatchewan. 

 

And when it comes down to your deals, one just has to go to 

Green Lake and look when you sold the Silver Lake farm to 

your friends in Prince Albert.  The citizens of Green Lake 

wanted to buy that farm, and there was no reason why you 

could not have co-signed for the citizens of Green Lake.  But 

you choose to do that for a group of your Tory friends from 

Prince Albert.  You had no trouble with providing $137 million 

for Millar Western in Alberta, but no money for the Green 

Lake citizens who wanted to purchase that farm. 

 

I say that that is a shame.  And that just goes to show you why 

you're sitting over there.  Because your Conservative friends 

come first and your large corporations, and not the citizens of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I just want to touch on the financial situation as you took it 

over in 1982.  You had $139 million in the bank to the good -- 

$139 million to the good -- and you took that now to close to 

$6 billion in accumulated deficit in this province. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time is up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my pleasure today 

to rise in support of the motion put forth by my colleague, the 

member from Moose Jaw Palliser and seconded by the member 

for Humboldt -- this motion that we commend the government 

for its commitment to 

financial accountability and its respect for the fundamental 

tradition that public funds must be appropriated by the 

legislature.  And of course the other half of the motion which I 

will address a little later, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But first I want to state the joy I have in speaking to this 

motion.  We have a Finance minister that has earlier this day 

tabled the Public Accounts for 1990-91.  As he pointed out as 

he was tabling the Public Accounts books, that this is the first 

time this has happened in a good number of years, in fact, in 

just over a decade now. 

 

I think it's a good move, Mr. Speaker, and I think it's one that 

truly points to the people of Saskatchewan and to those of us 

who are fortunate enough to serve the people of Saskatchewan.  

It shows the commitment of the now Minister of Finance to 

opening the process, to saying here's where we're at, now let's 

proceed from where we're at today so that in the future we can 

build upon our successes and hopefully put aside some of the 

failures behind us.  It's also my pleasure to follow my colleague 

from Athabasca.  And I noted he spoke about the 

Weyerhaeuser deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first time I rose in this Legislative Assembly 

in the late fall or early winter of 1986, right after that election, 

the Weyerhaeuser deal which had been made a couple of years 

earlier was tabled in this legislature. 

 

In fact, it was the first time I was ever called to order because I 

was referring to something that was not on the topic at that 

particular moment.  I'm pleased that it is part of this motion so I 

can refer to that very late tabling of the Weyerhaeuser deal. 

 

But that late tabling of the deal by the former PC 

administration typified what that administration was all about.  

It was a secretive government that made big deals with its 

big-business friends, and it did not want to share those deals 

nor the terms of the deals with the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I can well imagine why they didn't want to share what was 

in that.  We know that there was $236 million that is payable 

over 30 years -- maybe.  According to the deal, it's dependent 

upon Weyerhaeuser making a certain amount of profit, an 

amount of profit that they have not to date made.  In other 

words, it has not resulted in them making payments on that 

money. 

 

But in addition there was some rather strange things.  The 

former administration promised, guaranteed to Weyerhaeuser, 

that they would build 32 kilometres of logging road every year 

at the taxpayer of Saskatchewan's expense -- logging roads that 

formerly were built by the logging operation, by PAPCO 

(Prince Albert Pulp Company), and that now we build them for 

Weyerhaeuser at our taxpayers' expense. 

 

In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, there was over a thousand 

kilometres of logging road that we had paid for through 

PAPCO, that the former administration again bought those 

roads and made a payment, a cash payment to Weyerhaeuser of 

Tacoma, Washington, for that more 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

than a thousand kilometres of logging road. 

 

And it is astounding that such a deal could have been made, but 

it is not surprising that the former government wanted to keep 

that a secret. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion is condemning the previous 

government for its unprecedented practices in the last nine 

years, including public spending by special warrants.  And I'm 

reminded that in April 1982, the former administration, the 

former government, won office and it took until March 8, 1983 

before the final Appropriation Act was passed covering that 

term. 

 

Now I could forgive that perhaps as the beginnings of a new 

government, and they're just learning the ropes and getting 

their budget process in place.  But then I look at what happened 

in 1987 when that former government was re-elected in 

October 20, 1986 and it took them until June 17.  They had to 

operate under special warrants because they refused to table a 

budget in this legislature -- hardly a commitment, Mr. Speaker, 

to an open, honest government. 

 

And then in 1991, in the lead up to the recent provincial 

election, we saw a government that ran and hid literally.  As 

long as they could, they ran and they hid from this legislature.  

They did not pass the budget.  They fled the legislature because 

they feared losing a non-confidence motion and forcing an 

election in the summer.  And instead they governed using 

special warrants in an unprecedented manner right up until 

after the election day. 

 

And now we find ourselves in a situation where there's three 

months left in this budget year.  We have a Minister of Finance 

that should have started his considerations some six weeks ago 

for the budget for next year, and we have the now opposition 

decrying that we haven't presented a budget. 

 

The Minister of Finance is simply saying, look here is the 

expenditures that we've approved for the balance of this year.  

Stand up in the legislature.  Ask us what questions you want.  I 

will answer them to the best of my ability, but the real budget, 

the real process for an annual budget, that budget will be tabled 

in the spring of 1992. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I can do nothing but support the current 

Minister of Finance. 

 

The budget process is a serious process.  It's not, as the 

Minister of Finance pointed out earlier today, it's not simply a 

matter of attaching the minister's picture on a piece of paper 

and the minister's signing it and saying, here's the budget. 

 

We are taking this budget process seriously.  I have every 

confidence that when the Minister of Finance tables his own 

budget, it will be an accurate budget that will stand the test of 

time, and that we will come back on an annual basis and review 

the budgets presented by whoever the Finance minister is in 

this government.  But in this case, the member for Regina 

Dewdney is the Finance minister.  We will be proud to say that 

we've met the targets in those budgets. 

A budget process, Mr. Speaker, is a consultative process.  And 

it's not so simple as to simply consult with members of the 

Legislative Assembly, although that's part of it.  It is also to 

consult with the bureaucrats, to consult with the various 

department heads throughout the government, and some public 

consultative process as well.  That's a process that is going on, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I'm astounded.  Members opposite are saying they 

want the ministers to stand up and answer questions about the 

budget.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it amazes me because what we're 

dealing with are Estimates that were presented earlier in the 

year by the former administration.  It's astounding to me that 

the now opposition would want our ministers to stand up and 

answer questions about an inadequate budget and put our spin 

on that.  It would be absolutely astounding to have our 

ministers giving our spin on a former budget process. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan would be well served by that process, and 

obviously nor does the now Minister of Finance believe that 

that would serve them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my distinct pleasure to support the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly commend the new government for its 

commitment to financial accountability and its respect for the 

fundamental tradition that public funds must be appropriated 

by the legislature; and further, that it condemn the 

unprecedented practices of the past nine years including: (1) 

public spending by special warrant; (2) government waste 

and financial mismanagement; and (3) the accumulation of a 

massive provincial debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support this motion and would urge all members 

to do so. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has run out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  After the 

member from Regina Dewdney's motion yesterday, it is indeed 

a privilege to rise in the House and join in this debate. 

 

Private members' day rules remain intact for now.  Today we 

are debating a motion that deals with financial accountability.  

It is ironic that we should be dealing with financial 

accountability today when yesterday the NDP were attempting 

to scuttle the rules in place dealing with this very subject. 

 

Yesterday the NDP proposed a motion to break the rules, to 

suspend the constitution and to eliminate Estimates process.  

This would prevent the individual cabinet members from 

having to appear before the Assembly to answer any questions.  

Cabinet ministers will not appear before this Assembly and 

answer questions on their department's activities. 

  



314 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, if questions cannot be directed to the ministers, 

who will account for the money being spent in their areas?  

Where is the financial accountability, Mr. Speaker? 

 

This new financial accountability allows them to ignore all our 

questions, to ignore them for an unlimited time.  First the Gass 

Commission -- to remove the right of the Assembly to hold the 

cabinet accountable.  Now, Mr. Speaker, they are changing the 

rules so that we cannot even question them during budget 

debate -- the only other avenue allowed us in opposition.  They 

are doing away with Estimates. 

 

What do they have to hide?  They haven't even been in power 

for two months.  Why won't they answer our questions?  What 

are they trying to hide?  Are they hiding political NDP hirings?  

Political NDP firings?  Wages they are paying their NDP 

cronies? 

 

The member from Athabasca spoke of the previous 

government's deals with its friends.  Yes, we made deals with 

our friends -- the Co-op upgrader, the Wheat Pools at Biggar 

and Poundmaker, the Meadow Lake Tribal Council, and yes 

even jobs for union members. 

 

The government opposite has an agenda -- an agenda that is so 

secret that the NDP are not allowing it to go before this 

Assembly, an agenda so secret as their plan of action for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  What can be so secret?  What can 

the members opposite be hiding that this NDP government 

would deny us the Estimates process? 

 

The members opposite should be ashamed.  Why is this House 

sitting?  Why are we here, Mr. Speaker?  We are being stripped 

of our rights.  The Minister of Finance uses the excuse that he 

has not had time to prepare a budget.  The Minister of Finance 

tells us that the people of Saskatchewan want him to do this. 

 

He states that he is proceeding with the wishes of the public.  

They don't want him to rule by special warrants.  They want 

him to dissolve all rules of the legislature and suspend the 

province's constitution.  That is what the Minister of Finance is 

telling us.  The NDP are conveniently picking, choosing, and 

implementing what they feel the public wants. 

 

What about the plebiscites, Mr. Speaker?  Do the public want 

publicly funded abortions?  No, they do not.  What have the 

NDP done about this?  Nothing, Mr. Speaker.  But the NDP are 

claiming the people of Saskatchewan want them to abolish the 

rules of this House.  They claim the people of Saskatchewan do 

not want special warrants.  Mr. Speaker, I doubt if the majority 

of people in Saskatchewan even know how a special warrant 

works. 

 

(1545) 

 

What they want, Mr. Speaker, is a government that follows the 

rules, not one that eliminates all the rules.  Where is the NDP 

government's commitment to openness?  Where is the open 

government?  How can they claim to be open when they are 

closing the door on grievance before supply? 

This government has no regard for the role of the opposition.  

They have no regard for the rules of this Assembly.  They have 

no regard for the constitution.  And, Mr. Speaker, they have no 

regard for the real wishes of the people. 

 

What we are seeing here is an excuse in NDP wish fulfilment -- 

fulfilling their wishes at the expense of this Assembly.  The 

NDP are using their majority to exercise tyranny.  They are 

deeming this opposition and back-bench NDP MLAs (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly) are useless. 

 

This House needs only three seats:  one for the Minister of 

Finance, one for the minister of everything, and one for the 

Premier.  Those three, Mr. Speaker, are the only three left with 

any rights.  After all, Mr. Speaker, they are making all the 

rules.  They are rewriting the rules, much like children do when 

they are not happy with the way the game is going.  The NDP 

are playing, I'm the king of the castle, when in reality we 

should have a democratic government in Saskatchewan.  

Shame on the members opposite. 

 

Where is their regard for the democratic process?  Why are 

they doing away with grievance before supply?  Where is the 

money to go for the next four months?  Why won't the NDP 

allow their ministers to field questions from this side of the 

House?  Is it because the minister for everything would not be 

allowed to respond to community services' questions?  Is it 

because the member from Regina Elphinstone doesn't trust the 

remainder of the cabinet?  Are they not allowed to speak 

without direction?  Is the minister of everything holding their 

hand?  I think that may be it, Mr. Speaker.  The troika wants to 

muzzle their own members for fear that they may reveal 

information that should remain hidden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is doing precisely what they said 

they would not.  They are effectively closing their actions to 

public scrutiny.  This is evident in the creation of the Gass 

tribunal and now again in disposing with the rules of the 

House. 

 

The Gass tribunals are closed to scrutiny and now the spending 

of the NDP government is also closed to scrutiny.  Closed to 

the opposition, closed to the media, closed to the public and the 

taxpayer.  Is this the new form of government that the NDP 

brought to Saskatchewan?  Is this financial accountability?  A 

government that does not play by the rules.  A government that 

disposes of rules when they so desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage the government to bring a budget 

down.  I encourage them to grant this Assembly its historic 

rights.  I encourage the government to put forward the 

Estimates for the remainder of the fiscal year.  I ask the 

members opposite to maintain the constitution and the rules 

and the procedures of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the amendment to the motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

was listening very carefully to what the members opposite had 

to say and it reminded me of a statement by Marshall 

McLuhan.  Marshall McLuhan once said that all ignorance is 

motivated, Mr. Speaker.  All ignorance is motivated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in listening to the remarks by the members 

opposite about the budget process, about the procedural motion 

that is on the books right now, Mr. Speaker, tells me that they 

know absolutely nothing about the process, the budgetary 

process, and it makes me wonder where they've been, those 

members that have been in this House, in the legislature for the 

last . . . since the previous election. 

 

And it makes me wonder where the new members are getting 

their coaching from.  I would advise the new members on the 

side opposite to watch who they take their lessons from.  If 

they're going to take it from the people who are sitting in front 

of them, they ought to be careful because they just about all got 

cleaned out in the last election and they will get cleaned out 

even worse in the following election if they keep taking their 

advice from the people that are giving it to them right now, 

because they're completely out of base, completely off base. 

 

Mr. Speaker, every one of those members, by this motion, will 

have the opportunity to stand for hour after hour after hour and 

ask any question that he or she may want to ask of the Minister 

of Finance.  He may ask any question, no bars held.  No bars 

held.  And any statement that they might make to the contrary 

is completely false -- is completely false.  There is absolutely 

no limitation to the amount of debate that is being granted by 

this motion.  And the members full well know that.  They full 

well know that. 

 

But for some reason they've got a motivation, a Marshall 

McLuhan type of motivation to mislead and to . . . which have 

a tendency to mislead anybody that may be listening.  So I 

repeat that remark, Mr. Speaker, that Marshall McLuhan said -- 

all ignorance is motivated. 

 

So we ought to really find out what could be the motivation 

behind the members' remarks that they are saying.  What could 

be the motivation that they are using to say that they don't want 

to go ahead with the supply debate?  Why is it that they don't 

want to get up and ask those questions? 

 

You know what kind of questions should be asked, what kind 

of questions should be asked of the Minister of Finance?  I will 

tell.  I will give them an example.  I think that what should 

happen is you should be preparing so when this motion passes 

and the Minister of Finance stands in his place, you should be 

preparing to ask questions about four ministers -- four ministers 

of the previous government that had in their hands a 

corporation called the Saskatchewan Diversification 

Corporation. 

 

Did any of you even know what that corporation is about?  I'll 

bet you don't.  Well there are four ministers that lost their seats 

because of the secretness of that particular corporation.  Your 

members, your former colleagues 

voted them a total of $4.1 million in secret.  It was never made 

public till October l0 before the election, completely done in 

secret.  It was completely done in secret.  Your Conservative 

buddies voted them $4.1 million in secret.  For what purpose? 

-- to give money away to 19 other small companies in the 

province. 

 

Did anybody know about that?  Did any of my colleagues here 

know about it?  Did anybody in the press know about it?  I'll 

bet you didn't even know about it.  I'll bet you they even kept it 

secret from you. 

 

It wasn't till there was an internal leak which came out and 

showed how fed up the public service was with your antics, 

with your Conservative antics, how fed up they were with your 

secretness that this thing came out. 

 

And four ministers lost their seats.  And the ministers included 

the minister who's name was Grant Schmidt, the member from 

Melville.  He lost his seat.  Why?  Because of deals like this.  

The member from Meadow Lake lost his seat.  His name was 

George McLeod.  He was one of the ministers involved in SDC 

(Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation).  Then there was 

the former Finance minister and the former Education minister, 

Lorne Hepworth from Estevan.  Where is he now?  Do you see 

him sitting in this legislature?  No, because of secret deals. 

 

And these are the kinds of questions you should be putting to 

the Minister of Finance to get the answers for your own 

edification, for your own edification so that you know how to 

run a proper opposition.  Instead what you're doing is 

filibustering on a procedural motion. 

 

And I repeat to you, you can ask any question on any subject 

that this legislature has a responsibility for and nobody, 

absolutely anybody, is barring you from it.  And you're trying 

to make up a story as if you're being muzzled.  Completely 

untrue, which is completely untrue.  And I urge you to stand up 

and deny that statement.  I would ask anybody to stand up and 

deny that statement about the truth of what this motion is 

about. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I must say that I am very, very proud to be 

standing here and supporting this particular motion which 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan, the existing 

Government of Saskatchewan for its commitment to financial 

accountability. 

 

What we have done, Mr. Speaker, in the first step of doing this, 

Mr. Speaker, the first step was to put in a Financial 

Management Review Commission, an open-the-books 

commission.  This commission will be charged with the 

responsibility of doing an audit from 1983, an audit as they see 

fit. 

 

They are not being muzzled by anybody.  They will set up their 

own frame of reference . . . No, that's not exactly true; they will 

set up their own guide-lines.  They will set up their own 

guide-lines, Mr. Speaker, and they will be going through all of 

the books from 1983 on, to the existing budget which was 

presented to us but never passed, back in April of this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was a reason why people voted them  



316 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

out of office.  People wanted a change.  They did not like the 

way the fiscal affairs of the province were being handled.  

They saw the members opposite who were in government at 

the time, as being fiscally irresponsible.  They want to see 

fiscal accountability. 

 

Hence we have put in these two steps: the open-the-books 

committee, and now we want to get a supply motion before the 

House, Mr. Speaker, a supply motion which will allow the 

members of this Assembly to ask questions about all supply.  

It's called grievance before supply. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Under rule 16 the time has elapsed. 

 

(1600) 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 1 -- Energy Options Agreement 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm moving resolution no. 1 that 

says the following: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 

maintain the Energy Options Agreement with the purpose of 

researching all alternative sources of energy including the 

environmentally friendly use of coal, wind, solar, biomass, 

and nuclear, and that these studies will be released to educate 

the Saskatchewan public on the Energy Options Agreement 

findings. 

 

I'm putting this forward, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

tremendous opportunities that are available to the people of 

Saskatchewan, to the Government of Saskatchewan, and to 

Canada if we explore all the options we have in energy in this 

province. 

 

Under our administration, Mr. Speaker, the federal-provincial 

agreement on energy initiatives was signed, which allows for 

us to research all the possibilities.  The Government of Canada 

and Saskatchewan joined forces in a long-term plan to assess a 

wide range of economic diversification opportunities for the 

energy sector. 

 

The national Energy minister Mr. Jake Epp and myself at that 

time as premier signed a memorandum of understanding 

detailing the energy options so that we could co-operate in 

studying all of those options in the future. 

 

This agreement was seen to be very important, particularly as a 

step to developing Saskatchewan's energy resources.  And by 

the turn of the century, Mr. Speaker, as I'm sure you're aware, 

thousands and thousands and tens of thousands of jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan are potentially there as a result of 

the agreement that we undertook. 

 

My resolution today is to say to the members opposite and to 

the government, just please keep that energy agreement open 

so you can study all of your options.  Don't close any of the 

doors.  I believe that it's important that we review and assess 

the energy related 

opportunities available all across Canada, and particularly here 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

As some members know -- and my seat mate was the minister 

of Energy when this was taking place -- that Saskatchewan has 

tremendous potential for wealth.  And a Government of 

Saskatchewan at any time is looking for the potential to 

generate revenue for health and education, balanced budgets 

and the like, particularly after plebiscites to say that we should 

have a balanced budget.  We have tremendous potential for 

wealth generation in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure you're aware that the mayor of 

Saskatoon, Mr. Henry Dayday; the mayor of Regina, Doug 

Archer, have led delegations and thinking about leading people 

and economic development committees across Canada and 

particularly down East to see if we could have major economic 

development here in the province as a result of our energy 

options. 

 

Saskatchewan is blessed with an abundance of energy 

resources including crude oil, coal, natural gas, and yes, 

uranium.  There are also untapped opportunities for alternative 

renewable energy.  And certainly when my seat mate was the 

minister of Energy, he went through a number of them, and I 

just want to briefly touch on them today. 

 

The memorandum of understanding calls for the Government 

of Canada and Saskatchewan to work together to do the 

following: evaluate the economic and environmental feasibility 

of clean coal technologies including the capture and economic 

use of carbon dioxide and constructing a demonstration power 

generating facility in the province. 

 

Two, to study ways to promote the development and 

application of energy efficiency by assisting in the testing, 

commercialization, and initial marketing of new technologies 

intended to reduce agriculture imports to improve efficiency of 

electricity production and to use and to reduce energy 

consumption in buildings. 

 

Number three, to evaluate the feasibility of establishing a 

nuclear research and technology program in the province which 

could include the design and the manufacture of CANDU 3 

reactors, the construction of a nuclear power station, 

opportunities for development in the nuclear fuel cycle, and the 

enhancement of research programs in related fields. 

 

And four, evaluate the feasibility of implementing a fossil fuel 

resource development program in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Such a program would encourage the 

development and application of new technologies to more 

effectively extract the province's abundant oil, coal, and natural 

gas resources, and to diversify the province's economy through 

processing of those resources. 

 

The economic and environmental implications of all the 

projects being considered under the memorandum will be 

assessed, which, Mr. Speaker, as I'm sure that you are aware 

being from the city of Saskatoon, means literally tens of 

thousands of jobs and billions of dollars in revenue, not only in 

energy itself and the production of 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

energy but in research and in several items, Mr. Speaker, like 

agriculture, like food irradiation, nuclear physics, and nuclear 

medicine. 

 

Without restricting the generality of the agreement, the parties 

agreed to the following initiatives, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

members of the legislature would be interested as well as the 

public to work together to assess the feasibility of 

implementing a program in Saskatchewan to advance 

commercial opportunities in clean coal combustion, and the 

recovery and the use of waste products including the 

construction of an integrated gasification combined-cycle 

electrical facility in Saskatchewan. 

 

Such a facility would be a test centre for Canadian coals, acid 

gas, particulate, and carbon dioxide CO D22 recovery methods, 

and technologies requiring gasification as a base step, methanol 

production and fuel cells etc. 

 

Number 2, the development and commercialization of 

technologies in the province to recover CO D22 from coal-fired 

power plants; these studies will focus on technologies which 

will enhance the recovery of CO D22 from integrated 

gasification combined cycles in electrical facilities or which 

will allow retrofitting of existing coal-fired plants. 

 

Number 3, the development and commercialization of uses for 

the recovery of CO D22, and certainly there are significant 

opportunities for the use of large volumes of CO D22 in 

Canada as we use enhanced oil recovery and brines processing 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another major part of the agreement, Mr. Speaker, was to work 

together on a feasibility study to plan and, as appropriate, to 

develop and promote an energy efficiency and the alternative 

uses of energy.  These studies would consider the following:  

promoting the development and application of energy 

efficiency by assisting in the testing, commercialization, and 

initial marketing of new technologies including reducing 

agriculture energy inputs, improving efficiency of electrical 

production use, and reducing building energy consumption; 

and jointly assessing the feasibility of adopting alternative 

energy sources such as biomass for an example, to the 

conversion of agriculture and forest products, to transportation 

fuels; use of wood and peat for power generation in remote 

areas; and alternative transportation fuels such as natural gas; 

co-generation using fuels such as heavy oil emulsions; and the 

use of wind and solar energy, particularly in agricultural 

remote area applications. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the agreement which we encourage the 

government to stay with works together to evaluate the 

feasibility of establishing nuclear research and technology 

programs in the province of Saskatchewan, including the 

following, Mr. Speaker: the design and manufacture of 

CANDU 3 nuclear reactors; the construction and operation of a 

CANDU 3 nuclear power station in Saskatchewan; applications 

for slowpoke energy systems; opportunities for the safe, 

long-term management of nuclear fuel and waste; nuclear fuel 

cycle developments; nuclear applications in medicine and 

agriculture; university research programs and the 

enhancement of university programs in nuclear physics, 

medicine, and agriculture; related technology such as 

simulators, lasers, and irradiation processing; and, Mr. Speaker, 

the market of nuclear technology world-wide. 

 

Another part of the agreement, Mr. Speaker, works together to 

find all the opportunities in implementing a joint fossil fuel 

resource development program in Saskatchewan; field scale 

upgrading; enhanced oil recovery; improved coal and oil 

transportation. 

 

The parties acknowledged in this agreement put together by my 

seat mate when he was minister and the Government of Canada 

and myself, that in the course of implementing this 

memorandum of understanding and any subsequent 

agreements, consideration will be given to findings of public 

consultation processes, and such agreements will be subject to 

approved environmental reviews. 

 

The whole memorandum of understanding, Mr. Speaker, is 

subject to public scrutiny, public review -- consulting with the 

people and the environment in the cities of Saskatoon and 

northern Saskatchewan, southern Saskatchewan, and indeed 

across the province.  Parties acknowledge that we will put 

together a steering committee.  Any subsequent expenditures 

have to be agreed upon by both parties. 

 

It means that we can work together with research.  At a 

minimum, Mr. Speaker, it means there would be hundreds and 

hundreds of white-collar jobs in the city of Saskatoon and the 

city of Regina in research, looking at SaskPower, looking at the 

university, looking at medicine, agriculture, food irradiation, 

and the combinations of areas where we should lead, Mr. 

Speaker, on the environment as well as in agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to make the point that about 20 per cent of 

all the uranium that is produced and marketed internationally is 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  We have that tremendous 

potential to generate wealth.  Uranium to this province is like 

oil to Alberta.  We have the capacity plus the blessing of the 

resource and we have the educational capacity to deal with it, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The world is waiting to invest, as they do now, in the province 

of Saskatchewan, whether it's the French that are investing 

here, the Japanese, Americans, Koreans, the Chinese.  More 

and more people want nuclear reactors, let alone uranium. 

 

We find countries like France that are now 70 per cent nuclear 

energy, with a socialist government.  We find countries like 

Sweden have completely done an about-face and say that we 

want clean, environmentally safe electricity through the nuclear 

options.  We find the same in the Pacific Rim. 

 

World-wide the environmental problems are leading more and 

more people to the same conclusion that the mayor of 

Saskatoon has reached, the mayor of Regina has reached, many 

members of the House have reached, that we should look at all 

the options and particularly those we've been blessed with in 

the province of Saskatchewan: one, to make environmentally 

clean 

  



318 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

sources of power; number 2, to generate the wealth that's there 

-- literally billions of dollars; and number 3, to diversify our 

economy so that in fact we could have a high standard of living 

and the revenue to balance the budget, but of course pay for 

health, education, and several of our possible programs. 

 

We were looking, Mr. Speaker, at the potential for 30,000 new 

jobs over the next 10 to 15 years in all of the energy options.  

Complete diversification -- 30,000 new jobs -- well into the 

21st century that would put the province of Saskatchewan on 

the map in terms of energy options, diversification, and the 

potential to lead, not only Canada, but a good part of the world, 

in all of the nuclear capacity. 

 

When we look at recycling, Mr. Speaker, there's a tremendous 

amount of money and demand for recycling.  At a recent 

conference in the United States where I was joined by 

governors, many American governors were coming to 

Canadians or other people from around the world and said, are 

you prepared to do joint ventures on research on recycling?  

And what about the province of Saskatchewan because of its 

blessing in uranium?  Are you going to be moving in that 

direction or is it going to be in New Brunswick or Ontario? 

 

We look at the potential for nuclear medicine and research.  

And we also know, Mr. Speaker, that our own Lieutenant 

Governor, the Hon. Sylvia Fedoruk, has been an internationally 

well-known nuclear physicist.  But the whole area of nuclear 

medicine and nuclear physics is something that we've been 

leaders in.  And for us not to at least explore all those options 

would seem to be a terrible mistake, in my view, Mr. Speaker, 

because it's an agreement to spend money jointly, to do 

research in things that we're very good at, based on resources 

that we have here at our disposal.  And we have people from all 

over the world investing now in uranium and in the energy 

options. 

 

I could say from my own experience, Mr. Speaker, as well, that 

we market grain world-wide.  And with the new technology of 

irradiation, you can irradiate wheat or food products so that 

their shelf life and their storage capacity is extended years and 

years and years.  Now that's a multi-million dollar industry 

right in Saskatchewan.  On a commercial basis, if we wanted to 

get into the shelf life and the storage capacity of grains, of food 

products, we have the potential to do this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we have a new Department of Agriculture and Food who 

want to market internationally.  We market the countries that 

don't have good storage facilities, like eastern Europe, China, 

the Pacific Rim. And by using food irradiation and grain 

irradiation on a commercial and technical basis, we can extend 

the shelf life for a long, long time which would help hungry 

people, which would help market our resources, take advantage 

of the kind of technology we have here.  And, in fact, Mr. 

Speaker, we could be on the leading edge of that kind of 

technology. 

 

I'll also point out that in terms of health care, we have never 

taken a back seat.  And with the whole concern about cancer, 

Mr. Speaker, and nuclear medicine and the kinds of things that 

we can do to continue to lead, all of 

that research is there for Saskatchewan people.  We can lead in 

health care; we can lead in the environment; we can lead in 

energy; we can lead in agriculture; we can lead in international 

marketing; we can lead in recycling. 

 

We can lead in all of these areas that we've had the capacity to 

in the past, but never really broken into the future to allow us to 

capture the 21st century like we know we can. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the reputation of this province as being a 

leader and having the courage to go out in nuclear medicine, 

nuclear physics, food irradiation, marketing, health care, the 

environment, is one that I'm very proud of.  And I sincerely ask 

the new Government of Saskatchewan to consider this motion, 

this resolution that's on the floor of the Assembly, so that in 

fact we can at least continue the research. 

 

It's a joint-venture project that allows a lot of us to do work, 

many research scientists to be involved. It helps almost every 

part of our economy from the environment to agriculture to 

research to universities; diversification and economic activity 

plus, Mr. Speaker. And I'm sure any government would be 

interested in this -- raises enormous revenue, enormous 

revenue.  We're looking at literally billions and billions of 

dollars coming into the province of Saskatchewan in the 1990s 

and the 21st century if we don't just shut the door to this option, 

and all the options -- whether they're biomass, whether they're 

ethanol, the combinations of wind, solar, and all of the other 

options -- conservation.  All of those are part and parcel of this 

research. 

 

(1615) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to raise this resolution because the 

people of Saskatchewan are very much in favour of all of these 

options.  We had a panel review them all, and they 

recommended that we look at them one at a time. 

 

I would think in the spirit of a new administration that is 

talking about co-operation, nothing could make more sense 

than co-operating with the national government in doing joint 

research, exploring all the options that we have in our 

jurisdiction for economic diversification and wealth creation 

that is environmentally sound.  That just makes eminent sense, 

Mr. Speaker, because it's a joint venture.  It is co-operating and 

it's in the spirit of how we're going to have to build this great 

nation in the face of the challenges in the 21st century. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move this resolution because I believe it's 

important to the province and indeed to the country and 

probably no doubt to the world because of its international, 

environmental, and  economic resolution.  So, Mr. Speaker, I 

move, seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington: 

 

 That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 

maintain the Energy Options Agreement with the purpose of 

researching all alternative sources of energy, including the 

environmentally friendly use of coal, wind, solar, biomass, 

and nuclear and that these studies will be released to educate 

the Saskatchewan public on 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

 the EOA (Energy Options Agreement) findings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am proud to 

be able to second the motion of the member from Estevan.  The 

Energy Options Agreement is Saskatchewan's chance to grab 

the future.  It is our chance to . . . Saskatchewan can grab the 

future with this agreement.  This is our opportunity to gain the 

same sort of wealth potential that Saudi Arabia has. 

 

Why hide from the future?  Why live in the past?  Very few of 

us, Mr. Speaker, want to go back to living in caves or even 

living in our grandfather's original homes.  When we leave this 

building this evening we drive home with technology, with 

energy.  When we walk into our homes and flip on the lights, 

that is energy.  And we're all very pleased to have the heat 

turned on when we get there.  This is all part of what this 

Energy Options Agreement is all about.  Why should we not be 

trying to enhance that potential? 

 

The members opposite are very concerned about the uranium 

industry.  Some of them want to do away with it.  Their federal 

counterparts in Ottawa wish to shut down the whole uranium 

industry.  When I asked questions of the Minister of Energy 

and Mines concerning the mining industry, his reply was that 

we have to wait for the environmental study to be processed.  

Well that environmental study will not be finished until 

earliest, mid-1993, almost two years from now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the mining industry needs to know beforehand, 

providing it meets the environmental requirements, what is 

going to happen, what they're going to be allowed to do, will 

they be allowed to proceed with any plans?  The mere fact that 

they cannot proceed at this present time does not mean they 

cannot be studying, planning for future developments. 

 

Mines do not spring up overnight.  They need long-term 

planning. 

 

In 1988 under the auspices of the previous government, $90 

million was spent in exploration in the North in mining.  How 

much will be spent in 1992?  Fifteen million, 20 million 

maybe?  A quarter of what was spent before.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm not talking about pre-development expenses.  I'm 

talking about real exploration. 

 

Chile, a land that has a lot of resources, is receiving $500 

million this coming year in exploration money.  Ninety per cent 

of that, Mr. Speaker, comes from Canada.  Why are Canadian 

companies investing in Chile rather than in Canada, rather than 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Canadian mining industry, Mr. Speaker, uses the same 

guide-lines offshore from Canada as it uses in Canada for 

environmental concerns.  And yet they know that in Chile if 

they develop a mine, that they will be allowed to continue to 

mine its products, to gain the benefits of their exploration.  

They have no such assurances in Saskatchewan. 

 

Another part of the Energy Options Agreement concerns 

the oil and gas industry, and the same concerns of uncertainty 

that affect the mining industry in Saskatchewan affect the oil 

and gas industry.  When I look back at the changes that have 

happened in the oil and gas industry in this province over the 

last 20-some years, there have been quite a number of changes. 

 

I started work, Mr. Speaker, out in Swift Current in 1970 in the 

oil.  At that time, there was a project going called an INSITU 

project.  Today that kind of a project could not proceed because 

of the uncertainty, because of the lack of direction from this 

government.  These plans do not happen overnight.  It takes a 

long time to develop.  And you can't just state one day that, 

yes, you can go ahead and expect development to start taking 

place.  The Energy Options Agreement would allow people to 

start developing plans and know where they're going. 

 

Another type of new project that was started under the previous 

government in this province was the horizontal drilling.  Under 

conventional wells you receive a small amount of pay zone 

from your efforts -- you may get 5 feet, 10 feet.  But under 

horizontal drilling you can get hundreds of metres of pay zone.  

This is the kind of development that the Energy Options 

Agreement would encourage, would help to build.  And why 

are we trying to hide from it, Mr. Speaker?  I don't understand. 

 

We also have in this province, wind.  Some people would say 

that there is a lot of wind generated in this building, but most of 

it comes from the West.  I don't mean to disparage the members 

who come from the West with that comment but the wind 

generation concept is one that perhaps whose time has come.  

The Energy Options Agreement would give us the ability to do 

more research on that type of facility. 

 

There are large wind generating farms in various other parts of 

this continent.  California is a prime example, Mr. Speaker.  

You drive down the highways north of San Francisco and there 

are wind farms for 50 miles generating electricity.  Efficiencies 

need to be gained in that industry to make it truly efficient and 

economical.  The Energy Options Agreement would provide 

some of the money to do that research.  In western 

Saskatchewan in the open areas, wind generation farms are a 

viable option.  North Dakota is presently looking at those kind 

of facilities.  They may well have some already started. 

 

Solar power -- some of our smaller farms, some of our 

communities are using solar energy to heat their swimming 

pools, heat some of their buildings.  But their methods are 

inefficient at the present time.  We need to have research to 

improve on those type of energy sources. 

 

One thing that wind and solar provide is conservation methods.  

Mr. Speaker, SaskPower over the last number of years has 

provided a number of efforts to help conserve our energy.  

They provided blankets for the hot water heaters in people's 

homes.  They provided a loan to allow people to insulate their 

windows better.  Last spring they provided a rebate on 

fluorescent lights, the new small lamps that you would screw 

into an ordinary bulb socket.  And now they are providing 

rebates to buy timers to put on your automobiles when you 

plug them in in the winter. 

  



320 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

There may very well be other types of energy savings that 

could be researched and provided to the benefit of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  All of these type of research provide a cost 

saving to all of us. 

 

The member from Estevan mentioned biomass.  The city of 

Regina is well aware of biomass, garbage.  They're in the 

process of looking for -- or perhaps they have decided now -- 

where they are going to put their new garbage dump.  If they 

had a biomass energy generator, they could dispose of a good 

portion of their garbage.  These plants are already in operation.  

They need more work to become totally non-polluting.  This 

agreement would provide that money to do that research.  And 

why do we want to avoid it?  We need that kind of research, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Estevan has a large amount of pull in his 

area and it borders on my constituency.  Coal, when it's burned, 

is a pollutant.  There are methods to scrub most of those 

pollutants out of the energy wastes that goes up the stacks but 

not all.  More research can be done to improve that. 

 

Coal gasification is a big effort across the line in North Dakota.  

Coal gasification is expensive, but it's also more 

environmentally sound.  Coal gasification in the Estevan area 

at Coronach would improve our coal use, would make it more 

environmentally friendly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I've outlined some of the benefits that accrue directly to the 

mining, to the drilling of the oil wells, to the research in solar 

and wind.  One thing I haven't mentioned is other sources of 

energy. 

 

Uranium can be used in the CANDU reactors.  Regina and 

Saskatoon and northern Saskatchewan are all interested in 

getting access to the CANDU technology and to utilizing it to 

generate power and heat in their cities.  The CANDU reactor is 

probably the safest reactor in the world, Mr. Speaker.  It's not 

like the one at Chernobyl.  It's not like the one at Three Mile 

Island.  And yet the members opposite seem to want to deny us 

even the opportunity to study that technology. 

 

In all of the mining industry, in the research, there are jobs 

available.  The research jobs, Mr. Speaker, are high technology 

jobs, good paying jobs, jobs suitable for our university 

graduates.  The jobs created in the research industry are jobs 

that create spin-offs in our economy.  We also have the jobs, 

Mr. Speaker, for all the people that are involved in the mining, 

the transportation of the product from that mine, the ore, the 

building of the transportation systems and all the 

infrastructures. 

 

The member from Athabasca was saying that we did nothing 

while we were in government to aid the North.  Mr. Speaker, 

we developed many new mines up there.  And his members of 

the government want to shut those down now. 

 

We have five proposed mines that are on hold right now in 

northern Saskatchewan.  These mines, Mr. Speaker, if the 

government opposite would give the go-ahead and say, if you 

meet the environmental requirements you may proceed, they 

could go into planning and start to do their 

pre-development work on these mines.  But the members 

opposite will not give them that assurance that if they meet all 

the requirements they will be able to proceed. 

 

The oil patch is in the same business.  They need to know that 

they can proceed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've outlined what I feel are the good points of 

this Energy Options Agreement, and I support and I would 

encourage all the members of this Assembly to support this 

motion.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  At the end of my 

remarks I will be moving an amendment to the resolution 

presented by the member opposite.  The reason for the 

amendment is based on the fact that there is no such thing as an 

Energy Options Agreement.  In his remarks the member 

opposite has now referred to the September 13, 1991, 

memorandum of understanding which is not an agreement on 

energy between the Government of Canada and Saskatchewan. 

 

In this case the following issues are raised.  First, the motion 

does not address the memorandum of understanding or its 

terms.  Secondly, the motion is contrary to the contents of the 

memorandum of understanding. 

 

The members opposite may be referring to the recent report of 

the Saskatchewan Electrical Energy Options panel, also known 

as a Billinton panel.  If this is the case, the following 

observations are made: the panel has provided a report, has 

made recommendations, and has concluded its work. 

 

The motion urges the government to research all alternative 

energy sources.  This is not feasible or cost effective. The 

Billinton panel has identified that some alternative energy 

forms are not desirable or viable. 

 

The motion has failed to name the preferred mechanisms 

identified by the panel for alternate energy generation 

including cogeneration, hydro, and natural gas.  The motion 

also fails to mention the very important issue of energy 

conservation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have sadly witnessed what happens when a 

government forges ahead at any cost on a pet energy 

development project which is flawed, piecemeal, and unsound 

on every account. 

 

We can never again afford to have another Rafferty-Alameda 

Shand white elephant project in this province -- a project which 

is riddled with controversy and court actions; a project that has 

not stood up to public scrutiny, but instead has become a 

shameful national example how a development should not 

occur in a nation looked upon as a leader in the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all future energy developments in this province 

must meet four important criteria.  Such developments must be 

technically feasible, socially 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

acceptable, economically viable, and environmentally sound. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- In the interest of the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I therefore move an amendment to make the motion 

stating: 

 

 That all the words after "Assembly" be deleted and the 

following be substituted therefor: 

 

 encourage the Government of Saskatchewan to establish a 

sound energy framework in which co-ordinated energy 

development can occur which will maximize economic 

development potential, integrate energy related economic and 

environmental issues, promote energy efficiency to reduce 

energy costs, and will protect consumer and public interests. 

 

I so move, seconded by the Member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As the newly 

elected member from Saskatoon Greystone, I wish to speak to 

the motion from the member from Estevan.  And as members 

will recall, when it came to a vote of confidence in the 

government in this Assembly last week, that I voted in favour 

of giving the Premier and the NDP government a chance to 

provide leadership and direction and integrity to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, for the benefit of people in our 

province.  I voted to support the members opposite because I 

truly believe that they deserve a chance. 

 

I have been on record, as my party has been on record, for 

supporting energy options and energy conservation.  What I'd 

like to do today is to speak specifically to one aspect of this 

motion. 

 

On September 6, I was at a luncheon sponsored by the 

Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce at the Travelodge motel in 

Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, the guest speaker at that luncheon 

was the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

gentleman who is now Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  His address was one in a series, and the 

purpose of this series was to provide members of the 

Saskatchewan business community with a clear understanding 

of policies of the three political party leaders. 

 

Each one of the leaders was requested to address three different 

topics, Mr. Speaker.  One dealt with the deficit, the second with 

privatization, and the last issue with the idea of uranium mining 

and nuclear development.  The chamber members wanted to 

know each party's position on these three very important topics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that luncheon, in front of over 500 people, the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the gentleman who was 

seeking their support to become Premier, said the following.  

He said that his party had an old, outdated anti-uranium mining 

policy -- a policy which would 

permit no new uranium mines to open and one which would 

close existing mines as new jobs were found for the displaced 

workers.  The hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

Leader of the New Democratic Party, was very clear and 

up-front when outlining this policy.  But, Mr. Speaker, the hon. 

member then told the group that this NDP policy was 

developed at the height of the Cold War, developed when 

tensions between East and West were high, and fears of nuclear 

war were very high. 

 

Those circumstances, Mr. Speaker, the audience was told by 

the hon. member, had now changed.  Peace had been achieved 

and the threat of nuclear war was no longer as great a concern.  

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale, the 

Leader of the NDP, went on to say that other circumstances 

had also changed.  That when the NDP policy was adopted, 

global warming and acid rain were not understood to be as 

great a threat as they are today.  And he conceded that many 

people now feel that the scales have tipped away from fossil 

fuels and are favouring more use of nuclear power. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale told 

the 500 members of the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce that 

several important public review processes were at work and 

that his government would want to be guided by the 

recommendations of these bodies before making any decisions 

on uranium mining or nuclear power for Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale listed 

those bodies.  He outlined the panel; indeed he called it a blue 

ribbon panel, a panel of experts reviewing Saskatchewan's 

future energy options.  And this panel was chaired by Professor 

Billinton of the University of Saskatchewan and four other 

members, individuals like Chief Roland Crowe of the 

Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and other distinguished 

individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of those individuals was even a member of 

the NDP executive, a former vice-president of the New 

Democratic Party.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that particular panel has 

submitted its report to the Government of Saskatchewan.  It has 

recommended that the Government of Saskatchewan provide 

leadership, provide the public with information and advice, and 

conduct a fair and reasonable assessment of the nuclear option. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Professor Billinton and his panel struggled with 

the nuclear option but they recognized that it was just that, an 

option, an option on which government should provide 

leadership.  Mr. Speaker, please note I said government, not 

SaskPower, not the New Democratic Party at its annual 

convention, but government -- the function that the members 

opposite sought to obtain, and now that they have it, appear to 

be afraid or unable to exercise it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Saskatoon Riversdale led 

the people at that luncheon in Saskatoon to believe that he 

would be guided by new developments and by the 

recommendations of what he termed the blue ribbon panel, the 

Billinton panel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ask yourself: was the member choosing to 

mislead people in Saskatoon?  Has he done what he said 

  



322 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

 he would do?  No, he has not.  And he has not said a word, not 

one single word, on what his government's policy position will 

be on nuclear development in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1951 the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) government of Tommy Douglas did a very 

irresponsible thing by the standards of some of the members 

opposite.  Mr. Speaker, in 1951 the CCF government of 

Tommy Douglas began approving uranium mines in norther 

Saskatchewan -- mines which produced uranium. 

 

And do you know something, Mr. Speaker?  Those mines did 

not produce uranium for nuclear power.  No, Mr. Speaker, 

those mines produced uranium exclusively for the use in 

bombs.  And, Mr. Speaker, the tradition of the NDP CCF goes 

a long way back.  It goes back to an era when the CCF 

government of Saskatchewan approved 16 uranium mines in 

the Uranium City area, mines whose only function was to 

produce uranium for bombs -- uranium which was exclusively 

exported to other countries for their bombs since Canada has 

never had, and I hope never will have, a nuclear arsenal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when nuclear power was successfully developed 

in Canada and the CANDU reactors were built and operated in 

Ontario and other countries, the Saskatchewan government was 

still there, still supplying uranium -- uranium which was being 

refined elsewhere, refined in Ontario and exported around the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of Woodrow Lloyd, the first NDP 

premier of Saskatchewan, had no problem with uranium 

mining.  They had no policy to shut down the mines, no policy 

to ban the atom. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some members will also remember that the 

Liberal Party of Saskatchewan formed the government from 

1964 to 1971.  And during that time we had drought, low wheat 

prices, a collapse of potash prices, and many of the same things 

indeed that the Conservatives have experienced during the 

1980s. 

 

But unlike the Conservative government just previous, Mr. 

Speaker, the Liberals did not leave Saskatchewan with a 

heritage of debt and corruption.  No, Mr. Speaker, the Liberals 

left Saskatchewan with a pulp mill built and operating in Prince 

Albert and another one under construction in Beauval, 

Athabasca Pulp Ltd., a project later cancelled by the NDP 

because it didn't fit their model of development -- a project 

cancelled because it had been started by another government, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the NDP really did not want to share any credit or success 

with anyone else.  Even if it wasn't their project from the very 

beginning, it had to go as a result of that. 

 

The NDP government in which the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale served as deputy premier, Mr. Speaker, cancelled 

that deal.  He cancelled it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I wonder if the member from Athabasca would stand up 

and tell the members of the legislature today if that decision to 

kill that pulp mill project for north-western 

Saskatchewan, that totally political decision, that decision 

based on the politics of fear, Mr. Speaker, would he tell us if 

that decision helped his constituency, helped the people of 

Beauval, helped the Indian and Metis people of north-western 

Saskatchewan? 

 

No, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the member from Athabasca 

would not stand up and tell the House that that had been a good 

decision.  He would not do that because he is a practical man 

and because he knows that it was the wrong decision for 

Beauval, wrong for northern Saskatchewan, and wrong for the 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the leadership in feeding and benefitting 

from the politics of fear?  Where is the benefit?  And where is 

the public service?  I am sure that if we could turn the clock 

back to 1971, every member opposite would today vote to 

build that pulp mill in Beauval, would vote to help the people 

of the North, would vote for development and progress. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of Saskatchewan faces a very 

similar set of circumstances today.  All political parties 

recognize the need to diversify our economy.  We all know that 

Saskatchewan is blessed with high grade and abundant uranium 

reserves.  We all know that there are countries around the 

world, countries which have made decisions to develop nuclear 

power, and who would buy uranium fuel from Canada and 

from our province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that in spite of current low uranium market prices 

that our uranium reserves are of sufficient grade and quality to 

ensure our mines are the most competitive on the planet.  And 

we all know our uranium mines are closely regulated and 

controlled.  We know that certain practices of the past are no 

longer permitted and that workers' safety and environmental 

regulations prevent any real danger or harm to people, 

communities and the environment. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even though we do know these things, some 

members in the New Democratic Party and in government still 

seek to make political capital out of them; still seek to distort 

and twist facts to create fear and uncertainty; still feed the 

insecurity and the doubts of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservative government just defeated by the 

people of this province did accomplish some worthy projects.  

Nine years and $9 billion can't help but result in some 

worthwhile projects.  One such event was the 

Canada-Saskatchewan Energy Development Agreement, and 

this agreement provides a framework for the development of all 

of Saskatchewan's energy resources including sir, our nuclear 

resources. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, another agreement the Conservatives managed to 

develop during their term in office was the agreement between 

the Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. and SaskPower.  This 

agreement, we are told, provided for a series of nuclear related 

developments; studies into nuclear applications in agriculture; 

nuclear research and applications in medicine; nuclear fuel 

storage 

  



December 17, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

technologies; and for studies which, if they proved viable, 

could eventually lead to nuclear power as an energy option for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, neither the Conservatives who 

signed the agreement nor the New Democratic Party who are 

now in government, have provided the people of Saskatchewan 

with any other details of this document itself.  We are faced 

with addressing press reports and incomplete information on 

the content of this agreement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you not think that it would be an attribute of a 

responsible government to table this agreement, to let 

Saskatchewan people see and understand for themselves just 

how good or how bad the agreements that the Conservatives 

signed really are?  Mr. Speaker, wouldn't it be an action of an 

open government, a government which shows respect for 

media, which shows respect for openness and honesty and for 

the public? 

 

In any case, Mr. Speaker, this agreement is described to me as 

a planning agreement.  It provides for AECL (Atomic Energy 

of Canada Ltd.) to move 170 people to Saskatoon and to 

complete the design and engineering of the CANDU 3 project.  

It provides for jobs -- high-paying and quality jobs.  It 

provides, I am told, for the studies to see how well nuclear 

power would fit within SaskPower generating grid, what 

benefits would accrue, what sites might be suitable, what 

manufacturing spin-offs could be created and expanded for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the information of some of the Saskatoon 

members of the legislature, we have a company in Saskatoon 

called Hitachi Ltd. and they're one of the largest industrial 

manufacturing firms in the entire world, Mr. Speaker.  And 

they have built a turbine manufacturing plant in our province in 

Saskatoon.  And I'm told that the Hitachi turbine could become 

standard equipment to the CANDU 3 design and that this 

would create a very strong sales package and that the market 

for these power reactors and small turbines would represent a 

tremendous stimulus to Saskatchewan industry. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I'm also told that the agreement itself is 

conditional.  That SaskPower and AECL both put up $25 

million to move these personnel to Saskatchewan, to conduct 

these studies, to complete the design of the CANDU, to do site 

selection, to fund a chair in science at the University of 

Saskatchewan, to assess food irradiation projects, to do further 

studies on nuclear fuel storage. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if these studies were to show the projects were 

not viable, to show the projects were not in the interests of 

Saskatchewan, did not make sense, then, Mr. Speaker, then I 

am told that at SaskPower's option, they can advise AECL at 

any time up to 1995 and the funds so advanced by SaskPower 

will be converted into a loan and repaid to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know all there is to know about these 

things.  But I am amazed that the Conservative's struck this 

deal because it sounds far too practical and it actually sounds 

like a good deal for the province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. 

Speaker, this deal also sounds like it makes sense. 

Yes, commit some money to our future, but on a careful 

step-by-step basis, study, evaluate, and do engineering.  

Provide for controlled decision points and allow for public 

discussion and debate.  Get some benefits.  And while you're 

doing this, get some jobs transferred to our province.  Get some 

stable, well-paying, high tech jobs from a stable and 

established company, and provide Saskatchewan people with 

information and knowledge.  And then when we really have the 

facts, have done all the homework, then we can proceed.  If we 

decide not to continue with the project, we'll get our money 

back. 

 

How, Mr. Speaker, can this be a bad deal for Saskatchewan and 

where is the risk?  Where, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier on how 

a deal such as this can be bad for our province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Well you may recall that I mentioned Mr. Tommy Douglas 

earlier and that he approved 16 uranium mines in northern 

Saskatchewan -- mines used to produce bombs.  And some of 

you may find it surprising to hear but you know that it's true.  

And I don't think anyone in this House would condemn premier 

Douglas for doing that because I think we all understood that 

he felt that it was necessary to do what needed to be done in the 

province of Saskatchewan for the people of Saskatchewan in 

his time.  In any case, premier Douglas could and did make the 

decision.  He could and did provide leadership. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, premier Douglas also helped build other 

weapons.  He, together with some very distinguished 

Saskatchewan scientists, helped to build what we call the 

cobalt bomb -- a weapon in use in the war against cancer, what 

is also called the cobalt radio-therapy unit at University 

Hospital in Saskatchewan.  Tommy Douglas did understand the 

need for science and he supported this research.  And what a 

return for Saskatchewan and for Canada and the planet, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to make members of the legislature 

aware of a publication, a recent Saskatchewan publication.  The 

publication to which I am referring is called the Saskatchewan 

Nuclear Gazette.  Mr. Speaker, this gazette is produced in 

Saskatoon by aboriginal entrepreneurs who are in the 

communications business and who felt that nuclear issues in 

Saskatchewan had become so distorted, so unbalanced, that 

there was a niche in the market to produce a magazine that 

could put all of this in perspective. 

 

And I would like to remind the members opposite that there 

have been several programs as of late, a series by people who 

used to feel similar to yourself, who upon obtaining knowledge 

have changed their minds.  Mr. Speaker, I understand that some 

of the supporters of the party opposite could not even take this 

book on face value, but instead criticized the aboriginal owners 

as being pawns of the nuclear industry or being bought off. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ideological fanaticism of some opponents to 

nuclear science is so deep and so strong that they have no 

interest whatsoever in Saskatchewan or its circumstances.  And 

they have only a singular interest in stamping out or 

discrediting anything or anyone who puts forward views or 

ideas different from their own.  And I 

  



324 Saskatchewan Hansard December 17, 1991 

urge the members opposite to disassociate themselves from 

such thinking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to, as the member of Saskatoon 

Greystone, remind people that I come from a constituency that 

has very thoughtful people living there.  I spent a great deal of 

time going door to door during this past year prior to the 

campaign, and I want to tell you about them, because they were 

very thoughtful on October 21.  They wanted to send a 

message that they said that they were fed up with the previous 

government.  They wanted to send a message that they believed 

in a better way of doing things in this legislature.  And they 

wanted to send a message to the NDP that while their candidate 

was a good and honourable man, the majority of them did not 

think that the anti-nuclear approach that he took was good for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The constituents of Saskatoon Greystone wanted to send that 

message to you on behalf of thousands of people across 

Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am their messenger.  So to 

the constituents of Saskatoon Greystone I say, please consider 

the message delivered. 

 

There are people who have benefitted greatly from nuclear 

development.  And I find it absolutely despicable, Mr. Speaker, 

that in this province where we discovered cobalt treatments for 

cancer, that we cannot even build a medical isotope. 

 

What we need to do is to be informed, Mr. Speaker.  And what 

we have to do is to look at the health benefits of nuclear 

medicine.  Because it tells of a story of a Mossbank woman 

who was helped, a woman who was treated in this province in 

the 1950s and is still alive today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are nuclear medicine departments in every 

major hospital in the world.  Magnetic resonance imaging 

machines are nuclear medicine, Mr. Speaker, and the result of 

nuclear research. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, cobalt 60 is an isotope produced by 

CANDU reactors.  Canada produces about 85 per cent of the 

cobalt that is used for radiation therapy around the world, and it 

comes from Canadian nuclear research -- research that, in 

earlier years, was done in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 

 

We have credible and knowledgeable people right here in our 

province who have been part of this technology in helping 

mankind.  And one such person is Her Excellency, the 

Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, a noted nuclear scientist 

and a member of the team who, along with Dr. Harold Johns, 

pioneered nuclear medicine at the University of Saskatchewan.  

And, Mr. Speaker, did you know that the first cancer patient 

treated with cobalt 60 in Saskatoon in the early 1950s is indeed 

alive today?  That lady is still living and now resides in 

Victoria, B.C. 

 

How much more evidence do we need to know that we require 

to understand that we should not become ideological prisoners 

of a small and misguided anti-development clique? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am speaking to this motion presented by 

the member from Estevan because I do believe very much in 

exploring energy options and energy conservation.  But for 

anyone who has been interested in or partaken in research, we 

cannot leave out one variable or our research is faulty. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to be the 

seconder of the amendment from the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley, Mr. Speaker.  I had anticipated perhaps more 

time to address his amendment.  I recognize we are coming 

very close to 5 o'clock, but let me say this, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I've listened with care for the last 25 minutes to the 

independent member from Greystone who never once in her 

remarks came anywhere near the motion that is before this 

House.  She clearly came into this House attempting to be the 

apologist for AECL in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier in his remarks, the member from 

Souris-Cannington, did a little better job of disguising what 

they were really attempting to do in this House today, and that 

is to be proponents for a CANDU 3 reactor.  That has nothing 

to do with the motion that's on the order paper. 

 

Mr. Speaker, members opposite had a golden opportunity to 

talk about the future for energy in this province as they might 

see it.  Rather what we got was the sales pitch for nuclear 

reactors, Mr. Speaker.  Totally inappropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had anticipated the opportunity to speak about 

the energy options and to congratulate the member from Indian 

Head-Wolseley for his remarks and the direction he would 

point us, but time does not allow, Mr. Speaker, today.  And so 

on that basis I would move that we adjourn debate on this 

motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:57 p.m. 

 

 


