




















































Hansard: December 11, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 215 

 December 11, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Communication 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Speaker, as chairperson of the 

Standing Committee on Communication, presents the first 

report of the said committee which is as follows: 

 

 Your committee has considered the recommendations of the 

Public Documents Committee, under The Archives Act, 

contained in retention and disposal schedules comprising 

sessional paper no. 120 (amendment to schedules 295 and 

schedules 307 to 325 inclusive) of the fourth session of the 

twenty-first legislature as referred to the committee by the 

Assembly on December 4, 1991. 

 

 Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 

recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 

amendment to schedule nos. 295 and schedules 307 to 325 

inclusive be accepted. 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by 

the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on 

Communication be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity 

to introduce to you and the members of this Assembly, 12 

students from Marcelin Kihiw School, grades 10, 11, and 12.  

And I will be meeting with them after the question period for 

pictures and refreshments.  I'd like you to welcome them now. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like the Assembly 

to welcome the students from the Marcelin School.  This 

school is one that I attended from grades 4 to 12 and it's a fine 

school, and I see it's still doing well.  I'd like you to welcome 

the guests. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

know all members of the Assembly will want to join with me 

in welcoming back to the Chamber a member who served with 

great distinction for a period of time that I think all of us envy 

-- I think I'm correct -- from 1964 to 1982.  I refer of course to 

Walter Smishek who was 

minister of Finance, minister of Municipal Affairs, and served 

with distinction in the Blakeney government.  I know all 

members will want to join with me in welcoming him back 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome Mr. 

Smishek back, and draw to the attention of this Assembly that 

Mr. Smishek started out in what is now Redberry constituency. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Grain Transportation Systems 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few 

questions I'd like to ask the Premier.  And, Mr. Speaker, my 

question to the Premier, who has left everyone shaking their 

heads a little bit in their confusion on your position on grain 

transportation . . . The Premier was quoted as saying he 

supported a shipment of grain, both through the traditional port 

system and to the rail system. 

 

Mr. Premier, I don't think you can have it both ways.  Would 

you like to explain to us what you meant by that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  With 

respect to the minister, to the member opposite, I don't see a 

particular confusion, because to the best of my knowledge, in 

order to get the grain to port, you need the rail system.  And I 

support both the usage of the rail system and the port system in 

order to get our wheat to international market. 

 

I think what you're talking about is the conflict that apparently 

is arising on the west coast with respect to the movement out of 

the Vancouver ports versus Seattle ports. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, supplementary.  

Surely the Premier knows that when there's an order for grain, 

that in today's world countries don't hoard up a whole bunch of 

grain.  They expect their grain to be delivered within a month. 

 

And what I'm saying to you, Mr. Premier, what are you saying?   

Are you saying that you will allow the grain to go through 

Seattle if necessary, if there's a strike -- which we can expect.  

What are you telling us?  Will you see that the grain keeps 

going through the ports, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I leave it to you, of 

course, to decide whether the question is in order or not, but I 

can say to you, sir, that I don't believe, the last time I checked, 

that the Government of Saskatchewan is responsible for the 

administration of ports. 

  



216 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

I will however say that our position is that we believe the grain 

product, which is produced so ably by our farmers here in 

Saskatchewan, should be shipped to those who buy as quickly 

as possibly, as efficiently as possibly.  And we favour, where 

possible, a Canadian mechanism for doing so. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We think the idea of Canadians 

helping Canadians at all stages of the game is the right way to 

go and frankly, if there's a shortage of capacity with respect to 

the Vancouver ports, then we should be looking to the federal 

government to increase the capacity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Would the Premier 

then explain to us when it would be right to use the Seattle 

port?  When is the right time to use that? 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again the Premier is waffling on this 

question.  In fact, I would be surprised if he wasn't ready to set 

up another review to study the matter before he put his foot in 

his mouth again.  When thousands of farmers, Mr. Speaker, are 

going broke, prices are at historic lows, and our population is 

dwindling, how can the Premier of a province which has half of 

the population, half the farm population in Canada, how can 

you come down squarely . . . how come you can't come down 

squarely on the side of the farmers instead of protecting your 

union friends?  Could you answer that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of 

respect to the member from Wilkie this is a question which he 

has exaggerated to incredulity.  The position of the 

government, any government, whether it's a PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government, a Liberal government, or NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government in the province of 

Saskatchewan, is in a position which says that we should be 

supporting our economic engines, of which farming and 

agriculture is very important if not the prime one; and that we 

should be doing everything that we can as Canadians to make 

sure that our product gets to market as quickly and as 

efficiently as possible. 

 

I prefer doing it through the Canadian mechanism and the 

Canadian port system, and that's been my position consistently 

throughout the piece.  You ask me when do I favour Seattle?  I 

can't answer a hypothetical question.  I'll need to know what 

the circumstances are, but my preference is, as I've said before, 

as I think the preference of all good Canadians should be, to 

make sure that the Canadian system is up to speed, to be 

competitive world class and first class, to quote an old phrase. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  The Premier is 

refusing really to tell the Saskatchewan farm families where his 

priorities really are, which only proves I think, Mr. Speaker, 

how much influence his party has . . . Barb Byers and George 

Rosenau have over their policy. 

Mr. Speaker, I'm asking the Premier, will the Premier today 

give this House and the public of Saskatchewan his assurance 

that when the next strike occurs, which it inevitably will, his 

government will support the opposition in demanding that the 

federal government make the handlers of grain, inspectors, and 

graders an essential service?  And if not, why won't you do 

that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would answer the hon. 

member as follows.  I say this with the utmost of sincerity.  For 

nine and one-half years, sir, you were a member of the 

government which was in authority and could have, and should 

have if you felt in that position, advocated it so that the federal 

government would take an appropriate position.  To the best of 

my knowledge, you either did not advocate it or, if you did, 

you had no success in doing it. 

 

But I would say, secondly, to the hon. member the following: 

the most important point is that that is the old politics, the 

politics you're talking about -- the politics of trying to divide 

and conquer.  The politics of division is the old politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It's the old politics.  I would say to the 

hon. member from Wilkie what we've got to do, because of the 

challenges facing this country and this province, is not to seek 

enemies and to pull apart, but to pull together to overcome 

those obstacles.  And that's what you should be doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Since the Premier 

refuses to make any commitment whatsoever, ducking the 

question . . . Mr. Premier, do you not realize that every time a 

strike occurs when there is a shipment of grain going to 

whatever country that the Saskatchewan farmer loses those 

sales?  And even when the price is as low as it is, those sales 

are very important. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, since you refused to make any commitment 

whatsoever, would you show the farmers of Saskatchewan how 

much support you are giving them by telling us today what you 

have in your plans to get another $500 million into the hands of 

the farmers before Christmas? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to that 

question for the time being is the answer that I have given his 

leader and have given to the House before.  The Prime Minister 

has stated in his meeting with me that he would review with the 

Minister of Finance and the Minister of Agriculture Canada the 

positions advocated by the concerned farmers and the coalition 

of farm groups.  I'm awaiting a response from the Prime 

Minister in this context and then the farmers and the farm 

organizations will be meeting again with our people and 

anybody else that is involved to see what the next steps should 

be taken. 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

In any event, as the hon. member knows, the federal 

government itself alleges that the $800 million which is . . . a 

portion of that which belongs to Saskatchewan -- the forms are 

in the mail -- as good as it is, it comes that far for the 

December period so we should see how far it goes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Staff Changes at SPMC 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is to the minister responsible for Sask Property 

Management Corporation.  Madam Minister, your government 

has said the reason for the 400 or so firings that your 

government has done over the last six weeks, that there is . . . 

the reason for it is for down-sizing the government and that the 

mass firings are not political.  At the same time you personally 

have engaged in a hiring spree that shows that this is not your 

motive. 

 

I want to ask you Madam Minister, who is Frank Quennell, 

what specifically was he hired to do, and how much are you 

paying him to do it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, Frank Quennell was a 

special advisor that we brought in in the transition team to look 

at Sask Property Management Corporation.  That corporation is 

under a great deal of difficulty.  It has a lot of complaints from 

departments with it.  We're looking at reorganizing that 

department.  At this stage, Mr. Quennell is no longer with Sask 

Property Management. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the same 

minister.  She did not answer my question.  I said: what's his 

responsibility, what's he getting paid to do it?  She did not 

answer how much. 
 

But anyway, Mr. Speaker, my further supplementary.  I 

understand that Garry Beatty, who worked for the member for 

Riversdale in the old NDP government, has been brought back 

to master SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation). 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask her . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . She can answer that.  But I want to ask also a brand new 

question.  I have here, Mr. Speaker, I have a leaked . . . Ah, she 

can answer two at once.  She's . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member has already 

indicated he's on two subject areas.  Is he going on a third or is 

he asking a question on the two that he's already mentioned?  I 

want the question. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I just said I would like to know 

that.  I didn't say I wanted her to answer. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- My new question to the minister, my new 

question to the Minister.  I have a leaked document.  Mr. 

Speaker, I have a leaked document in my hand from 

 SPMC, and I will quote this, Mr. Speaker.  It says in part, 

quote: 

 

 Leslie Martin, a legal research assistant, reporting directly to 

Mr. Frank Quennell started work with the Corporation on 

Monday.  She will be doing projects and investigation for Mr. 

Quennell . . . 

 

Madam Minister, who is this Martin and exactly what project is 

she doing and what special advisor is she working for and what 

is she investigating? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I'd just like to draw the attention of the 

members that you cannot in a particular question ask a number 

of detailed questions of which the minister more than likely 

will not have the answers.  Question period is meant for policy, 

and I ask the member to redirect his question without the 

details. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, if the minister can't answer 

these questions, will then she take notice and give me the 

answers please.  And I'll go on with another new question, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I can't help it that the new ministers 

can't answer these questions.  We know we've had three or four 

questions asked before at the same time. 

 

I have another quote, Mr. Speaker.  I have another quote: 

 

 . . . Tony Darnell and Pat Brown, former employees, are 

conducting a number of reviews as well as examining some 

files." 

 

And then the memo tells staff to co-operate with these two 

people.  Madam Minister, who is Tony Darnell, if you want a 

straight question.  Who is he?  I'm asking you a straight 

question.  Who is Tony Darnell?  Who is Pat Brown?  What are 

they reviewing for your special advisor and what files are they 

investigating?  Now that's about as straight a question as you 

can get. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, it's not that the minister 

doesn't know the answers to the questions.  I think it's just the 

member doesn't know what the questions are himself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Darnell had worked formerly with 

the Department of Supply and Services.  He was very 

knowledgeable about how that department worked before.  We 

brought in some people who had experience because we feel 

that department is a . . . that corporation is a corporation out of 

control.  It had very little accountability.  It's very inefficient.  

There's a great deal of concerns expressed about that 

department, and we're trying to bring in people who can look at 

it, reorganize it, and tell us in effect what the government 

should be doing with it.  These people are short-term contracts 

and they will, as soon as the job is finished, be released. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  



218 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the same minister.  I didn't 

ask about all her kind of answers about the qualifications and 

what he's doing.  I asked what he's being paid and exactly what 

he's doing for the advisor.  You didn't answer the question. 

 

Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I have another quote from this memo.  

They don't want to hear about these quotes from their own 

memos, from their own department. 

 

 I would also advise that Mr. Francis Schmeichel has been 

engaged as an Administrative Assistant to myself and is 

located in the President's Office. 

 

Madam Minister -- and this is another straightforward question 

-- please, will you answer my question.  Why does your special 

advisor need an advisor to advise the advisor and what is the 

role of the new . . . (inaudible) . . . Now those are 

straightforward questions.  Please answer them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, this was a corporation that 

in the last three years went from 7 managers to 26 managers.  

There was a 300 per cent increase in the cost of the managerial 

level.  I don't think the former government is in any position 

where they can criticize this government for taking on the issue 

of trying to make sure that the corporation in the future will be 

managed much more efficiently and much more effectively 

than it was in the past. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My final question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Would the minister not agree, would she 

agree that these 4 or 500 firings that you did a blood test on to 

see if they were blue or red or what; that anybody that had a 

tinge of blue were fired and hired by your blood test.  Is that 

what you've done, Madam Minister?  That's exactly what 

you've done. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- No, Mr. Speaker, that is not our intention.  

We intend to hire competent, qualified people unlike the last 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Foreclosure Moratorium 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the Minister of Agriculture.  Mr. Minister, your party leader 

and your rural candidates promised immediate action to impose 

a moratorium on farm foreclosures in the recent election.  

Given that farm families in Saskatchewan are losing their farms 

every day and your government's failure to act on this promise 

is continuing to cause serious and irreversible damage to many, 

many farm families, when, Mr. Minister, will you see and 

when will we see your Bill to impose a moratorium on farm 

foreclosures? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The commitments that were given in the 

election campaign were to immediately begin discussion with 

the financial institutions.  And those discussions are ongoing, 

and we're very pleased with the discussions.  And when the 

announcements can be made, we will make them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the same 

minister.  I truly am pleased to hear that meetings will be 

taking place, and I'd like to ask the minister of this new, open, 

and honest government to tell me and the thousands of 

Saskatchewan farmers who are wondering the same thing: what 

will you be asking of these lending institutions, and what 

proposal will you be making to the banks when you meet with 

them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We have already met with the financial 

institutions, including the publicly managed ones, and the 

discussions on the matters of concern to farmers are being 

raised with them.  We're looking for both short-term solutions 

and long-term solutions and have committed ourselves to an 

ongoing discussion with them to get agreement on both. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Policy on Gambling 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 

Minister of Finance . . . pardon me, Minister of Justice.  You 

made comments recently concerning computerized slot 

machines being allowed in Saskatchewan.  The whole gaming 

industry in our province from bingos to casinos and horse 

racing and lotteries should be re-evaluated.  And there's 

tremendous potential within these industries.  And at the same 

time, due largely to the lack of planning and control by the 

previous government, there are problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Particularly, sir, in the bingo industry.  

Will you please tell us, Mr. Minister, what the overall plan is 

concerning gaming in Saskatchewan before any changes are 

made or any new concepts are going to be introduced. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

that question, and I agree very strongly with certain parts of her 

preamble, particularly the fact that this policy or the policy in 

this area seems to have drifted along without any firm direction 

and without any overall concept of where we want to go with 

this kind of gambling activity. 

 

I have undertaken a review in connection with the matters that 

she mentioned in her question, and this review is ongoing.  

We're trying to discuss the problems with all of the people who 

seem to have an interest in it.  And the member will know that 

there are many such people who have an interest in these 

questions. 

 

I have not arrived at the point where I make any 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

recommendation to my cabinet or caucus colleagues yet, but I 

hope to be able to do that early in the new year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- This is a supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  As 

I suggested in my opening question, Mr. Speaker, we do have 

legalized gambling in Saskatchewan under our present laws.  

But although governments have allowed gambling, they have 

never dealt with it from the standpoint of economic potential.  

And there is tremendous potential for an overall plan which 

would connect tourism and non-profit agencies and I believe 

would generate employment as well. 

 

There are problems as you have pointed out, and the bingo 

industry is the subject of much controversy.  Will this 

government take another look at the recommendations of the 

bingo inquiry which were completely ignored by the previous 

government which actually commissioned the inquiry at great 

expense to the taxpayers of this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes.  We'll be 

revisiting that report as well as taking a careful look at 

experience in other jurisdictions.  For example, many 

jurisdictions have already gone to the so-called video games or 

the video gambling, electronic gambling, whatever term you 

want to use.  These are complex questions and we hope in time 

to be able to produce a coherent policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- A final but new question, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Minister of Agriculture.  This question pursues the same 

line of questioning that I was trying to have answered by the 

Minister of Justice. 

 

The situation in the Saskatchewan horse racing industry is 

continually deteriorating, sir.  And the past government was 

presented with a plan to assist the industry in its revitalization, 

but the two-year funding package was cancelled after the first 

year just as the program was beginning to generate some 

results. 

 

I would like to ask that . . . Recently I know that the 

government has granted permission for Teletheatre betting to 

be conducted in selective hotels in Saskatchewan to increase 

the betting revenue for horse racing.  In recognition of the 

value of the Saskatchewan horse racing industry to our 

economy and the difficulties that it's faced, will you be 

consulting with the horse racing industry about the areas 

selected for placement of slot machines with respect to the 

effect that it's going to have on Teletheatre betting? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I appreciate you didn't ask a more specific 

question because I might have had to decline to answer.  But I 

do have a meeting set up with the industry and I will raise those 

questions with them.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for the Families.  And in 

light of a resolution or a motion that is sitting on the books in 

this Assembly regarding the United Nations convention of the 

rights of the child.  And the motion was asking the government 

to allow for public discussion and debate regarding this 

question. 

 

I realize we've had notice from the Minister of Justice that there 

will be a statement given, but I would like to ask the minister if 

the minister would at least have allowed a public debate on this 

question before endorsing the convention or the charter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I'll attempt to answer that question, Mr. 

Speaker, although I'm not the minister responsible for that 

particular foundation.  But I'll answer it because later on the 

agenda of the House there will be a ministerial statement in 

connection with the ratification by Canada of the UN (United 

Nations) Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

 

It may be, as the member says, that it would have been to 

advantage to have debated the resolution prior to the 

announcement of Canada's ratification, but the ratification has 

taken place and is being announced in parliament today and is 

being announced in other legislatures, those that are sitting 

today. 

 

So we thought it appropriate to bring on the ministerial 

statement today.  And the member will of course have an 

opportunity to express his views, at least in a preliminary way, 

in response to the statement that I plan to make. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today, 

Wednesday, December 11, 1991, the Government of Canada is 

formally ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights 

of the Child.  The convention is a legal document setting out 

international standards and obligations that guarantee rights 

and freedoms to children, defined as persons under 18 years of 

age. 

 

Canada's ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the 

Child follows two years of federal-provincial consultation.  

Because much of the subject matter of the convention falls 

within the legislative jurisdiction of the provinces, the federal 

government requested the approval of the provinces before it 

ratified the convention. 

 

In Saskatchewan, the Department of Justice co-ordinated an 

interdepartmental review of programs, policies, and legislation 

to ensure our province could offer our approval of Canada's 

ratification.  The review determined that, by and large, 

Saskatchewan currently complies with both the letter and the 

spirit of the convention. 

 

The convention on the rights of the child sets out special 

protections for children.  Many of these protections or 

guarantees are the same as those contained in the  



220 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  In Saskatchewan, 

basically all of the protections stated in the convention are 

provided through our network of social policies and programs. 

 

The convention affirms that actions taken on behalf of a child 

must be taken in the best interests of the child.  It affirms that 

children's rights must be respected without discrimination of 

any kind.  It recognizes a child's inherent right to life and the 

responsibility of ratifying nations to ensure the survival and 

development of the child. 

 

It ensures a child's right to a name and to a nationality.  It 

affirms the right of children to the highest attainable standard 

of health, including the right to access facilities for treatment 

and rehabilitation and the responsibility of ratifying nations to 

strive to ensure no child is deprived of access to such health 

care services.  It recognizes the right of every child to a 

standard adequate for the child's physical, mental, spiritual, 

moral, and social development. 

 

The convention also affirms the importance of parents in the 

upbringing of children.  In this country the importance of the 

parental role is already well recognized, but the convention 

provides another safeguard.  Provisions of the convention, 

relating to parenting, stress that the ratifying nation must 

respect the responsibilities, rights, and duties of parents in 

providing proper direction and guidance to a child in the child's 

exercise of the rights stated in the convention. 

 

It emphasizes the right of the child, as far as possible, to know 

and be cared for by his or her parents.  It states that a child 

shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will.  

Exceptions to this provision are allowed, subject to careful 

review in cases such as abuse or neglect. 

 

It acknowledges that the best interests of the child will be the 

parents' basic concern and therefore states that parents have the 

primary responsibility for the upbringing and development of 

the child.  It provides that a child's education be directed to the 

development of respect for the child's parents, as well as for his 

or her own cultural identity, language, and values. 

 

Canada's ratification of the convention is subject to two 

reservations exempting our country from compliance with two 

provisions of the convention.  Canada is reserving the right not 

to apply the provisions of the convention dealing with formal 

legal requirements for adoption to the extent that these 

requirements may be incompatible with customary forms of 

care among aboriginal peoples in Canada. 

 

Canada is also reserving the right not to detain child offenders 

separately from adult offenders where separate detention is not 

appropriate or feasible.  This exemption takes into account 

Canada's current Young Offenders Act which allows detention 

of young offenders in the same facility as adult offenders in 

limited circumstances. 

 

Canada's support of international standards for the protection 

and care of children is vital.  Saskatchewan is a 

leader in the development of social programs that strive to 

ensure a basic standard of living is provided for all members of 

our society.  Yet we continue to hear almost daily of instances 

where children in our community suffer as a result of not 

having the proper care, attention, and support. 

 

The fact that every child does not grow up with the protections 

and basic rights, in spite of the programs and services and 

legislation that we already have in place, is a clear indication 

that much, much more can and must be done.  Each of us 

shares the responsibility to ensure that every child in this 

province has shelter and food, has a safe, supportive, and 

loving environment; and has the developmental opportunities 

to achieve their fullest potential. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand in this Assembly today and 

confirm Saskatchewan's support for the United Nations 

Convention on the Rights of the Child and to state our ongoing 

commitment to ensure that every child has the protections and 

guarantees stated in the convention. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

pleased to stand here today and commend the minister for his 

support of the children and the convention, albeit, Mr. Speaker, 

that I just want to bring to the Assembly's attention and as I 

indicated in a question just a bit earlier, that there are a number 

of people and organizations not only across the province but 

across this great nation of ours and certainly in other countries 

that do have a few questions regarding the charter. 

 

No one, Mr. Speaker, is saying that children shouldn't be 

protected or that we shouldn't identify ways of protecting our 

children.  But we also realize that parents have a responsibility 

in bringing their children up in the protection of the child and 

in giving their child a high standard of living. 

 

And we also realize that around the world, many countries of 

the world, and even in our own province, there are children that 

unfortunately do not have the parental guidance and direction 

that is needed. 

 

And so this convention has laid out some guide-lines and rules 

by which we can accept and reach out and certainly offer 

children the rights they deserve -- a right to a healthy life-style, 

a right to education, a right to a healthy and fitting life-style, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also want to bring to the Assembly's attention that not only do 

children have rights but I believe parents have responsibilities.  

As parents, it is our responsibility to not only raise our 

children, give them a good home, give them a loving home, 

and give them good, high living, moral . . . a moral standard to 

live by and standards to grow up on and to look to, but also we 

have a responsibility to give guidance to our children.  And 

many parents . . .  In this room there are many parents, and 

we've all realized the difficulties we have in raising our 

children. 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

But I think, Mr. Speaker, we want to recognize that our 

children have some rights.  But I also want to bring in one fact 

that I have a strong feeling on, and I believe many of the 

groups that have contacted our caucus and possibly even 

contacted members on the government side of the House, the 

fact that this charter maybe doesn't go as far . . . or far enough, 

the fact that we don't give recognition to the unborn. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the recent plebiscite, 

the recent election, the plebiscite indicated that people across 

this province really believe in strengthening the rights of the 

child but also going a little further and recognizing the unborn 

in our society. 

 

And I want to bring that to the attention of the minister of this 

House and indicate yes, we in this Assembly and we on this 

side of the House certainly recognize the rights and the needs 

of giving our children a healthy life-style, a healthy home, and 

a healthy environment to grow up in. 

 

And we want to commend the government for the ratification.  

But we would like to have had . . . or given the people of this 

province and this Assembly an opportunity to debate it.  And I 

thank the minister and I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2). 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Assessment Management Agency Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 

Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill respecting Certain Payments to the Meewasin Valley 

Authority, the Wakamow Valley Authority and the Wascana 

Centre Authority. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

TABLING OF DOCUMENT 

 

The Speaker: -- Before orders of the day, pursuant to 

section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive 

Council Act, I hereby table a letter from Her Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor, establishing the membership of the 

Board of Internal Economy. 
 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I 

would seek leave of the House that item 21 under motions be 

moved to item 1, which if passed will allow me to participate 

more fully in the proceedings of this Assembly.  The place 

where this item currently stands on the order paper prevents its 

consideration for many, many months, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 

question put by members, no. 16 I believe, be converted to 

motion for return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would ask that this question too 

put by members, no. 18, be converted to motion for return, 

debatable. 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that this 

question put by members, no. 19, be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 
 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask that the 

question put by members, no. 20, be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 

question put by members, no. 21, be converted to motion for 

return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would ask that the question put by 

members, no. 22, be converted to motion for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return (debatable). 

 

Before the minister makes a statement on 23, I have a 

statement to make.  Question 23 requests information for more 

than one department and therefore is not in order in the form of 

a written question.  The question is ruled out of order but it 

may be resubmitted in the form of a notice for motion for 

return. 

 

(1445) 

SPECIAL ORDER 

  



222 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  At the 

outset I want to join, I'm sure, with every other member who 

has spoken in the throne speech debate thus far in extending 

my own congratulations to you, sir, for your election to the 

high office of Speaker in our House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, your experience in this parliamentary process and 

your commitment to this parliamentary process and your 

dedication to know that the parliamentary process will work in 

this House, will serve you very well, Mr. Speaker, in the days 

ahead.  Although, Mr. Speaker, as I watched the question 

period today and observing some members of the caucus 

opposite, it struck me that your experience in the class-room 

over the years may also serve you well in this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to extend my own personal 

congratulations to every other member of this House who has 

been elected or re-elected in October.  We are, each of us, in 

line for four of the most interesting, rewarding, demanding, 

perhaps frustrating years of our lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I would want to say, in my view, Mr. Speaker, that no 

matter where we sit in this House, whether it be in the 

opposition caucus or whether we sit as an independent member 

or whether we sit on the back bench or the front bench or 

somewhere in between, Mr. Speaker, in my view there is not a 

bad seat in this House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- And any of us, any of we who are privileged to 

sit in this House should count it as a rare and important 

privilege to serve the people of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to occupy this particular seat 

in the legislature, I want to extend my deepest thanks to the 

people of Moose Jaw Wakamow for all those who laboured so 

hard to elect this candidate in the recent election.  It is my 

commitment to them that my first responsibility in this 

legislature and in all aspects of government will be to represent 

those people of Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And while congratulating, let me also extend my personal 

congratulations to those members of our House who have been 

appointed to the Executive Council, to the cabinet of our 

government.  Mr. Speaker, we have a small transition cabinet, 

and yet within the confines of that small transition cabinet, Mr. 

Speaker, we have more women represented in the Executive 

Council of cabinet today than we have ever had in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Calvert: -- And my congratulations to the Premier and to 

those four women who are providing leadership for our 

province.  Mr. Speaker, it is a small cabinet.  In fact I note, Mr. 

Speaker, not many months ago it would have taken two cabinet 

ministers, two associate ministers, and a whole back bench full 

of legislative secretaries to do the work that any one of these 

cabinet ministers is doing today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, these individuals have 

undertaken a tremendous, tremendous work-load on behalf of 

the province and the people of Saskatchewan in this transition 

time, and we owe our gratitude to them. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, one passing note about our new 

cabinet.  For the first time, Mr. Speaker, you will recognize in 

many years, for the first time in many years, we have in 

Saskatchewan again a Minister of Agriculture who is at work 

full time and a full time Premier. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, the times of transition are never 

easy, but this cabinet and this government have begun the task.  

Mr. Speaker, in my remarks in the throne speech debate today I 

wish to reflect a little on the challenges, as I see them, that face 

our new government and our province, and to reflect equally on 

the opportunities that are before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I consider the situation that we find 

ourselves in, both in terms of the province and as a new 

government, I'm given cause to remember that famous 

paragraph written by Charles Dickens many years ago with 

which he opened his novel, The Tale of Two Cities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to reflect upon these 

words and see if they do reflect the times in which we find 

ourselves as a province and as a government.  Charles Dickens 

wrote: 

 

 It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the 

age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch 

of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of 

Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of 

hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before 

us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to 

Heaven, we were all going direct the other way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those words to me capture the mood which we, 

the government, meet here and in our province generally.  

Although I reflect further that Charles Dickens may have in 

fact been writing about our nation in 1991 because I ask 

members to note that he began the second paragraph of his 

book with these words:  There were a king with a large jaw . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker, these are in many ways the best of times and the 

worst of times.  We would seem to have everything before us 

as a government with a brand-new mandate, and we would 

seem to have nothing before us as a legacy of the former 

administration. 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

On one hand we seem to have one foot on the way to heaven, 

and with the other foot on the way to . . . well directly the other 

way, Mr. Speaker.  These are the best of times and the worst of 

times.  Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to consider the situation 

that we as a new government inherit, the challenge which is 

before this new government.  From the former administration 

we inherit lawsuits against the Government of Saskatchewan, 

lawsuits brought by Saskatchewan people who have been 

unfairly treated by the administration -- lawsuits making us 

liable for millions and millions of dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in our first few weeks of government we have 

encountered and uncovered a whole raft of what are called 

personal service contracts, Mr. Speaker.  Such things never 

existed before the previous Tory administration -- personal 

service contracts guaranteeing people like Mr. George Hill 

$435,000 a year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view there isn't a person in Saskatchewan 

or a position in Saskatchewan that's worth $435,000 a year.  

Never mind paying that kind of money to a man, and what did 

he give us?  What did Mr. Hill give us for $435,000 a year?  

Well he gave us our power bill in one envelope and our gas bill 

in another envelope.  And then we find, Mr. Speaker, upon 

entering government, $1.35 million tucked away in a trust 

account, Mr. Speaker.  I wish members opposite would explain 

to this House and explain to the people how they view that as a 

proud record. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we find contracts like this one 

employing an individual with a contract for $30,000, and what 

has he left to do?  Play golf.  Play golf, Mr. Speaker -- $30,000 

to play golf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we inherit as a new government this kind of 

personal service contract.  We inherit a situation where many 

of the assets of our province have been sold off or given away.  

We inherit a situation, Mr. Speaker, of massive public debt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will remember and all members will recall, in 

1982 in the operations of government there was a surplus that 

was indicated in Bob Andrew's initial financial statement of 

$139 million in the bank, cash money, available for that 

government to use.  Today, Mr. Speaker, in that same account, 

we have an operational deficit of somewhere in the 

neighbourhood of $6 billion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the situation that we inherit as a new 

government.  And it may be no wonder that it may seem to us 

as the worst of times.  Mr. Speaker, not only have these people 

emptied and laid bare the cupboard, Mr. Speaker, these people 

have put a mortgage on the cupboard.  Mr. Speaker, not only 

are there no more golden eggs, these people have cooked our 

goose, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It wasn't so many months ago that some of us were in this room 

when the former member from Melfort, at that time 

government House leader, third in command of his 

government, not many months ago that some of us were in this 

House and saw him stand in this place and reject 

his government, tell the truth.  He told the truth about Fair 

Share.  He rejected his government, he quit his government. 

 

And he said, Mr. Speaker, that day he said to this House and to 

the people of Saskatchewan, he said this province is on the 

verge of bankruptcy.  On the verge of bankruptcy -- from the 

third in command of the former administration. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as rare as it was, that particular Tory minister was 

telling the truth.  Mr. Speaker, this province is on the verge of 

bankruptcy.  So the challenge, the challenge, Mr. Speaker, is 

that on the one hand we have a bankrupt province; and yet on 

the other hand, we have unaddressed needs crying out from 

every corner of our province and every sector of our 

community. 

 

The needs of the farm families of Saskatchewan, the needs of 

rural Saskatchewan are well-known in this House.  We have a 

rural Saskatchewan on the brink of economic collapse.  We 

have quotas on our universities, young people being denied 

access to education.  We have long outstanding matters of 

injustice involving our native and Metis people.  We have 

increasing demands upon our health care system.  We have 

roads that have gone to pot, Mr. Speaker.  We have small 

businesses that are simply trying to survive month to month.  

We have municipal governments struggling to keep afloat, 

unaddressed needs from every corner of our province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have spoken at length in this House 

about the crisis in the family farm and the crisis in rural 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, it's not only in rural 

Saskatchewan, and it's not only on the family farm where there 

is pain and crisis these days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I went door-knocking in the month of October, 

among all of the homes in the constituency of Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, Mr. Speaker, not a day would pass but that I 

wouldn't meet another family with boxes packed preparing to 

leave our province . . . (inaudible) . . . another family struggling 

to make ends meet month to month or another household where 

they're burning the candle at both ends to maintain part-time 

jobs or a single parent trying to exist on minimum wage.  Mr. 

Speaker, the pain is not simply in rural Saskatchewan; the pain 

is general.  We are all afloat in this province on a very stormy 

sea. 

 

And how can we forget for even a moment in this House, Mr. 

Speaker, particularly on a day when we have recognized the 

UN declaration for the child, how for a moment in this House 

can we forget that in northern Saskatchewan we have children 

living in conditions that are not unlike third world conditions?  

How can we for a moment forget that just blocks from this 

legislature, blocks from these marble steps, there are children 

who go to school hungry on a daily basis? 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are the challenges we face.  These are the 

unaddressed needs of our province on the one hand, and on the 

other hand we've got a bankrupt treasury.  Mr. Speaker, these 

are difficult times to be in government -- that may seem to all 

of us to be the worst of times.  And the worst of times, Mr. 

Speaker, made all the more difficult by 

  



224 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

the financial mess that has been left behind by the member 

from Estevan, the member from Thunder Creek, the member 

for Rosthern, member from Morse, and the others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just let me, if I may for a moment, with an aside 

-- I have listened with interest as the members of the 

Conservative caucus have entered debate in this House, 

particularly the member from Estevan.  And you know it just 

seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Estevan and 

others over there have not quite grasped the reality of what 

happened on October 21, Mr. Speaker.  They have not quite 

grasped the enormity of their rejection by the people of 

Saskatchewan, the enormity of their defeat. 

 

One would expect, Mr. Minister, a government that has been 

turfed out in that manner would express at least a modicum of 

humility, at least a modicum of embarrassment for having their 

record and their philosophy so rejected by the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I have observed day after day the same 

arrogance that I say put them in the condition they're in today.  

Mr. Speaker, I don't know if they recognize yet the enormity of 

their defeat. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is clear is that our province and this new 

government has been left with a massive challenge: a bankrupt 

province and needs crying out from every corner.  And it may 

seem to us that these indeed are the worst of times.  And you 

know, Mr. Speaker, I guess that's where the story ended.  If that 

were the end of the story, I don't know why anyone of us would 

want to be in this legislature.  I don't know why anyone of us 

would want to be a part of government. 

 

But these are not just, Mr. Speaker, the worst of times.  They 

are, as Charles Dickens put it equally, "the best of times."  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I am of the view that in every crisis there is an 

opportunity.  And it is, Mr. Speaker, crisis. 

 

It is challenge that history shows has brought out the very best 

in Saskatchewan people.  We in Saskatchewan are not a people 

who wring our hands in despair and give up, Mr. Speaker.  And 

I can tell you, we are not a government that is willing to wring 

its hand in despair and give up either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- It is just the contrary, Mr. Speaker.  This 

throne speech which we debate indicates that we are a 

government ready to undertake, as the throne speech quotes, "a 

new beginning," Mr. Speaker.  We are not a government that 

will be prepared to wring our hands in defeat.  We are a 

government prepared to make a new beginning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are a new government given a strong mandate 

by the people of Saskatchewan.  We have members elected 

from every walk of life and from every corner of our province.  

We come here with experience in government and with 

members who are brand-new to the 

political process. 

 

But what unites us, Mr. Speaker, what unites us first of all is 

that we come to this House with a commitment to the 

principles of social democracy, Mr. Speaker.  That's what 

unites us, and we each in our own and our common way come 

with dreams for our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with Robert Kennedy, we are and will be a 

government that does not simply see things as they are and say 

why; we are a government who will dream of how things might 

be and say why not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we dream.  We in this government dream of a 

province where at the turn of the 21st century, like the soup 

kitchens of the 1930s, the food banks of the 1980s and '90s will 

be a thing of the past.  Mr. Speaker, we dream of an end to 

poverty in this province, and we say why not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as a government dream of a Saskatchewan 

where the democratic institutions in our province are as open 

and as honest and as appropriate to our times as they are 

anywhere in the free world, Mr. Speaker.  We dream of a new 

democracy in Saskatchewan, and we say why not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are a government that dreams of a province 

where women and children and men can live and walk in their 

communities and walk on the campuses of our province 

without fear, without fear of violence, Mr. Speaker.  We dream 

of a new society without the fear of violence, and we say why 

not? 

 

We dream, Mr. Speaker, of a province where dignity is restored 

to the farming enterprise and where the rich land of our 

province may continue to feed the hungry of our world.  We 

dream of feeding the hungry, and we say why not? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we dream of a province where working men and 

women can enjoy the best of labour standards and the best of 

occupational health and safety, and we say why not?  Why not 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my view it is intolerable, it is intolerable that 

workers are injured, killed on the job, and those responsible 

seem to go off scot-free.  Mr. Speaker, we dream of a province 

where the working men and women enjoy the protection of 

their society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we dream  -- this dream was identified by my 

friend and colleague the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden in 

her moving of this throne speech -- we dream of a province 

where environmental protection and enhancement and 

conservation can be a model for all the nation and all the 

continent, and indeed for all the world.  We say why not here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, our province longs for new vision and new 

direction and new confidence.  And, Mr. Speaker, this 

government and this throne speech is that new beginning, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

How do we take our dreams and make them reality?  How do 

we translate the dreams that we bring to this House as  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

individual members and as a new government?  How do we 

translate them into reality?  How do we strive toward the goals 

we have set? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we do that on the principles of social 

democracy.  That's how we do it.  We do it on the principles of 

social democracy which as broadly and as simply stated are 

these:  We can accomplish by working together that which we 

cannot accomplish by working alone. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, in this province when we join 

together, when we unite in common cause, when we work 

together in Saskatchewan, there is very little that we cannot do.  

When we are divided, there is very little we can do.  When we 

work together there is very little we cannot do, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, my whip, when asking me if I could 

be prepared to enter the throne speech debate today, he called 

and he said, do you have a song in your heart?  Well how little 

did he know.  In fact I do have a song in my heart, Mr. 

Speaker.  It was a song that my parents enjoyed singing, and 

their generation, in difficult times and challenging times.  It 

seems to me it's a song that's not inappropriate as the theme 

song to the times which we are now in.  And it's a song, Mr. 

Speaker, about social democracy and it goes like this:  Well we 

ain't got a barrel of money, and maybe we're ragged and funny; 

but we'll travel the road, sharing the load, side by side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, that's how we're going to do it.  

That's how we're going to do it -- side by side -- workers and 

farmers, rural and urban, native and non-native, young and old.  

From the oldest grandparent in our province to the newest 

immigrant arriving today on the aircraft, we're going to do it, 

Mr. Speaker, travelling the road, sharing the load, side by side.  

Mr. Speaker, that, in my view, is social democracy, and that is 

how this government intends to proceed. 

 

Let me conclude, Mr. Speaker, by saying we will not reach all 

of our goals.  We will not in our time achieve all of our dreams, 

succeed in all that we undertake.  But this government will not 

forsake the journey. 

 

I listened with interest in this throne speech debate as the 

member from Estevan delivered a little Christmas homily here 

in the House.  I think therefore I can be excused if I bring to 

my remarks, not a quotation but an illustration from scripture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you and members will remember that scene when 

the slaves of Israel escaped the oppression in Egypt and found 

themselves there on the shores of the Red Sea.  To their front, 

the waters of the Red Sea; on each side, the imposing 

mountains; and behind them, the Pharaoh's chariots.  Mr. 

Speaker, some of them wanted to give up; some of them 

wanted to return to the bondage of Egypt.  And it was in that 

crucial moment, Mr. Speaker, that the divine command came to 

Moses, saying, go forward, go forward.  And they did, Mr. 

Speaker.  They entered the 

stormy sea.  They went forward.  They did not hesitate.  In 

faith and confidence, they went forward -- just as this 

government, Mr. Speaker, intends -- in spite of the challenges, 

in spite of the odds against to go forward. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I find of particular note in the account 

of the exodus in the Old Testament is that most never saw the 

promised land.  They never made it.  Moses died before they 

got to the promised land. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, many of us will not see the full realization 

of our dreams, either in this session or in this lifetime.  But I 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, we in this government will not forsake 

the journey. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- So I'll end, Mr. Speaker, with the place where I 

began.  Again from A Tale of Two Cities, another quote, and 

this quote is from a conversation between Defarge and 

Madame Defarge.  He says: 

 

 It is possible -- that it may not come, during our lives . . .  We 

may not see the triumph. 

 

 (But, returned madame,) We shall have helped it. 

 

Friends, members of the legislature, we will be judged in this 

House and our government will be judged.  The test that I shall 

apply to our government, and indeed to this legislature, is the 

test that Franklin Delano Roosevelt identified in his second 

inaugural address in, I believe, 1937 when he said: 

 

  I see a nation one-third of whom are hungry and homeless, 

and the test of our progress will not be in how much we add 

to the abundance of those who have much, but how we meet 

the needs of those who have little. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we in this government shall have helped 

meet the needs of those who have little, I for one will leave this 

House satisfied with our work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, because I believe this throne 

speech is but the beginning of the first few steps on the road to 

a better province, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand in this 

government and support this throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I first of all want to say and publicly congratulate the 

member for Moose Jaw Wakamow for his speech, a very 

moving and very powerful address indeed.  And I know we 

have all been heartened by those remarks. 
 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you for your 

election as Speaker.  And I want to say that it's not one of those 

pro forma congratulations, Mr. Speaker.  It's a heartfelt 

congratulations because all of us in the Assembly know that 

your election as Speaker is a result of  



226 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

the respect shown to you by members of all sides of the House 

and not as a result of some back room deal or some other type 

of thing which would cast a stain on your election. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that you will have the 

co-operation and the support of myself during your tenure here 

as Speaker of the House, to spite the fact that now and again 

we may agree to disagree on certain interpretations of the rules, 

as has been known to have happened in the past. 

 

Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, I stand here today and I want to thank the 

members of the constituency of Regina Rosemont.  And by the 

members of the constituency I don't just mean members of the 

New Democratic Party, but all those people who lived in the 

constituency who gave me their confidence and support in a 

manner which can only be described as overwhelming.  

Despite some controversies that were engaged in prior to the 

election and that I happened to be involved in, the people of 

Regina Rosemont granted me the opportunity to speak on their 

behalf in this legislature.  And for that I feel very, very humble, 

and I must say, very privileged to do so.  And I make a 

commitment to those people now that no matter what the issue 

or no matter what the times, that their voice will be heard in 

this Legislative Assembly, and their voice will be heard within 

the government caucus and on their behalf. 

 

Mr. Speaker, having said that, and within the context of the 

previous speaker's remarks, I'd like to talk a little bit about 

what the events of October 21 meant, to the way I see what 

happened on October 21 and what it represented. 

 

And I can only, Mr. Speaker, define the overwhelming victory 

for our party on October 21 as a mandate for change.  That 

October 21 represented a verdict by the people of this province 

and rejection by the people of this province of the right-wing 

agenda which had been followed by Conservative parties.  

Whether they were in Saskatchewan, whether they were in 

British Columbia, whether they were in Ottawa, whether they 

were in Britain, whether they were all around the world, people 

have said no to that right-wing agenda.  On October 21 here in 

Saskatchewan they said it in no uncertain terms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the reason they said it, the reason they said no to the 

right-wing agenda is the people of this province, I believe, are 

aware of the crisis which confronts us -- not only here in 

Saskatchewan, but the crisis which confronts us on a global 

scale. 

 

If we look around the world we will see the kind of things 

which have been replicated here in this province manifesting 

themselves, some in greater terms, some in greater scope, some 

in greater interpretation, if you like, within the global context. 

 

If you look at the question of hunger, we have hungry children 

here in Saskatchewan.  And that hunger represents 40,000 

children here in the city of Regina alone.  And that hunger of 

the children is part of the global hunger which is felt by 

children all over the world, 

whether it's in North America, whether it's in Europe, whether 

it's in Asia, whether it's in Latin America, or whether it's in 

Africa.  There was something that is happening on a global 

scale which is causing children to be hungry.  There is 

something that is happening on a global scale that is putting the 

needs of those children not foremost but is burying those needs 

beneath a mountain of hunger, malnutrition, and deprivation.  

The statistics speak for themselves; 100,000 children a day die 

from hunger on a global scale -- 100,000 kids die because they 

can't get enough to eat.  That's like every three days or every 

four days the city of Regina and the city of Saskatoon 

combined are getting wiped out. 

 

Imagine if you will, Mr. Speaker, those two cities filled with 

children; they are decimated every three or four days.  They're 

gone.  They are dying from . . . because we have not been able 

to provide them with the food they need to live.  And I guess 

child hunger represents the worst manifestation of the global 

crisis.  But there are many others. 

 

There's a global crisis in health care.  People are dying each 

and every day because there's an inadequacy of health care.  

People are dying and are forced to live in circumstances which 

cause them to die because they don't have access to education 

on a global scale.  People are denied the basic right, the right to 

live, because somehow the system on a global scale is not 

meeting their needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problems that we face here, as the 

environmentalists say, cannot be dealt with solely by looking at 

the problems that we face here.  They have to be looked at at 

least at that level of the global crises. 

 

We have a national crisis.  That global crisis is reflected on a 

national level here in Canada itself, Mr. Speaker.  We have a 

constitutional crisis; we have an economic crisis; we have a 

crisis of confidence in terms of political leadership.  We have a 

country like Canada which is blessed with the riches that have 

been given us, blessed with a population, a small population, 

which should be able to utilize those riches. 

 

We find ourselves in the kind of crisis which we see happening 

when we look to eastern Europe and Yugoslavia for example, 

where in fact the very fabric and unity of this country is 

threatened because there are things, there are forces at work, 

which are causing solutions to those problems not to be 

implemented. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have a provincial crisis.  The provincial 

crises were ably pointed out by other members in the 

Assembly.  Of course the most obvious crisis is the one of 

feeding the hungry kids in our province.  And for nine and a 

half years the Conservatives failed to meet the basic needs of 

children. 

 

We don't have to go to the Third World to see the crisis in 

health care and education and in housing. All we have to do is 

look to the North to see the kind of circumstances that people 

in towns and villages like La Loche or in Stony Rapids or in 

Black Lake or Fond-du-lac are forced to live in because the 

system has failed them, Mr. Speaker.  Because the system has 

failed to provide even basic and 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 227 

adequate needs for them. 

 

We come across situations in this province, Mr. Speaker, which 

are totally contradictory to any rational notion of humanity.  

We see for example, liquor subsidized in northern 

Saskatchewan while the former Conservative government put 

an end to food subsidies.  It says something about the priorities 

of that government, the former government, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of trying to deal with the crisis that we face here at a 

provincial level. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I began the speech, I said there is a rejection of 

the right-wing agenda.  And that agenda has become to be 

known in terms of political economy as the neo-Liberal agenda 

-- neo-Liberalism.  The concept of free-market forces working 

out there, unfettered, unbridled, the market weaving its magic, 

things happening -- the idea and notion that somehow if the 

market and if big business and the corporations are left to do 

their own thing, then somehow we'll all become more 

prosperous for it. 

 

Well if we start here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we had 

nine and a half years of unbridled capitalism in this province -- 

nine and a half years in which the proponents of that 

neo-Liberal agenda worked their magic in the market-place.  

And what did we end up with, Mr. Speaker?  We ended up with 

a fiscal crisis of the state; that is, the provincial government not 

having enough money in the coffers to provide even basic, 

adequate services for the citizens of this province. 

 

We've seen that neo-Liberal agenda at work in this province for 

nine and a half years; seen the degradation of the educational 

system.  We've seen the degradation of the health-care system.  

Need I remind members of what happened to the school-based 

dental plan for children? 

 

We've seen that neo-Liberal agenda at work in all sectors of 

this economy in which certain people did get rich.  Certain 

people enriched themselves at the expense of everybody else, 

Mr. Speaker, at the expense of the great majority of the citizens 

of this province.  Because the ideas of neo-Liberalism are the 

ideas, the same old story of the old capitalism from the '30s or 

the capitalism from the 1800s; that is, the ideas of Adam Smith 

and the ideas of all those ideologues who say, if we allow some 

to enrich ourselves, then the others will be able to get trickled 

down upon. 

 

Well what's happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the greed, the 

outright greed of those who enrich themselves haven't even left 

crumbs on the table for the other citizens of this province to try 

to fight over.  What's happened, Mr. Speaker, is that for the last 

nine and a half years their political agenda, driven by their 

economic dogma, has left this province in a state of financial 

and fiscal ruin; has resulted in the lowering of living standards 

for the great majority of citizens of this province; has resulted 

in a province which used to be the beacon of progress in North 

America left floundering, left floundering like a flattened dog 

on the roadside, Mr. Speaker, because that's what happened.  

That's what happened as a result of their neo-Liberal agenda 

here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Lyons: -- Well some members say it's more like a dead 

skunk in the middle of the road, Mr. Speaker.  I can appreciate 

that symbolism particularly when it comes to the smell that's 

left over as a residue and that kind of odour . . . odoriferous 

emanation if you like, that comes from the kind of patronage 

that we have seen regarding the things like George Hill's 

contract calling for $1.3 million of severance pay.  Some 

people got rich, Mr. Speaker.  The rest of us got it in the neck. 

 

That neo-Liberal agenda, Mr. Speaker, as I said is something 

that is not peculiar here to Saskatchewan.  We see it in Canada 

and we've seen the results of that neo-Liberal agenda when it 

comes to items like free trade. 

 

What's happened, if you noticed in the news yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, that 300 to 400,000 permanent jobs, good paying jobs, 

which have been lost in this country as a result of that 

free-trade agreement signed by the Mulroney government in 

Ottawa and supported by the former government here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that neo-Liberal agenda has lost us long-term, 

permanent, structural jobs that Canadian people need to keep 

their body and soul together, to feed their families, to be able to 

provide themselves with opportunities -- educationally, and 

what have you, culturally, recreationally.  Those jobs have 

been gone so we've seen an increase in the unemployment rate.  

And it's a structural increase, Mr. Speaker, because the 

neo-Liberal agenda isn't working.  We've had it since '84 

federally; we've had it since '82 provincially, and what have 

been the results? 

 

The proof is in the pudding, Mr. Speaker.  The proof of that 

agenda is in the pudding and that pudding has gone rotten, 

tastes sour, and has been thrown out on October 21 by the 

people of Saskatchewan.  And when Brian Mulroney gets the 

courage to call the federal election, will be rejected en masse 

by the people of this country because they've said: enough is 

enough. 

 

We're not going down that path any more and we were not 

going to be trod upon and exploited as a result of the 

ideologues of the Conservative Party, whether provincially or 

federally. 

 

And that neo-Liberal agenda, Mr. Speaker, consists of a 

number of notions and actions.  The first notion is the freedom 

of the market-place.  Let the market-place rule because the 

market will decide all.  And we've seen what's happened in 

Canada when that notion has been put into effect. 

 

Airlines, for example, and the deregulation of the airline 

industry -- has that improved airline service to the people of 

Saskatchewan or not?  When you talk to people who travel, 

who wish to take vacations, who want to go visit friends and 

relatives in other parts of the country, what they're saying is 

that they're finding it harder and harder to do and more and 

more expensive to go, to utilize a service which because the 

Tories have done away with the railway system in this country 

-- an affordable service, a service which used to be affordable 

-- that they're not even able to utilize the existing transportation 

  



228 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

infrastructure. 

 

That notion of the liberalization of the market-place, that 

notion that the market must rule, was rejected by the people of 

this province on the 21st.  And they're saying, we do not want 

you as a government -- that is those on this side of the House -- 

to follow that agenda.  The agenda we want you to follow is the 

agenda of us, we, the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to talk a little bit about that, but first 

perhaps I should just mention that some of the notions that 

have come up or some of the slogans that have arisen as a 

result of the neo-Liberal agenda, I think should be examined 

rather closely by all members of this Legislative Assembly as 

well as all legislators throughout Canada. 

 

The first concept that's arisen is that of globalization.  Now 

what does globalization mean?  Well behind the notion of 

globalization as presented by the neo-Liberals is a thought that 

the spreading of the productive apparatus on a global basis will 

enhance the life of people all over the globe; that their living 

standards will be raised, that the magic of the market-place. . .  

because of the global domination of the multinationals, that 

somehow those people around the world will benefit. 

 

We here in Canada, we hear the members from the 

Conservative caucus talk about globalization in glowing terms.  

They talk about it as if it's some kind of magic formula which 

is somehow going to solve the problems that we all face on a 

global scale. 

 

What has been, Mr. Speaker, I would ask, what has been the 

result of this notion of globalization?  Has it been a 

globalization of prosperity?  Well, Mr. Speaker, statistics and 

the facts say otherwise.  The notion of globalization, the 

actuality of globalization has not led to prosperity for people in 

this province; it has not led to prosperity for people in this 

country; and has not led to prosperity for the peoples of the 

world. 

 

There is a very interesting report, Mr. Speaker, that you may at 

some point of time want to avail yourself of.  It was a study 

done by the University of Ottawa.  Michael Cassutovsky is the 

name of the person that led this study.  It was a study of the 

effects of globalization and what it meant for the people of the 

world. 

 

Well first of all it said that the reason for globalization has 

become clear.  The reason for globalization is one and one 

only.  The moving of plants and productive apparatus out of 

countries like Canada, out of provinces like Saskatchewan is 

for one reason only, and that is to find cheap labour. 

 

And it's not just in Canada but it's also in the United States; it's 

also in Japan; it's also in the European Economic Community 

where industries which were indigenous to those areas have 

been taken, lifted up, and put into the low wage countries. 

 

And Mr. Cassutovsky finds, and the study by the University of 

Ottawa finds, that the average rate of pay for 

workers in industries which have been moved from the 

so-called first world to the low wage countries, the average 

daily rate of pay is 3 to $4 a day.  In countries like Malaysia, in 

Singapore, in low wage colonies like Hong Kong -- all those 

areas of the Third World which have been industrialized as a 

result of globalization have meant not an increase in the living 

standards of the people there, but in fact have meant a decrease 

in the living standards; that it's resulted in an increase in 

poverty, an increase in violent crime, has resulted in a forced 

march from the countryside to the cities in which people are 

forced to live in the kind of dire poverty that we know well 

when we visit northern Saskatchewan; that the ability of the 

globalization, instead of meaning the globalization of 

prosperity, has meant a globalization of poverty. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is the underlying, fundamental 

economic challenge that we here in Saskatchewan will face in 

the coming years, because we are not divorced from the global 

economy.  We cannot be an autarchic economic entity, an 

entity which operates by itself alone.  As John Donne said:  "no 

man is an island" and no woman is an island unto itself.  

Neither is Saskatchewan a political entity unto itself. 

 

But the question that we have to face, Mr. Speaker, is this.  At 

the base economic fundamentally we have to . . . have to face is 

this question.  Do we accept the dictates of the global capitalist 

economy?  Do we become, in other words, the handmaids of 

the multinationals who now make the major economic 

decisions in this province, in this country, and on this globe?  

Do we become their handmaids or do we strike out down a 

path which is different from that dictated by the multinationals? 

 

That's the fundamental and the overriding political and 

economic question that we, Mr. Speaker, I believe have to face.  

And fundamentally our record as a government will be judged 

on that basis -- our ability to operate in what is essentially a 

hostile economic environment.  The ability to create jobs, the 

ability to provide social services and educational services and 

health services, our ability to clean up the mess, as we say, left 

by the Tories will be fundamentally structured by our response 

to that hostile economic environment. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when I speak of a hostile economic 

environment, let me give you a few statistics done by the 

World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on what's 

happening as a result of the increase in globalization.  By the 

end of the century, the International Monetary Fund and the 

World Bank -- institutions, by the way, dominated by the large 

multinational-driven state entities, the United States, the EC 

(European Community) -- by the end of this century, 6 billion 

people will be on this planet, 5 billion of which will live in the 

poor countries of this globe. 

 

So five out of every six people on this planet will be living in a 

country which has suffered under the effects of globalization; 

15 per cent of the population of the globe, Mr. Speaker, will 

live in the rich countries.  And those rich countries control 80 

per cent of the world's wealth. 

 

Now when I say that 15 per cent of the population that 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 229 

live in the rich countries will control 80 per cent of the wealth, 

I'm not talking, Mr. Speaker, obviously, about all the people 

who live in those rich countries, because if we look around in 

Canada, we will see that in Canada 75 per cent of the wealth in 

Canada is controlled by 10 per cent of the population and the 

bottom 40 per cent of the population in this country controls 

.54 per cent of the wealth.  So obviously that 15 per cent is 

misleading in the sense that it's not all those people.  It will be a 

very small group of those people. 

 

Three billion people, Mr. Speaker, by the end of the century 

will share in only 5.4 per cent of the total wealth of this globe.  

Three billion people will have to share a pie which is only 5 per 

cent of the whole pie. 

 

The World Bank, not necessarily known to be a friend of the 

socialist movement around the world, also has this to say: that 

in the two years since the neo-Liberal agenda was implemented 

in Poland and Hungary -- in only two years -- the same level of 

economic disparity which presently exists throughout Latin 

America has been introduced in Poland and in Hungary, Mr. 

Speaker.  The same kind of division as between classes and as 

between income distribution and as between levels has now 

been introduced as a result of that introduction of that 

neo-Liberal agenda.  Imagine that -- just in two years we see 

that kind of disparity. 

 

What the other side of the coin and which is relevant to this 

province . . . has been in the three years between 1988 and 

1981.  According to the University of Warsaw's sociology 

department, in 1988 73 per cent of Polish workers supported 

privatization.  By March 1991, that support had dropped to 27 

per cent. 

 

Now when you take the kind of conflict that we've had in this 

province over privatization and put it in that context, you will 

see why people throughout the globe, whether it's here in 

Saskatchewan or whether it's in newly privatized Poland, say 

this is not the way and this is not the system which is meeting 

our basic economic needs, and we're rejecting that system. 

 

And before the members opposite get up on their feet to take 

exception to that, I'm not here talking about the liberalization of 

freedom.  There's not one member of this Assembly who 

doesn't support the right to free speech, the right to assembly, 

the right to be able to determine democratically their own 

future.  And all of us here rejoice in things like the fall of the 

Berlin wall and the death of Stalinism in eastern Europe. 

 

But along with that glasnost, if you like to use the Russian 

term, comes the perestroika.  And what's happening throughout 

eastern Europe, and in fact in the Soviet Union itself, is a 

rejection of that model because that model in eastern Europe is 

the one that the people of Saskatchewan and the people of this 

country have been hit with.  And the people throughout this 

province and this country rejected that and are rejecting -- did 

on October 21; will do it in the next federal election. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- The president of the World Bank, Michael 

Candessus I think summed it up best when he was talking 

about the neo-Liberal agenda and its effects in Poland over the 

last two years.  What he said is there has been a lowering in the 

real production and a notorious increase in unemployment. 

 

And doesn't that describe what happened to us here in 

Saskatchewan over the last nine years -- that neo-Liberal 

agenda which the people of Saskatchewan were faced with. 

 

Some members may take exception, Mr. Speaker, to using the 

term neo-Liberal.  As I said, it's a term from political economy, 

but I do believe it's very apt.  It's a very apt term when we 

come to talk about the politics here in Saskatchewan on that 

level because in my mind, Mr. Speaker, and in my experience, 

having grown up in another part of the country along the east 

coast where we were plagued by a series of Conservative and 

Liberal governments, that fundamentally there is no difference 

in the economic policies pursued by the Conservatives and 

those pursued by the Liberals. 

 

For example, all we have to do is reflect back to the last 

provincial election prior to October 21 and what do we hear the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, the Leader of the Liberal 

Party, say about the fiscal crisis that Saskatchewan faces?  We 

all know, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly, that the tax system in 

this province and in this country is unfair, is inequitable, that 

the rich pay little and the rest of us pay a lot. 

 

And what was the position of the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone?  Here we are in a province, here we are in a 

province with food banks.  Here we are in a province that has a 

crisis in the education system and the health care system, and 

what does the member from Saskatoon Greystone say during 

the last election?  Those traditional mechanisms which have 

provided funds for us here, the resource sector, what did she 

do?  She stood up and she said, my gosh, golly gee, I demand 

that the NDP guarantee us that they will not increase taxes to 

the wealthy.  I demand, I demand that they guarantee that the 

NDP will cut oil royalties, will cut oil royalties to a level below 

that of Alberta. 

 

In other words, what she's saying, Mr. Speaker, and what she 

said is the same thing that the Tories have done in the past nine 

and a half years.  She has no plans to reform the economic 

system of this country or of this province.  It's the same old 

neo-Liberal agenda that we've heard time and time again and 

that's got us into this mess. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine going to the 

defence of the oil companies against that of homeless kids and 

kids that don't have enough to eat?  I would ask the member 

where does she think the money is going to come from, if not 

from a fair share of resource revenues to the people of this 

province.  But no, she doesn't want that to happen. 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday on my desk arrived the third-quarter 

report from North Canadian Oils Limited, an oil company 

headquartered here in Saskatchewan.  I 

  



230 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

open it up to page 6, the condensed consolidated balance sheet, 

and under an area entitled, liabilities, I see a number that says 

$83 million and across from that number, deferred income 

taxes -- deferred income taxes. 

 

So here we have the nine and a half years of the Tories plus the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone rushing to the defence of 

oil companies that have the ability to defer $83 million in 

income tax and the whole year hasn't been done yet.  How 

much more income tax are they going to defer by the end of 

their fiscal year, Mr. Speaker?  Right? 

 

No, no.  No, no.  For the member from Saskatoon Greystone, 

it's okay that the neo-Liberal agenda be followed, that there's 

more wealth transferred from the backs of working people, 

from the backs of farmers, from the backs of small business 

into the hands of oil companies, into the hands of banks, into 

the hands of her corporate friends who she's hoping is going to 

bankroll her rise to political prominence in this country, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And there, Mr. Speaker, is the fundamental difference between 

the two old-line parties and we on this side of the House.  Mr. 

Speaker, we say that the people of the province will not be the 

hewers of wood and drawers of water for the rich corporations 

and for the wealthy; that the wealthy are going to pay their fair 

share and that the people of this province are going to get the 

break, not the corporations getting the tax breaks in the system 

which is unfair to all of us here in Saskatchewan and all of us 

here in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, on October 21 the people of this 

province rejected that neo-Liberal corporate agenda for 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, we will as a government march 

down a different path.  We will be getting our fare of resource 

revenues so that there won't be hungry kids here in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to be getting our fare 

of taxation revenue from the wealthy so that we can put our 

kids in a decent school, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to ensure, 

Mr. Speaker, that seniors have the right to good quality, the 

best quality health care that we can afford, and those that can 

afford to pay, will, Mr. Speaker, despite what the 

Conservatives say, despite what the Liberals say, because we 

are not beholden to the large corporate multinationals who 

bankroll. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, when I stand here it's funny seeing 

them trying to fight over who's going to write the cheque.  The 

Liberals and the Tories, they're saying . . . standing up for the 

corporation, hoping that these corporations will write the 

cheques to pay their path, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatoon Greystone can talk 

all she wants about the new politics.  The fact is her version of 

the new politics is a new cheque in the Liberal Party's bankroll 

as opposed to an old cheque in the Tory Party's bankroll.  

They're singing from the same song sheet when it comes to 

economic development.  They're singing from the same song 

sheet when it comes to taxation, Mr. Speaker, and it's a song 

that the people of Saskatchewan have refused to sing and will 

not sing, Mr. 

Government, and will . . . Mr. Speaker.  And it is a song, it is a 

melody which will not be played by members of this side, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I began, there is a crisis on a global scale.  It's a 

crisis in the environment.  There's a crisis in hunger.  There's a 

crisis that each of us have the ability here as members of this 

legislature to affect in our own corner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will think globally but we will act locally.  

And in acting locally, we will develop the kind of democratic, 

community-based economy which doesn't rely on the 

investment decisions made by large, out-of-province 

multinationals, but will rely on the strength and the ingenuity 

and the will of the people here in Saskatchewan to put into 

place; and which will rely, Mr. Speaker, on the kind of public 

enterprise which built this province in the first place. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, when you take away one of the 

cylinders from that engine, that engine doesn't run very well.  

The Tories took it away; Ross Thatcher did it in the past; the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone hopes she'll have the 

opportunity to do it in the future.  But the people of this 

province, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province will say, we 

want all those cylinders to function. We are going to use the 

tools that we have, and we will build the province by any 

means necessary, Mr. Speaker -- we will build the province by 

any means necessary. 

 

The neo-Liberal agenda is the old agenda from the past.  We're 

going to go forward with a brand-new agenda to build a 

brand-new Saskatchewan over the objections of the Liberals, 

over the objections of the Tories, but with the support of the 

people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I thank you very 

much for the opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure today to enter into this debate on the throne 

speech and congratulate once more Mr. Speaker for assuming 

his position in the chair.  I can assure Mr. Speaker that I will 

try to get to my feet quicker in other circumstances and save 

the House some of the . . . what just took place here. 

 

I would like to take this opportunity also to congratulate Her 

Honour on the job that she did in presenting the throne speech.  

As always, Her Honour adds a great deal of dignity to this 

House and to our province.  I must say also, Mr. Speaker, that I 

would like to extend to the constituents of Thunder Creek my 

appreciation for returning me to this Assembly for the third 

time. 

 

As you know, Mr. Speaker, Thunder Creek doesn't have a long 

history in this legislature, at least not in recent times, but it is 

known as one that takes its politics very seriously in our 

province.  A number of prominent politicians have come from 

that part of the world.  As a matter of fact, I've had the distinct 

responsibility and pleasure of representing the farms of two 

former premiers in this province. 

 

I think it goes without saying that people in that constituency 

take their jobs, their farms, their families,  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 231 

very seriously.  They take their politics very seriously.  And 

over the time that Thunder Creek has been in existence, it has 

always returned politicians who have been from the centre to 

the right, shall we say, as their representatives in this 

legislature. 

 

People there I think, when one goes out campaigning, don't 

ever mince words with their representative; they always pretty 

well lay things on the line.  And I think to be an MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) in that particular 

constituency you have to stay on your toes or you won't get 

returned.  So the confidence that they've shown in me in this 

recent election when the New Democratic Party swept this 

province basically, I really appreciate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I do say to the government of 

the day that they did win a very large majority, that they have 

the confidence of the people.  They attained 50 per cent of the 

vote in this province.  And obviously the people in this 

province were looking for changes in direction, that there were 

some areas that the former government took part in that 

perhaps didn't fit with the agendas of people.  And I respect 

that, Mr. Speaker, as one must always respect the ultimate will 

of the voter. 

 

And I say my congratulations to many of the new members of 

this House who were elected in a particular NDP government.  

Many of these members represent rural ridings -- ridings that in 

the past in this province have for the most part sent either 

Liberal or Conservative members to this legislature. 

 

And I say to these new members, you have a tremendous 

responsibility to bring to this House because you represent 

people that have traditionally had very, shall we say, small "c" 

conservative values, and they expect that their representatives 

will also reflect those values. 

 

One thing I think, Mr. Speaker, that is obviously clear to me in 

this throne speech debate . . . And I must say that Her Honour 

didn't particularly have a lot to work with when she presented 

on Monday December 2 to this Chamber, the Speech from the 

Throne.  This is my seventh Speech from the Throne, Mr. 

Speaker, and I must say that it certainly is the thinnest. 

 

One thing that has become very evident to me as I've listened 

to the debate over the last six days is that some members of this 

legislature, and particularly the NDP, the new NDP 

government, have not changed their ways from the days in 

opposition.  They certainly are not short on sanctimonious 

rhetoric, and we just had a good case example of this -- the 

member from Rosemont who gave similar speeches while in 

opposition. 

 

And although those speeches, Mr. Speaker, are always 

delivered with a lot of fervour, and obviously that member has 

a well-read library at home when he talks about world affairs, 

they clearly point to one thing that I haven't heard either in the 

throne speech or any of the speeches from members in this 

Assembly.  And that is, where is this government going to take 

us?  Where is the plan that people in this province are 

expecting from a 

new government? 

 

I sat in this legislature now, as I've said, for six and a half 

years, Mr. Speaker. And I have listened to the NDP opposition 

over five years prior to now -- before that when there was a few 

of them over here -- and I've always heard a great deal of 

criticism.  But I've never really heard a plan that would fit the 

province of Saskatchewan into the 1990s. 

 

They talked a lot about the salad days in the '70s when 

Saskatchewan was booming and there was lots of money to 

spend. And we know that that alternative, which at that time 

consisted of big government, big unions, nationalization, things 

like land bank, aren't applicable today in Saskatchewan or in 

Canada. 

 

So we know their past well, and we are expecting something 

different in the future.  And I found it kind of interesting, Mr. 

Speaker, during the last campaign, the campaign manager for 

the NDP Party, a well respected former member of this 

legislature and certainly a man that knows politics, would make 

some statements in the Prince Albert Daily Herald that I'd 

like to read into the Assembly because I think they corroborate 

what I've been saying in my opening remarks. 

 

And this is to quote Mr. Messer: Jack Messer told the 

Saskatchewan New Democratic Party's annual convention 

Friday what Conservative leader Grant Devine has been saying 

throughout the campaign. Messer said the party had a good 

campaign organization and an election planning committee that 

worked long and hard. 

 

And after all this work we came out with no platform.  A lot of 

people were saying it's not like the NDP.  We have to have a 

New Deal number three.  Party supporters expected a complete 

platform, but they began to realize that there was no overall 

policy plan midway through the campaign," Messer said. 

 

I know a lot of you were showing a little bit of concern, but the 

discipline and the strategy and the logic of that contributed 

largely to us winning this election. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I find that a little bit irresponsible from a 

former cabinet minister in this legislature, a man who sat both 

in opposition and government, that the NDP Party would be so 

crass as to tell the public in this province that they didn't have a 

plan, did not intend to have a plan, and that they simply were 

going to cash in on mistakes that were made by the former 

government. 

 

And certainly they did cash in, Mr. Speaker, on those mistakes.  

But I think the people of this province deserve better from a 

political party. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that when you first ran for this 

legislature back in the early '70s, that the Hon. Allan Blakeney, 

a former premier of this province did put forward a plan.  It 

was a plan that was controversial in some areas but it was a 

plan.  And that the former Thatcher government of the day did 

not particularly have one at the end of its mandate. 

  



232 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

And Mr. Blakeney took that plan.  He put it forward to the 

people, and he won many constituencies in this province 

because of that plan.  He simply did not campaign on the 

mistakes of the Thatcher administration.  And I think a lot of 

people in this province, particularly CCF/NDP people could 

take a lot of pride in the fact that that plan was laid out and that 

people had a clear choice of what to vote for. 

 

(1600) 

 

People in this province deserve better than to simply have 

blatant manipulation of the electoral process simply to gain 

power, simply to gain the reins of power.  Power for power's 

sake alone, Mr. Speaker, is not enough to run a government 

upon. 

 

I listened a little earlier in the day, Mr. Speaker, to one of the 

member's opposite, a member who I know quite well, a 

member who I have a great deal of respect for, a man of the 

cloth.  I must say that he did some of the finest marryings and 

buryings in Moose Jaw that I've ever heard.  But the member 

talked about dreams, and dreams for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  My father always had a saying on our farm that 

you've got to get up in the morning and dream a little because 

that's how you'll create something. 

 

And I'm proud to say that I'm the fifth generation of farmer in 

Saskatchewan on my particular farm and we have created a lot 

of things over the years.  My grandfather dreamed, after the 

'30s blew most of our land away, that he would plant tree rows 

and bring the land back into production.  My father dreamed in 

the early 1970s that we would irrigate our land with the 

effluent water from the Moose Jaw sewage system, and today 

we're doing that. 

 

You've got to have those kind of dreams in this province in 

order to create a home for your family and create wealth and 

create the things that our society has come to expect.  But along 

with those dreams, Mr. Speaker, one must get down to work, 

because when you dream all day nothing gets accomplished.  

And without a lot of hard work and individual initiative, you 

won't get to that dream. 

 

And so far, from what I've seen of this particular session of the 

legislature, there's a lot of dreaming going on by the 

government and no hard work.  We haven't seen, Mr. Speaker, 

a budget document presented in this legislature.  And I thought 

surely after five years in opposition with so many criticisms, 

that this new administration would have sort of had a plan -- a 

fiscal plan where they wanted to go. 

 

Instead we have seen a government that seems intent on only 

one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that one thing seems to be 

fulfilling some of the political wishes of their friends.  And that 

political wish of people like Barb Byers and George Rosenau is 

to punish the Conservative Party and the Conservative 

opposition, instead of getting on with the real agenda. 
 

And I think for that reason, Mr. Speaker, they haven't done 

things like bringing in the freedom of information Bill that was 

passed in the last House by all members who sat in this House.  

It was a unanimous vote.  All this government had to do, Mr. 

Speaker, was come in and proclaim that particular piece of 

legislation, and I'm sure 

that all members would have supported it.  But instead they 

don't want to do that.  They have excuses of why freedom of 

information shouldn't be available. 

 

But this new open NDP administration is now embarked upon 

a very partisan course.  We have seen the appointment, Mr. 

Speaker, of a committee behind closed doors.  And I remind 

this legislature that not even Joseph McCarthy had his tribunals 

behind closed doors.  We have a committee that supposedly is 

going to set a new financial direction for this province.  It is 

going to examine, as the current Premier said, how we've done 

things in the past and how we will learn from those experiences 

and we will do things better in the future. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not too far in the past -- '83. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- As my colleague from Rosthern says, we 

don't want to go too far back though.  We don't want to talk 

about nationalization.  We don't want to talk about some of the 

things that were done in previous governments.  We only want 

to define very narrowly some things that have happened since 

1983.  And primarily they have keyed in in the area of 

privatization. 

 

Now this committee, Mr. Speaker, not only meets behind 

closed doors, Mr. Speaker, but it has three admitted NDP 

partisans upon it who will then vote in secret as to what 

particular transactions will be talked about and will not be 

talked about. 

 

And when you tack that on, Mr. Speaker, with things like Mr. 

Messer becoming an interim, and I'm sure soon to be 

permanent president of SaskPower, and the denial in this 

House of members opposite to tell us what his salary and 

remuneration and fringe benefits will be. 

 

When we have the members opposite embarked upon a process 

of firing all of the boards and commissions in the province and 

replacing them with cabinet ministers -- boards and 

commissions that, I might add, Mr. Speaker, now seem to have 

been solely staffed up with members of the now infamous law 

firm from Saskatoon.  And I will only repeat the one name, Mr. 

Ching, because the other two are now members of this 

legislature and I wouldn't want to cast aspersions upon them.  

But this particular law firm has even had to change its name 

because now the members are all employed, along with their 

cabinet minister friends, in running the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So this, Mr. Speaker, is this new open government that has all 

these dreams.  And so far the dreams are strictly limited to 

doing political hatchet work. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it really makes me wonder when we think that we 

have to empower the Gass Commission with quasi-judicial 

powers -- a very first in this province that I'm told, Mr. 

Speaker, as far as doing financial review -- quasi-judicial 

powers, behind closed doors, out of sight of the media, out of 

sight of the public, if we aren't simply on a political agenda.  

The auditor of this province, Mr. Speaker, has those abilities, to 

staff and call before the Public Accounts Committee . . . call 

before the Public Accounts Committee under oath, I'm told, 

anyone that they wish to talk to.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, in 

your  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 233 

time in this legislature there was even the circumstances of a 

person being called before the bar of the legislature, and I 

believe it had to do with the hospital situation in this province. 

 

So there were forms available to the government, forms that 

were available to all members of this legislature to examine in 

detail any particular fiscal transaction that may have occurred 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Instead we have a Finance minister who comes out in front of 

the commission's announcement with an inflated budget deficit, 

a deficit that is so wild, Mr. Speaker, that it doesn't even really 

deserve comment. 

 

And I won't read into the record the entire transcript from the 

Leader-Post on November 23 in Bruce Johnstone's article, Mr. 

Speaker, because the member from Wilkie did it the other day.  

But I will read one excerpt out of that particular document, Mr. 

Speaker, because I think it reinforces what I've had to say here 

today. 

 

 These few examples (Mr. Johnstone says) show the NDP was 

(far) more interested in tarnishing the Tories' 

already-tarnished reputation for fiscal management than 

providing an accurate picture of the deficit. 

 

 Of course, people outside the province -- who don't 

understand the subtle nuances of political debate in these 

parts -- might mistake Mr. Tchorzewski's bogus budget 

deficit for the real McCoy. 

 

Well I guess the highlighted word in there would be "bogus", 

Mr. Speaker, because one can't say anything more for that 

particular document that was released. 

 

And it comes down, Mr. Speaker, in the face of concerns by 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan taxpayers, for a long time.  

And as I said before in my opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, the 

former government did not do everything perfectly.  The 

former government, Mr. Speaker, the former government made 

mistakes. 

 

I was the newly-minted minister responsible for SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), Mr. 

Speaker, who shut down GigaText.  GigaText, in everyone's 

mind I think, Mr. Speaker, was a mistake -- I think one that 

started out being a opportunity but then turned into a mistake. 

 

And I say to these new back-benchers here today that this is 

probably the highlight of your election, because as you come 

forward with a plan and as you start to make decisions in this 

legislature, you will make mistakes, believe me.  Probably the 

safest members in this legislature today, as far as their seats are 

concerned, are the 10 members sitting here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Because these 10 members have been elected 

in the face of a sweep.  And as your government, as your front 

bench, as your treasury benches start to make decisions, they 

will make mistakes.  And it will be 

up to you to make sure that you hold them accountable. 

 

There was three very pertinent questions put to the public of 

Saskatchewan in the recent election campaign.  Those 

questions deal with how people in this province expect to be 

governed and how some of the moral questions that we have in 

our society should be handled.  And I think it's incumbent upon 

all members of this legislature to think about those questions as 

we go through our processes in this Chamber. 

 

People like the Association of Saskatchewan Taxpayers, Mr. 

Speaker, have clearly said that there must be changes in the 

way that governments handle the public's money.  Other 

organizations around the province have said that very clearly. 

 

And I accept, Mr. Speaker, as a member of a former 

government, that criticism.  I respect that as a former cabinet 

minister who was forced with making decisions on a daily 

basis in this province. 

 

But clearly on the question of balanced budget legislation in 

this province, the people spoke overwhelmingly that they want 

balanced budget legislation in this province and they want 

government to listen and they want all levels of government, 

Mr. Speaker, to listen.  They want their federal government, 

they want their provincial government, they want their 

municipal government, to listen to that word. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, they spoke very clearly, I think, on the issue 

of abortion.  People in this province for a long time have been 

torn on this particular question, but one thing became very 

evident, Mr. Speaker.  The people do not feel that they have a 

responsibility to fund publicly people who would wish to use 

abortion as a means of birth control in this province.  And I 

think that as we as a legislature deliberate questions in the 

health care field, as we deliberate questions that have pertained 

to the family, that we think very clearly about how the people 

spoke on that particular question. 

 

And thirdly, Mr. Speaker, they said very clearly that they want 

a say in the constitutional process of our country.  They will 

not accept constitutional deals being done behind closed doors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I clearly remember that all members of this 

particular legislature, except three, voted in favour of the 

Meech Lake accord.  The now Premier of this province voted 

for it.  But clearly, Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan did 

not like the process that went along with the Meech Lake 

accord.  This Premier, who prides himself on being somewhat 

of a constitutional expert, has a long history of doing 

constitutional deals behind closed doors. 

 

(1615) 

 

One only has to remember those events which occurred in 

1981-82 in a kitchen in Ottawa, when the current Constitution 

of Canada was repatriated to this country without one of the 

major provinces being a part of it.  That deal was done in that 

kitchen basically with three individuals.  And I would hope, 

Mr. Speaker, that the 

  



234 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

current Premier's long-suit constitution does not get a 

similar-type deal; that he and his colleagues do not trade off the 

wishes of the people of Saskatchewan which they enunciated 

very clearly in that plebiscite, and that was that they have the 

right to vote as individuals on how any constitutional change 

will take place in our country. 

 

So I'm saying to the member from Riversdale, early on in your 

mandate, be honest and open with the people of this province 

when you think about changing their destiny as we did with the 

constitution when it was brought home from England. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP government truly wanted to 

have an open government, as I said earlier, I think they really 

could have set the stage by proclaiming the freedom of 

information legislation.  Because I think I clearly heard people 

around this province say that they want more access to 

government, they want more access to their members, and that 

they want more access to the levers that are available to 

influence government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I now want to go to another area, an area that 

certainly is very dear to me and certainly to most of my 

constituency, and that's the area of agriculture. 

 

Thunder Creek basically has no choice but to live and die with 

the agricultural economy.  It is made up of grain farms, of 

mixed farms, of irrigation along Lake Diefenbaker.  It by and 

large is totally dependent on the small towns that lie therein, on 

how agriculture survives in the 1990s. 

 

And I really wonder at what I've seen in this legislature so far 

from this new NDP government as far as agriculture goes.  

When the members of the opposition tried to have an 

emergency debate on that particular topic, members of the 

government already upon their election felt that it wasn't 

worthy of an emergency debate.  They said no, we are going to 

bundle a bunch of people together and we're going to go off to 

Ottawa and that we'll lay it squarely where it belongs, and that 

is upon the federal government. 

 

Well I agree in part, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government 

has a tremendous responsibility to agriculture in this country.  

In these times when one down on the farm has to fight the 

international grain wars out of your back pocket, it makes it 

darn tough.  And I fully expect that our federal government 

should do its duty and help us fight those wars; that it should 

go to GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and 

represent us properly; that it needs to be part of a safety net 

process that allows all farmers to plan for their future; that the 

federal government has to be there with third lines of defence 

in order to get us through those ups and downs in the 

commodity prices. 

 

But provinces also have responsibility, Mr. Speaker.  Members 

opposite talk about the things that they're going to do in many 

other areas to solve the problems of Saskatchewan.  I've heard 

members opposite talk about Indian land claims.  I've heard 

them talk about the area of social services.  I've heard them talk 

about the areas of education and health.  Clearly they believe 

that as a provincial government they have the ability to 

intervene 

in those areas and make significant contributions, even though 

those areas, Mr. Speaker, also have significant federal 

responsibility. 

 

Just recently we have seen the provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba further come in to backstop their agricultural 

situation.  They have come through with money in very 

difficult fiscal times to help their agricultural economies out 

because they full know that this winter will be one of the most 

difficult on record for farm families. 

 

I heard the other day, Mr. Speaker, that net farm income in 

1991-92 will be probably on the same level as 1971.  And this 

is even with billions and billions of dollars by both federal and 

provincial governments being pumped into those farm 

economies over the last decade.  But all I have seen, Mr. 

Speaker, from this government is the excuse over and over 

again that they leave it with the federal government, that they 

ride on the coat-tails of the former premier who did go to 

Ottawa and who did get a very significant sum of money for 

agriculture in Canada and certainly agriculture in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And when this government has the opportunity, with very little 

money, to make sure that farm families in this province, farm 

families all across the constituency of Thunder Creek, have the 

opportunity to access cash near-term, rather than waiting till 

spring, they have not done it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have listened very carefully to some of the 

things that members opposite have talked about in this 

legislature as far as money goes.  And I hear about a $300,000 

plane trip to Ottawa that the Minister of Agriculture and the 

Premier embarked upon to take their friends and other people 

to Ottawa. 

 

I hear about $300,000 being spent on this Gass tribunal which 

is being held in secret.  I hear about $300,000 being stripped 

from the Sask Works program.  I hear about $300,000 probably 

going into the pocket of the new president of SaskPower. 

 

And I say to members of the government in this legislature, 

you add those up and you're half-way there, boys.  Another 

million and a half bucks and you could have got 200 million 

for farm families before Christmas.  Have you done it?  No, 

they haven't done it.  Have you talked about it?  No, they 

haven't talked about it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But you know, the funny thing is about all these $300,000 that 

I've identified being spoken about in this legislature, those are 

all political things, Mr. Speaker.  They fit the political agenda 

of the government, therefore they're all right.  They fit the 

political agenda of this new, open government, therefore those 

$300,000 expenditures are all right. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, two and a half million to three million 

dollars would have got all of that money into our economy for 

Christmas time in this province, but they have chosen their 

political agenda over the agenda of agriculture.  And I'm sure 

that as many of these new rural members go home over the 

Christmas break, people are going to ask them why that was 

the agenda they chose 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 235 

instead of the one that would have brought money into the 

pockets of families all across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quickly want to go to a couple of other areas 

that I think are important because this government, I think, in 

its early stages has shown us that on the economic development 

side it doesn't have any plan.  The member from Rosthern 

asked some very pertinent questions the other day about how 

the government was proceeding with a certain endeavour.  

They didn't have any answers for it.  We've seen how they 

scrapped Fair Share Saskatchewan even though the current 

Premier is on record in many places in this province as saying 

that he would review each move individually, that in certain 

circumstances it might make sense for the economy of a certain 

area.  But no, he had to satisfy his political agenda; therefore he 

would can it.  But there were jobs going with that particular 

program, Mr. Speaker, and those jobs will have to be replaced. 

 

The community bond program -- probably something that will 

be remembered as a hallmark by people in this province for 

many years to come, introduced by the former government -- 

community bond program alone will not sustain rural 

Saskatchewan.  It's going to take a concerted effort by all of the 

economic areas of government to bring about an economic 

agenda that can rebuild many of our communities who have 

been hit so hard by our agricultural problems. 

 

We see the closing down of trade offices, simply to get rid of 

people instead of simply replacing the people and carrying on 

with trading with our neighbours in other countries around the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a classic example is the potash industry.  The 

Potash and Phosphate Institute has been doing preparatory 

work in China for many years.  When I was there last January 

on a trade mission, with the trade commissioner from Hong 

Kong by the way, we were able to talk to the Chinese about 

some of the advances that PPI (Potash and Phosphate Institute 

of Canada) have been making, demonstration projects.  And 

that particular visit resulted in another 400,000 tonnes of 

Saskatchewan potash being sold. 

 

That sale of potash employed people in this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  It created jobs and it created wealth that this province 

can then redistribute to the people in this province.  Closing 

down those trade offices served no purpose other than to satisfy 

the agenda of the current government which is totally political. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can see that my time is running short, but I want 

to say to this legislature and to the people in my constituency 

who saw confidence to send me back to this legislature for a 

third time, that we will be watching very carefully the plan that 

we hope will evolve from this government.  And so far, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said before, there is no plan. 

 

But when that plan finally surfaces and in whatever form it 

takes, that we will be here to, yes, criticize as an opposition 

should, but also to place alternatives before this legislature -- 

something the previous opposition in this province did not do -- 

to place clear alternatives in 

the area of agriculture, of economic development, of reform of 

this House, of ways that Saskatchewan taxpayers will feel more 

comfortable with how their money is spent.  And we will 

propose those alternatives, Mr. Speaker, because I think that is 

what the people expect of an opposition.  They expect us to 

continue to work hard for the people of this province. 

 

And as that plan unfolds, Mr. Speaker, I hope that these people 

are not so narrow-minded, so ideological that they cannot see 

the promise that can come from things like privatizing Trans 

Gas, for instance, the economic benefits that could accrue to 

this province by allowing shareholders rather than taxpayers to 

pay for the pipe that must be buried in the ground of this 

province to transport natural gas to our homes and our farms 

and our cities. 

 

And the same with the area of atomic energy, Mr. Speaker -- 

that members will not be so illogical and ideological that they 

will not grab hold of some of the opportunities that are 

presented to this province with our vast uranium resources, so 

that we may develop them for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, the plan is a little thin right now.  

And for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I will not be able to support 

the throne speech. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:31 p.m. until 4:38 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

 

Romanow Calvert 

Van Mulligen Murray 

Thompson Hamilton 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Lingenfelter Draper 

Teichrob Serby 

Koskie Whitmore 

Shillington Sonntag 

Anguish Flavel 

Goulet Roy 

Atkinson Cline 

Kowalsky Scott 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Kluz 

Koenker Carlson 

Lorje Renaud 

Lyons Langford 

Pringle Jess 

Lautermilch Haverstock 

-- 50 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 



236 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 10 

MOTIONS 

 

Address be Engrossed and Presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member from Swift Current: 

 

 That the said address being engrossed and presented to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor by such members of the 

Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Ways and Means 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Canora: 

 

 That this Assembly, pursuant to rule 87, hereby appoints the 

Committee of Finance to consider the supply to be granted to 

Her Majesty and to consider ways and means of raising the 

supply. 

 

The Speaker: -- The Government House Leader will need 

another seconder. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- That motion should be seconded by 

the member for River Heights. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

(1645) 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

am pleased to rise today to move second reading of An Act to 

amend The Medical Profession Act.  Mr. Speaker, the 

amendment to The Medical Profession Act deals with the 

regulation of locum tenans physicians, that is physicians who 

provide temporary services in the province.  Typically, these 

physicians have provided services in rural areas by filling in for 

the local physicians who may want to take some time off to 

further their education for example. 

 

Increasingly, locum physicians are relied upon by communities 

to provide services for a longer period of time.  The existing 

provisions in the Act are becoming unworkable as they were 

originally intended to deal only with locums working on a very 

short-term basis. 

 

The existing Act is also not clear in detailing the authority of 

the College of Physicians and Surgeons to issue locum permits 

and specify conditions on those permits as they 

do in the case of other medical licences.  The proposed 

amendment will clarify the college's authority in this area. 

 

The current Act limits locum physicians to a four-month permit 

and is not clear on how many permits can be issued.  The 

College of Physicians and Surgeons has recently adopted a 

policy which allows them to issue several four-month permits 

to the same physician.  However this is administratively 

awkward for the college, and it can of course create 

employment insecurity for the physician.  It also does not 

create a stable practice situation for the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government and the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons of Saskatchewan recognize the difficulty that rural 

communities face in this area as well as the need to effectively 

regulate locum physicians.  This amendment will allow the 

college to specify the qualifications, length of locum permits, 

and conditions of permits in the by-laws pursuant to the Act. 

 

An important feature of the new locum physician by-law will 

be longer terms for the permits, Mr. Speaker, up to two years in 

many cases.  Another important feature will be a requirement 

for the locum physician to practise in a specific community for 

up to five years.  This will also allow locum physicians 

sufficient time to meet the college's requirements for full 

licensure should these physicians want to remain practising in 

Saskatchewan.  It will also assist some rural communities to 

retain their physicians for longer periods of time, resulting in 

the provision of more stable medical services to the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendment is fully supported by the College 

of Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical 

Association, rural communities, rural hospital administrators, 

rural physicians, and locum physicians.  The efforts of the 

College of Physicians and Surgeons of Saskatchewan to ensure 

competent, stable medical services in rural areas are supported. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act respecting an 

amendment to The Medical Profession Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

understanding after having discussed this with the Government 

House Leader, that we will be going through for second 

readings, items 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 10 today.  And in my opinion, 

all of our critics here are keenly interested in the Bills as they 

have been presented, and of course we are very keenly listening 

to the second reading speeches of the ministers that are 

promoting these Bills.  And because we are still doing 

consulting with the various agencies that are affected by this, I 

would now ask that this debate on second reading be 

adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'll be moving second 

reading of the Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 

  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 237 

Liquor Consumption Tax Act. 

 

This Bill is in the same form as the one introduced by the 

previous government last April.  Unfortunately as with other 

pieces of legislation, that Bill was never passed and it died on 

the order paper when the former government prorogued the 

legislature as we'll well remember, back on June 18 of 1991. 

 

Subsequently the former government passed regulations which 

purported to achieve what this Bill would have and should have 

done at that time.  They passed the liquor consumption tax 

reduction regulation to remove the GST (goods and services 

tax) from the liquor consumption tax base effective January 1, 

1991 and to reduce the liquor consumption tax rate from 10 per 

cent to 7 per cent effective April 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, although we agree with these changes, we 

certainly do not agree with the manner in which it was done.  

We do not believe that the permanent adjustment to the tax 

base or to the tax rate should be done or made by order in 

council behind the closed doors of cabinet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, over the past few years established 

democratic institutions and traditions in our province have 

undergone significant stress.  Unilateral changes such as the tax 

change initiated by the former government have radically 

altered and endangered many of these important traditions. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are proceeding with this Bill in the 

Legislative Assembly which is the proper forum for such 

changes to take place.  In this way we enhance the role of the 

Legislative Assembly, opposition members, and the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The 

Liquor Consumption Tax Act be read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on this Bill 

be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of Bill 6, an Act to amend the superannuation Act.  The 

objective of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to provide a restricted 

retirement option to employees who have age and service 

totalling at least 75 years.  This Bill is necessary because of the 

actions taken by the former government.  As a result of 

budgetary decisions made in the 1991-92 process, as well as 

privatization measures, a number of positions were abolished.  

These amendments will allow the eligible individuals to access 

restricted retirement option.  This Bill will provide comparable 

benefits to that of the early retirement program offered to 

individuals in 1987. 

 

The benefits provided to an employee are, first, an unreduced 

pension from the old defined benefit plan or an increase in 

equity for the new money purchase plan; secondly, a one-time 

payment equal to one day's pay for each year of service; and 

third, bridge benefit of 350 per 

month until age 65.  Mr. Speaker, these amendments will 

provide some relief for those government workers affected by 

initiatives undertaken earlier this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to move An Act to amend 

The Superannuation Act, and I move that it now be read a 

second time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on Bill No. 6 

be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Legislative Assembly and 

Executive Council Act, 1991.  The amendment proposed in this 

Bill will require a by-election to be held within six months after 

a vacancy occurs in the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, this amendment is made 

necessary by recent events in the province of Saskatchewan 

and I want briefly to allude to those events. 

 

We had on December 19, 1989 the then member for 

Kindersley, Bob Andrew, resign from the House.  The people 

of Kindersley and the Kindersley constituency remained 

unrepresented in this House from December 19, 1989 until the 

last general election, a period of more than 22 months. 

 

The second case that I want to draw to your attention, Mr. 

Speaker, is the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley where 

the former member, Graham Taylor, resigned from this House 

on January 18, 1990. And the people of Indian Head-Wolseley 

were unrepresented in this House until the last general election, 

a period of more than 21 months. 

 

In the case of the Turtleford constituency the then member, 

Colin Maxwell, resigned from this House on June 30, 1990.  

And again the people of Turtleford were unrepresented in this 

House until the last general election, a period of about 16 

months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And finally in the case of the Souris-Cannington constituency, 

the former member, Eric Berntson, resigned from this House 

on July 19, 1990.  And that constituency remained 

unrepresented in this House for a period of 15 months, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Obviously, Mr. Speaker, this is a situation that cannot be 

tolerated in a democracy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The Bill that we present, Mr. Speaker, is 

a very important democratic reform designed to ensure that no 

constituency will be unrepresented in  



238 Saskatchewan Hansard December 11, 1991 

this House longer than the period provided for in the Bill. 

 

The Bill also provides that if a general election is called after a 

by-election is called but before the by-election is held, the 

by-election will not be held.  That's a provision just in the event 

that those two time periods get in too close . . . just get too 

close together, too close a conjunction. 

 

These amendments, Mr. Speaker, will make the law of 

Saskatchewan consistent with the law in other jurisdictions and 

will, as I said, protect the democratic rights of citizens to 

representation in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move that debate 

on this Bill be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 -- An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 

and Certain Consequential and Other Amendments to 

Other Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today 

and move second reading of Bill No. 8, an Act respecting the 

Tabling of Documents, 1991.  Mr. Speaker, for some time now 

Saskatchewan residents have been demanding information 

from their government that is timely, relevant, and accessible in 

order to ensure accountability to the public.  They're interested 

in having access to better information as to how their tax 

dollars are being spent. 

 

The current government when in opposition emphasized 

financial accountability to the public.  We believe a 

well-informed public is essential in setting spending priorities. 

 

Through this Bill today this government is acting on its 

pre-election commitment to keep the public well informed. 

 

The current Act has been found to be confusing and difficult to 

interpret and apply.  Currently some government organizations 

are not required to provide financial statements to the 

legislature by a date imposed by law.  This Bill will require 

improved financial reporting by these organizations. 

 

Gone are the days when public documents are released months 

after the close of a fiscal year. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The provisions in this Bill will require 

government organizations to submit their financial statements 

to the legislature within specified time constraints.  It requires 

more financial information to be made available by the 

government.  Improved financial reporting will result in more 

control over spending and improve accountability to the public.  

In the 

same way, consistent and timely submission of financial 

statements will provide more useful information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is imperative to restore public trust and 

confidence in the institutions of democratic government in 

Saskatchewan.  If safeguards are in place and the rules well 

understood, the worst abuses of the political process evident in 

recent years will be avoided.  This Bill moves us far along that 

path. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I take pleasure in moving second reading of an 

Act respecting The Tabling of Documents Act, 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on Bill No. 8 

be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1700) 

 

Bill No. 9 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second 

reading of Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Urban 

Municipality Act, 1984, and Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The 

Local Government Election Act. 
 

The first Bill amending The Urban Municipality Act restores 

wards in cities over 100,000 in population for the next civic 

election. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- The Bill provides that wards in these 

cities, namely Saskatoon and Regina, are retained for at least 

two elections.  By doing this, our government will be 

correcting the mistake made by the previous government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments also permit councils of all 

other cities, towns, and villages the option of adopting the ward 

system for the 1994 elections.  No prior referendum is 

necessary to exercise this option, therefore any urban 

municipality in the province will be able to use a ward system 

in the next round of local elections. 
 

This legislation responds to the overwhelming demand by 

voters in the largest cities to return to the ward system.  

Members of this House will recall that three years ago, the 

former government abolished the ward system that was in place 

in Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert.  The ward system was 

abolished in spite of the objections of municipal councils and 

votes of electors calling for the retention of wards.  For 

example, in a referendum held in Regina in 1988, 74 per cent 

of the voters supported the ward system.  After the last round 

of civic elections in October of this year, we heard almost 

universal criticism from voters and candidates about the 

undemocratic nature of the at-large system for local elections.  

I think the voters were telling us that at-large city local 

democracy does not function very well in the absence of wards. 
 

It is a responsibility of the province to ensure that local 

elections are democratic.  That is why the legislation  



December 11, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 239 

ensures elections every three years, and ensures secrecy in 

voting, for example.  And that is why this Bill ensures a ward 

system will be in place in the two largest cities for at least two 

successive elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipal 

Association) has consistently called for a return to the ward 

system for cities.  And both SUMA and the Provincial 

Association of Resort Communities have been asking for the 

option to be available to resort communities.  The option of a 

ward system will be useful where resort communities are 

situated near each other along a lake shore.  It will allow the 

residents to form one municipality while retaining their 

individual representation on council through wards.  Members 

should note that wards are an established feature of rural 

municipal government and of rural school division elections. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me expand on the reason why the public is 

calling for a return to the ward system in larger centres.  People 

want to ensure that all areas of the city are represented.  They 

want to get rid of what some people call bed sheet ballots 

containing so many names that it is impossible to make an 

informed choice in the polling booth.  And they want to know 

who on council to approach and who to hold accountable when 

they have concerns with city hall. 

 

Candidates for city council have also been asking for a ward 

system so that they do not have to be well off financially to run 

for office or be bankrolled by some group with a vested interest 

in council decisions. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to mention the second Bill, The 

Local Government Election Amendment Act, that makes some 

amendments that are consequential to the main Bill that I have 

been describing.  The second, companion Bill refutes all 

references to the split vote . . . to split ward or at-large system 

that the previous government offered as an option in 1988 

amendments, which all cities decline to use. 

 

I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we want to give 

municipalities an opportunity to comment and suggest 

amendments to this Bill before it is passed.  If they feel 

strongly that options provided are insufficient to satisfy the 

desires of urban voters, we will want to look at making 

amendments.  We believe this is a good Bill, but we intend to 

allow municipalities time to review it. 

 

Unlike the former government, we will consult the 

municipalities and allow them the opportunity to study it and 

respond with any suggestions for change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

the Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 and of Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The Local 

Government Election Act. . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Just Bill No. 9. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Bill No. 9. 

The Speaker: -- Yes, I recognize the point of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- This is highly . . . Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I 

think is highly unusual, the procedure that the government is 

using here in trying to do two Bills at one time. 

 

The Speaker: -- I think the member's point is well taken, and I 

would ask the member for extreme clarity in this House.  

Would she move Bill No. 9, second reading of Bill No. 9, first. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I just move the Bill No. 9 at 

this time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In that case I would 

move that Bill No. 9 be adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Local Government 

Election Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, based on my previous 

remarks, I move second reading of Bill No. 10. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that debate on Bill No. 

10 be now adjourned. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:08 p.m. 

 

 

 

 


