




















































Hansard: December 02, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 5 

 December 2, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 

2:03 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- May it please Your Honour: 

 

The Legislative Assembly have elected me as their Speaker, 

although I am but little able to fulfil the important duties thus 

assigned to me. If in the performance of my duties I should at 

any time fall into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to 

me and not to the Assembly whose servant I am, and who, 

through me, the better to enable them to discharge their duty to 

their Queen and country, humbly claim all their undoubted 

rights and privileges, especially that they may have freedom of 

speech in their debates, access to your person at all seasonable 

times, and that their proceedings may receive from you the 

most favourable consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I am commanded by Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor to declare to you that she freely confides 

in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s 

person and government, and not doubting that their 

proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temper, and 

prudence, she grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and 

allow, their constitutional privileges. 

 

I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall 

have ready access to Her Honour upon all seasonable 

occasions, and that their proceedings as well as your words and 

actions, will constantly receive from her the most favourable 

construction. 

 

2:04 p.m. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

A New Beginning 

 

It is my privilege and pleasure to welcome you to the first 

session of the twenty-second legislature of the province of 

Saskatchewan. It is a particular pleasure to welcome those of 

you who are sitting as members of the legislature for the first 

time. 

 

Election to public office is an honour. The challenges which 

you face are many and varied, and the responsibilities are great. 

The people of this province have placed a tremendous trust in 

each of you. It is the solemn duty of each member to keep the 

sacred trust of the electorate. 

 

My government accepts with enthusiasm its mandate to 

provide Saskatchewan people with honest, open, accessible, 

and truly accountable government. A renewed public trust and 

restored confidence in the traditional values of Saskatchewan 

community are essential elements in my government’s vision 

for the future. 

Appropriations 

 

The primary work of this session will be to provide supply for 

my government for the remainder of the current fiscal year. My 

government has the greatest respect for the fundamental 

tradition that public funds must be appropriated by the 

legislature, and that members have the right of grievance 

before supply. 

 

Members will accordingly be asked to take steps to vote supply 

on the basis of the Estimates first presented to this House in 

April 1991 by the previous administration. This will end the 

need to fund the ongoing operations of government through 

special warrants. 

 

Approval of this year’s appropriations will also require 

legislation to amend The Mortgage Protection Act, The 

Municipal Revenue Sharing Act, The Assessment Management 

Act, The Meewasin Authority Act, The Wakamow Authority 

Act, The Wascana Authority Act, and others. 

 

My government will present its first budget early in the spring 

session. At that time we will also place before you a legislative 

agenda which clearly demonstrates the new directions and new 

priorities of my government. 

 

Taxation 

 

This legislature will also be asked to repeal legislation which 

provided for the expansion and harmonization of the provincial 

sales tax. The elimination of this additional tax burden will 

safeguard jobs throughout our province and put millions of 

dollars back into the pockets of Saskatchewan consumers, 

thereby stimulating the provincial economy. 

 

We will also be seeking approval for several other legislative 

amendments related to the repeal of this expanded tax, 

including amendments to The Liquor Consumption Tax Act, 

The Revenue and Financial Services Act, and The Income Tax 

Act. 

 

My government is concerned about the fiscal position of the 

province. Annual deficits must be brought under control and 

the massive provincial debt must be reduced. My minister have 

already announced reductions in spending, and further 

initiatives in this regard will be announced soon. 

 

My government has also acted to fulfil a major commitment 

made to the people of this province with the immediate 

establishment of the Financial Management Review 

Commission. This independent and non-partisan commission is 

mandated to open up the financial records of this province and 

to seek ways to improve the financial accountability and 

efficiency of government. 

 

Agriculture 

 

Agriculture is another major priority for my government. Every 

effort will be made to safeguard the family farm. The family 

farm is vital to our rural way of life and to Saskatchewan’s 

future. 

  



6 Saskatchewan Hansard December 2, 1991 

My government is disappointed that federal initiatives in 

income stabilization for farm families continue to fall far short 

of the real need. My government will continue to press Ottawa 

to fulfil its promise to provide farm families with an adequate 

and immediate cash payment to cover shortfalls from previous 

crop years. My ministers are also convinced that changes must 

be made to the gross revenue insurance plan and the net income 

stabilization account. 

 

Within this context, my government has recently participated in 

a unique lobby to pressure Ottawa to accept its responsibilities. 

My ministers, together with farmers, farm organizations, and 

political leaders from across the prairie provinces 

communicated this urgent message to the federal government. 

Ottawa has indicated it will examine the situation. This kind of 

coalition, united in common purpose, is unprecedented. 

Undoubtedly these co-operative efforts will continue. 

 

At the request of the agricultural producers, my government 

has also begun a review of the gross revenue insurance plan 

and the net income stabilization account, and we are preparing 

to negotiate improvements to these programs. We are also 

engaged in developing initiatives in consultation with lending 

institutions and others, to provide badly needed debt relief for 

our agricultural producers. 

 

Democratic Reform 

 

My government is determined to restore the fundamental 

principles of democracy. As a first step in this direction, 

legislation will be introduced to ensure that by-elections are 

held within six months of a vacancy. A second initiative will 

provide for the legislative and public consideration of the ward 

system in municipal elections. Additional democratic reforms 

will be introduced in the spring session after public 

consultation. 

 

As part of this effort to restore the public’s trust in the political 

leadership and the public service of this province, legislation 

will be introduced to ensure fairness and common sense as the 

primary objectives in employment packages for senior public 

servants. 

 

My government has also initiated the development of a 

comprehensive code of ethics and stringent conflict-of-interest 

guide-lines for both elected representatives and public servants. 

Preparations for these initiatives are expected to be complete 

before the next session of this legislature. 

 

And finally, my government wishes the newly elected Speaker 

success with his important responsibilities to ensure proper 

decorum in the Assembly. It is my government’s objective to 

restore and enhance the public’s respect for this legislature and 

all members. 

 

Co-operation and Community 

 

Overcoming the tremendous obstacles facing our province and 

turning them into opportunities will require that all 

Saskatchewan people come together in a renewed spirit of co-

operation and community. These values have 

always been and will continue to be the distinguishing 

characteristics of our people and our province. My government 

believe that rekindling this spirit of co-operation and renewing 

this commitment to community will ensure the success of our 

efforts to rebuild this province. 

 

I leave you now to the business of the session with full 

confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties and 

responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 

guide this legislature in all its deliberations. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:14 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Notice from the Chief Electoral Officer 

 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of 

the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral 

Officer lists of the names of such members as have been 

returned to serve in the legislature. 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: -- I wish to inform the Assembly that the pages 

for this session will be: Sukh Basi, Richard Brimble, Trevor 

Davies, Adele Friess, and Cheryl Konanz. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Deputy Premier, the member from Regina Dewdney: 

 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, December 3, 1991. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly  



December 2, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Government House Leader, member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 

after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do 

appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as 

he shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

Minister of Health and the member from Regina Hillsdale: 

 

That members Lingenfelter, Hagel, Koskie, Lorje, and 

Goohsen be constituted a special committee to prepare and 

report, with all convenient speed, lists of members to 

compose the standing committees of this Assembly provided 

under rule 89: 

 

That the said standing committees be severally empowered 

to examine and inquire into all such matters and things as 

may be referred to them by this Assembly, and to report 

from time to time their observations thereon, with power to 

send for persons, papers, and records, and to examine 

witnesses under oath; 

 

That the said special committee consider the size of the 

standing committees and to report thereon with all 

convenient speed. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Election of Deputy Speaker 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon River Heights, the Minister of 

Education: 

 

That Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, member for the constituency 

of Regina Victoria, be Deputy Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose, the Minister of Agriculture: 

 

That Mr. Glenn Hagel, member for the constituency of 

Moose Jaw Palliser, be Deputy Chair of Committees of this 

Assembly. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 2:21 p.m. 

 


