




















































Hansard: December 09, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 163 

 December 9, 1991 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel, and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Toth. 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and fellow members 

of this Assembly. It is indeed a pleasure and an honour to 

represent the constituents of Kelsey-Tisdale in this Chamber 

for the first sitting of the twenty-second legislature for the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am not the federal Minister of Finance but I did 

go and buy a new pair of shoes before my address to the 

Assembly. The one good thing, Mr. Speaker, is that I did not 

have to pay PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — On behalf of the constituents of 

Kelsey-Tisdale, I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on 

your election. You have their support and their confidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you are very familiar with the constituency of 

Kelsey-Tisdale. Some of your family farmed for many years in 

the Etomami area near Hudson Bay. 

 

You are also aware, Mr. Speaker, that the constituency of 

Kelsey was represented for many years by John Brockelbank 

Sr. of the Bjorkdale district. This brings to mind another 

Speaker of this Assembly, John Brockelbank Jr., who so ably 

served this Assembly during the Blakeney administration. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, I wish you the best in your work 

for the Assembly. 

 

I also wish to congratulate our Premier. It is clear to me that 

this government is one of action, not simply words. It is clearly 

a government in touch with the needs of our communities and 

our province. In particular, I believe that he is leading by 

example and resetting the priorities of government. The 

selection of a small, efficient, and competent Executive 

Council, Mr. Speaker, makes it possible to conceive of a 

leaner, more efficient government, a government that puts 

priorities of individual Saskatchewan citizens in Saskatchewan 

communities ahead of politics and pomp. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Mr. Speaker, I represent a constituency that 

supports the people-first approach to government. It is a large 

rural constituency that reaches from Tisdale to Hudson Bay to 

the Manitoba border, and from Prairie 

River in the North to Nora in the South. It is a constituency of 

towns, villages and hamlets and family farms. 

 

Some would say that we maybe shouldn‟t spend our time 

talking about our constituencies, but, Mr. Speaker, I believe it 

is important to talk about the strengths and the concerns of each 

and every constituency in this province. And we are proud of 

the many accomplishments of our communities and our people, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Tisdale Recplex is an example of these accomplishments. 

It is a magnificent complex built in conjunction with the 

elementary school and which shares the auditorium, the curling 

rink, the skating rink, meeting rooms. It‟s home to the AAA 

Midget Trojans and the Tisdale Ramblers and a large indoor 

rodeo. It is the centre of the community and it was built by 

community. 

 

Another example of community spirit, Mr. Speaker, is the 

Porcupine Opportunities centre which includes an activity 

centre, skilled workshops, skilled industry, laundromat, a 

SARCAN depot, a retail store, and residential services for the 

mentally disabled people of our region. These facilities are 

located in Porcupine Plain — built by community, community 

spirit, neighbour helping neighbour. 

 

And in Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker, the creation of the forest 

vision by community, workers, and industry is a document 

envisioning the future of sustainable forest in north-eastern 

Saskatchewan. Hudson Bay is also home to magnificent 

snowmobile trails, forestry week, the junior B hockey team, the 

Hudson Bay Saints. It is also home of the Hudson Bay Rider 

high school football team which has won the provincial title 

three out of the past five years. 

 

And how about our people, Mr. Speaker? Let‟s look at our 

political heritage for a moment. People like the John 

Brockelbanks, father and son; Sandy Nicholson, who we 

recently paid tribute to; or John Messer; the Hon. Minister of 

Finance; and the Hon. Minister of Education — roots from our 

constituency of Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our constituency is also made up of people like the 

Saskatchewan Roughriders‟ Bob Poley from Prairie River, 

Saskatchewan; and Jim Clunie from Tisdale, a member of the 

Canadian professional water-ski team, who captured the world 

water-ski title this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Kelsey-Tisdale is a constituency that is known for 

its parks, lakes, and fertile land. Kelsey-Tisdale was named 

from Tisdale, which is the largest community in our 

constituency, and also from the fact that Henry Kelsey passed 

through this area in 1690. Recreation, tourism, forestry, and 

agriculture provide for a good quality of life for the blend of 

ethnic groups that have settled in this region. 
 

Our communities have a diverse mixture of ancestries, 

including our Indian and Metis brothers and sisters, Mr. 

Speaker, that have functioned co-operatively in the regional 

development associated with Kelsey-Tisdale constituency. The 

people of this region have diversified industry that is 

complementary to the natural surroundings. Some examples are 

alfalfa pelleting plants,  



164 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

plywood plant, an aspen plant, many private saw mills and 

outfitting camps, grain bin manufacturing, and egg carton 

production from waste paper, value-added products from wild 

fruit and honey — just to mention a few. 

 

Despite the strengths of our community and our diversity, the 

people of Kelsey-Tisdale have experienced the hardship that 

has infected our province over the past decade. I wish to 

outline some of these areas in which the people of this 

constituency have seen difficulties, have sought change, and 

have put their faith in a government that has promised to work 

for change. 

 

In Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, the driving force of our local 

economy is agriculture. We are known for our diversified 

agricultural base — canola, flax, alfalfa, honey production. We 

are also known for cereal grain production and livestock. Even 

with this diverse agricultural base, Mr. Speaker, our family 

farms continue to struggle for survival. The farm gate crisis has 

spread throughout our constituency even though we have some 

of the richest farm land in the province. The best of farming 

practices, Mr. Speaker, has not solved the problem of low 

prices, high input costs, and farm debt. Farmers in 

Kelsey-Tisdale are being forced off the land in record numbers. 

 

There is another serious situation in the farm community. 

Many of our farmers are nearing 60 years of age. Many would 

like to retire in dignity, Mr. Speaker, but cannot force that 

additional debt on their sons and daughters who want to take 

over that family farm. Fewer young families on the family farm 

results in our rural communities becoming involved in the rural 

crisis. Communities like Bjorkdale, Chelan, McKague, 

Carragana, Eldersley, Crooked River, Archerwill, in fact every 

community in Kelsey-Tisdale, are seeing the effects. The first 

signs are usually important community services that begin to 

disappear. And we have all seen this in the past nine years, Mr. 

Speaker. Maybe it‟s the closure of a school or of a church or of 

a business or of a curling rink. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the survival of rural Saskatchewan is dependent 

upon bringing in of young families on our farms. These people 

will provide hope for the future of agriculture and for the future 

of rural communities. They are important to the maintenance of 

the quality of life we desire in our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 21 the people of Kelsey-Tisdale 

helped elect a government which they trusted with their 

concerns, concerns about protecting a way of life based on 

agriculture and rural communities. They said yes to family 

farms and no to the corporate farm agenda. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture and rural communities clearly have 

been our priority during the election and now. Only a little 

more than 30 days into our mandate the farmers of 

Kelsey-Tisdale are applauding our Premier for his . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Yes, applauding our Premier for efforts in 

helping them with the recent trek to Ottawa. 

This was a trek to Ottawa by a Premier and ordinary farmers 

who wanted to talk to Ottawa about the farm crisis and make 

the federal government aware of the seriousness of the 

situation, the need for more and immediate cash infusions, the 

farm debt problem, and the need for improvements to GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance plan). 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the farmers of Kelsey-Tisdale know they 

now have a government that has their interests as a priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — Forestry and small business are another area 

of keen interest to the citizens of Kelsey-Tisdale. Indeed 

forestry is central to the economic health of many of the 

communities in my constituency. Many people in Hudson Bay, 

Weekes, Carragana, Mistatim, Erwood are dependant upon the 

industry for employment. 

 

The forestry industry is no longer as strong as it was a decade 

ago. Foresters, loggers, mill workers are being laid off or have 

no job. Independent operators are receiving smaller and smaller 

logging contracts, and industries we have grown to depend on 

such as Saskatchewan Forest Products, MacMillan Bloedel, 

and Simpson Timber have simply slowed down or shut down. 

 

For an example, the result of the closure of Simpson Timber 

has meant that 600-plus jobs were lost in the forest industry in 

Kelsey-Tisdale over the past year and a half. Many of these 

people, Mr. Speaker, are still unemployed. Many of these 

people have joined the exodus from this province. 

 

The state of our forest industry is caused by a policy introduced 

by the previous government, Mr. Speaker. It was a policy of 

having no policy. It was a lack of support to sustainable 

forestry enterprise. It has eroded the forest management 

process that promotes sustainable employment and forestry. 

 

This industry is also important to tourism in Saskatchewan. We 

offer a tourist industry that has the best hunting, fishing, 

camping, and family recreation. Mr. Speaker, with the closing 

of many local recreational sites in our area in favour of Get 

Smart, this industry is also under extreme pressure. 

 

Many of the jobs that have been lost in this industry were a 

result of the lack of vision for forest resource by a previous 

government that favoured multinational megaproject 

development and ignored the importance of forestry to this 

province. 

 

I am pleased, Mr. Speaker, that our government has repealed 

the expanded PST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — The PST has been so harmful to the family 

businesses of my constituency. Small businesses and industry 

were closing down day after day. Workers were out of work 

and were forced to join the ranks of the 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

unemployed or were seeking the help of Social Services or 

simply leaving the province for work elsewhere. 

 

I found it interesting and very disappointing that in our 

constituency, Mr. Speaker, nearly 900 voters have made the 

exodus since 1986. This does not count the number of children 

that would have left with their parents. Too many of these 

people, Mr. Speaker, are standing in the line of the 

unemployment office, Social Services, or the food bank. 

 

For those people who have stayed, I can tell you that they were 

very disappointed in the direction of the previous government. 

They were aware that our communities were dying. Our richest 

resource, our young people, were leaving in record numbers. 

The main streets of fine communities were shutting down, and 

those excellent small businesses were gone. 

 

(1915) 

 

On October 21 my constituents asked for a new direction. They 

asked for leadership. They elected a team of people to lead the 

way through our economic situation. They wanted a 

government with compassion and with understanding. Our 

constituents, Mr. Speaker, are not asking what they can get 

from government; they‟re saying what can we give to our 

society that will turn the current malaise into opportunities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on October 21 the people of our fine constituency 

said no to this province‟s large debt and reckless spending. 

They said they did not want to be sent a bill of more than 

$5,000 for each man, woman, and child in the province for 

spending they did not benefit from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — They said no to the idea of taxing an extra 7 

per cent on many necessities that would strike hardest at the 

poor, at the seniors, the pioneers of this province, who are now 

living on fixed incomes, or at the young people, many of whom 

are working at minimum wage. 

 

The constituents of Kelsey-Tisdale are a strong lot. They 

believe in community, and neighbour helping neighbour, and 

co-operation, sharing in community spirit. They believe in the 

Saskatchewan way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is this belief in the Saskatchewan way of 

co-operation that has brought together farmers and labourers, 

seniors and young people, and the people of various ethnic 

backgrounds. It is this belief that helped found our province 

and continues to hold our communities together. Many of our 

seniors today came to Saskatchewan to settle and to pioneer. 

 

I look at my wife‟s parents and others who are of Ukrainian 

descent. Many of these pioneering people came to 

Saskatchewan because they felt the need of freedom and the 

ability to earn a living as they chose. I am proud that our 

Premier was one of the first world leaders to welcome the 

independence of the Ukraine. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Renaud: — It is appropriate that we recognize and 

support the reforms that are taking place in the Ukraine. This 

area of the world has provided our province with strong people 

of pioneering spirit. Mr. Speaker, these pioneers knew that 

joining together to fix wrongs and to give what they could so 

their children and grandchildren could have a decent place to 

live, a place to be proud of, and a place of freedom, was the 

right way. 

 

Our seniors, Mr. Speaker, out of a concern for their children 

and grandchildren, want to protect and strengthen a way of I 

fife that they have struggled for. These seniors voted for a 

government that holds these democratic socialist ideals. These 

people voted for a New Democratic government, a government 

that holds the value of the person above the value of the 

almighty dollar. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: — On October 21, Mr. Speaker, my constituents 

said yes, we want an education system for our children that is 

based on desire and opportunity, not on the size of a person‟s 

pocket-book. They said yes, we want a universal medicare 

program, a program for rich or for poor. Mr. Speaker, our 

constituents said yes to Main Street, Saskatchewan. They said 

yes to the development of good quality jobs for our kids right 

at home. They didn‟t vote for the moving of jobs without 

concern for the workers and their families or without concern 

for the cost to the taxpayers. I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, 

the people of Kelsey-Tisdale said no to that wasteful and 

inhuman political ploy. 

 

They said no to the spending of large amounts of tax dollars on 

companies that didn‟t need it and that created little in the way 

of permanent jobs. And they said no to the secret deals to 

friends of the government and secret contracts to top officials 

in the public service and Crown investments. 

 

Our constituents did say yes, Mr. Speaker, to a government that 

promised to govern in a way that produced trust in our 

parliamentary system and their politicians. On October 21 the 

voters in Kelsey-Tisdale stated that they insisted on a 

government that would open the books and continue on a plan 

of open and honest and accountable government. 

 

And since the election, Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to many 

people of Kelsey-Tisdale constituency, and I want to say again 

— and I can tell you honestly — that are proud of our Premier 

for accompanying a group of farm people, farm organizations, 

and other government officials to explain to Ottawa the real 

situation in rural Saskatchewan today. 

 

They are proud of our new direction as promised in the election 

campaign and now publicly endorsed in the throne speech. Mr. 

Speaker, I trust that with God‟s grace I can represent my 

constituents, each and every one, toward a goal of betterment 

of our constituency and our province with honesty, integrity, 

and fairness. 

 

I support a new beginning, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I will be 

supporting the original motion and rejecting the 

  



166 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations on 

being elected Speaker of this Assembly. It is a great privilege 

and honour for me to be here in the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly representing the diverse and unique people of Indian 

Head-Wolseley constituency in our great province. 

 

I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is the first time 

in two years that the people in the Indian Head-Wolseley 

constituency . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: —. . . that the people in Indian Head-Wolseley 

constituency have been represented in this Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my decision to seek election to the Legislative 

Assembly was based on the fact that the people, life-style, and 

natural heritage of Saskatchewan are very important to me. 

And we deserve something better in the way of leadership, 

direction, and priorities than what the previous government 

delivered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — The secret deals, scandals, sell-outs, and 

patronage have destroyed our trust in governments. Something 

as basic as honesty, fairness, accountability, and compassion 

should not be too much to ask for and expect from elected 

officials, for without these basic principles we have nothing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Indian Head-Wolseley constituency is typical 

of rural Saskatchewan. Agriculture is the main industry. As a 

third-generation farmer myself, farming is a way of life for me 

and hopefully my children will some day take over the family 

farm. A number of small towns are situated throughout our 

constituency. Small businesses are the backbone to these rural 

communities and every effort must be made to support and 

assist small business in Saskatchewan. 

 

Five Indian reserves are located within our boundaries. We, as 

the Government of Saskatchewan, and the federal Government 

of Canada, must work with the Indian people to resolve 

long-standing issues. 

 

Our constituency has one of the highest ratios of senior citizens 

anywhere in Saskatchewan. This group of people is very 

important. They‟ve built this province and made it one of the 

best places in the world to live, and they have knowledge and 

experience that only time can buy. We need to ensure that our 

seniors have comfort and security in their retirement years. I 

believe that leaders and decision makers should utilize the 

valuable information and expertise offered by our seniors. 

After all, they have been where we are now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our greatest treasure is our children. All of us, 

through our own families, friends, communities, schools, 

churches, and organizations have some 

involvement with children and in turn contribute to their 

growth, learning, and well-being. It should be our goal to leave 

our children a world that is as good, or hopefully a little better, 

place to live than when we inherited it from our forefathers. 

The greatest threat to our children, and future generations, is 

our deteriorating environment. Tough decisions and 

commitments are required now, Mr. Speaker, if we are to deal 

with these unprecedented challenges. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a lot of history in our constituency. At 

one time, Indian Head had a higher population than Regina. 

Just over 100 years ago, the largest farm in the world was 

located at Indian Head. This 64,000-acre farm was acquired at 

a cost of about $1 an acre, and the wheat produced sold for 88 

cents a bushel. It is interesting to note that, even with these 

attractive prices, the farm eventually went broke. It is also 

interesting to note that a few years ago some of the land from 

the original farm sold for $950 an acre. It is little wonder that 

the farm economy is in trouble today with the price of wheat at 

$2 a bushel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in Saskatchewan is well aware of the 

importance of agriculture and the problems associated with the 

industry. There have been boom and bust cycles in this risky 

business throughout history. Things will change, Mr. Speaker. 

The fact of the matter is there are five more people to feed on 

this fragile planet every two seconds. And over 100,000 people 

starve to death every day. No one is making more land. In fact, 

productive agriculture land is being lost at an alarming rate 

through development, erosion, salinity, and urban sprawl. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the trade wars end and Saskatchewan 

farmers can compete fairly on world markets, we will once 

again have a successful and thriving industry. Meanwhile it is 

imperative that every measure be taken to protect and preserve 

the important family farms in Saskatchewan until the good 

times return. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say how pleased I am to see the 

throne speech of December 2 contain the announcement that 

legislation to provide for the expansion and harmonization of 

the provincial sales tax will be repealed. This unfair tax heaped 

upon an already overtaxed society was totally unacceptable and 

clearly rejected in the recent election. 

 

It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that in 1950 in this 

country 50 per cent of the taxes were paid by individuals and 

50 per cent by businesses and corporations. Today, individuals 

pay over 80 per cent of all taxes while businesses pay less than 

20 per cent, with many big businesses and corporations paying 

no tax and, in fact, carrying tax credits into future years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, an area of great concern for me and many other 

people in this province is our natural heritage and environment. 

Among our greatest assets are our fertile soils, clean air and 

water, productive forests, rich oil, gas, and mineral deposits, 

and diverse wildlife populations. It is important that we utilize 

these resources responsibly, manage them wisely, and protect 

them for future generations. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 167 

For example, Mr. Speaker, the history and record of wildlife 

conservation achievements in this province are second to none 

in North America. The importance of the area now known as 

Saskatchewan to wildlife was recognized by our forefathers 

when the first migratory bird sanctuary in North America was 

established in 1887 at the north end of Last Mountain Lake. 

 

For decades Saskatchewan has led the way to save the 

endangered whooping crane. In 1941 there was only 21 

whooping cranes in the world. Today, as a result of dedicated 

conservation efforts, there are nearly 200 of these regal birds in 

existence. 

 

In 1929, out of concern for dwindling wildlife populations, 

sportsmen organized in this province. Today the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation has the highest membership per capita of 

any other wildlife conservation organization in North America. 

In 1937, in response to the devastating drought, Ducks 

Unlimited launched its very successful and much admired 

wetland conservation work on the Prairies. In 1942 naturalists 

came together, eventually forming the Saskatchewan Natural 

History Society, which is well-known and respected across the 

nation. 

 

More recently, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was selected for the 

launching of the North American waterfowl management plan. 

This 11th-hour effort to salvage our dwindling waterfowl 

resource will see upwards of $400 million pumped into 

Saskatchewan over the next 15 years. 

 

The former Conservative government received much-deserved 

and widespread support and praise when The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act was passed in 1984. Unfortunately, the 

same government in its dying days took major steps to 

undermine and destroy this landmark legislation. This popular 

and vital legislation must be retained as it is imperative that 

critical wildlife habitat on our Crown lands be protected for the 

benefit of all people and future generations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, the accomplishments of 

Saskatchewan people in the conservation of our natural 

resources has been impressive, but much remains to be done. In 

a mere 100 years we have changed the face of southern 

Saskatchewan from one of the most productive ecosystems in 

the world to one of the most modified landscapes in North 

America. Consequently, we have witnessed many changes in 

our once rich natural heritage. 

 

(1930) 

 

In the 1950s, 20 million ducks returned to our province each 

spring. In recent years fewer than 4 million ducks have made 

the annual trek, a decline of over 80 per cent. In 1960 there was 

500,000 white-tailed deer in Saskatchewan. Today fewer than 

250,000 survive. Some 20 per cent of our native plants are 

deemed to be rare and endangered, and half of all the 

endangered species listed in Canada are found on the Prairies. 

The loss of natural habitat continues at an alarming rate. In the 

five-year period from 1976 to 1981, we lost just under 2 

million acres of natural habitat. Broken down, this loss works 

out to 44 acres an hour, day and night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the loss of natural areas and the associated plant 

and animal species is not limited to Saskatchewan, but in fact is 

a world-wide crisis with species becoming extinct on an hourly 

basis. 

 

The widely acclaimed Brundtlund report on our common 

future, the world commission on environment and 

development, states that in order to ensure species diversity and 

survival a minimum of 12 per cent of an ecological region must 

be maintained. To date, less than 5 per cent of our natural 

landscape is secure under some form of protective status in 

southern Saskatchewan. The Brundtlund Commission report 

concludes that we have 10 years to reach the 12 per cent goal, 

or in many parts of the world, including Saskatchewan, it may 

be too late. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government must take immediate action with 

serious and determined commitments to achieve the 12 per cent 

goal here in Saskatchewan by the year 2000. In many cases this 

will be our last opportunity as a society to set aside 

representative samples of our vanishing natural heritage. Mr. 

Speaker, our children will not have the opportunity to make the 

choices in front of us today. If we fail to look to the future and 

act responsibly, our children will be the losers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Concern for our environment is the number one 

issue in our society and indeed around the world. In fact the 

1990s have been dubbed the decade of the environment. The 

public is no longer prepared to sit back and see our 

environment exploited and plundered for short-term economic 

gains or political agendas. Our environment and resources are 

far more important than politics and politicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the specific item 

mentioned in the throne speech under the heading “Democratic 

Reform.” I quote: 

 

As a first step in this direction, legislation will be 

introduced to ensure that by-elections are held within 

six months of a vacancy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks that 

it has been two years since the people in the Indian 

Head-Wolseley constituency have been represented in this 

legislature. Myself and other voters and taxpayers in my 

constituency are not proud of the fact that we must surely hold 

the record in Canada for being without representation in any 

legislature for the longest period of time. 

 

We applaud the government‟s commitment to hold by-elections 

within six months of a vacancy occurring, so that people will 

never again sit for years unrepresented in this legislature. 

  



168 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to 

recognize and thank a very special individual — my father, 

Reg Scott. Like many of our parents, he lived through the Great 

Depression of the 1930s. He went overseas during the Second 

World War to fight for our country so that we today may sit 

here in this Chamber in a free and democratic society. 

 

He returned home to farm, and together with my mother raised 

a family of six children. When I discussed with dad the idea of 

getting into politics, he was as usual very supportive and 

offered very good advice. Unfortunately my father has not been 

able to partake in the excitement and activity surrounding my 

election to this Assembly, as he is bedridden in a losing battle 

with cancer. 

 

In his absence, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, thanks dad for 

all your help, guidance, wisdom, and love over the past 44 

years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say thank you 

to the people of the Indian Head-Wolseley constituency for 

their support and trust. I am committed to serving my 

constituents to the best of my abilities, and I look forward to 

working with them in the months ahead. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it is a great privilege, honour, and 

humbling experience to sit in this Legislative Assembly and 

represent the very fine people of the Indian Head-Wolseley 

constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Speech from the Throne and I do not 

support the amendment. Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it is definitely a pleasure to 

once again speak on the throne speech in this House. 

 

Before l go through my remarks, I‟d like to congratulate all the 

members that were re-elected and a special congratulations to 

the new ones that have been elected and have now heard a lot 

of them speak in this House. And I‟d also like to again, as I did 

in question period, congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your 

appointment as Speaker. 

 

Just a few words, Mr. Speaker, about my constituency. I see 

quite a few of the members are doing that, just so that all so 

many new members kind of know where your boundary lines 

are and what not. I have one of the largest constituencies in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I represent 25 towns. There‟s no 

other constituency that has that many towns. 

 

And it‟s the old Diefenbaker riding between Regina and 

Saskatoon. I‟m very, very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. It takes 

in from just out here by Keddleston to within about eight miles 

of Saskatoon. The boundary lines are between the two lakes, 

Last Mountain Lake and Diefenbaker Lake. And I‟m very 

proud to represent this riding. And I‟m very proud that the 

constituency of Arm River, the members 

re-elected me for my fourth term of office in this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: - I had a real good organization, Mr. Speaker. 

They worked hard for me. They‟ve been a loyal bunch of 

people. 

 

I‟m so proud to be able to say that in 1977 we put 51 polling 

captains together in our team and we‟ve only had one that has 

left us — and he just moved to the city — in those 13 years. 

And I‟m very proud and I want to say thank you to them also. 

And I‟m going to make sure that they get a copy of Hansard so 

they know that I‟m saying that about them, because those are 

the kind of people that see that you return. 

 

There isn‟t a member in this House, Mr. Speaker, that has 

returned that doesn‟t get here by a good bunch of people that 

have to elect them. It‟s the people. I don‟t care whether you‟re 

on the other side of the House or whether you‟re in the Liberal 

Party or the Conservative Party, you still have to be well liked 

and well respected in your constituency. You would not be 

representing this House. So I want all members on all sides of 

the House, all three parties, to be proud that you‟re here, that 

you‟re representing in this institution. I‟m proud. I‟m very, 

very proud that I‟ve been representing, if I finish out . . . if the 

Lord lets me live for another four years, I‟ll have 17 years in 

this House, and that‟s to me quite an achievement. 

 

My towns have done quite well in the last years. Some of our 

smaller towns, our farming communities, some of the smaller 

towns have a little smaller and moved to the bigger points. 

Now some of the bigger points of my riding are the towns of 

Craik and Davidson, Outlook, Allan, and Dundurn, Hanley; 

them are my bigger towns. And these towns have done quite 

well. 

 

And one of the things I‟m very proud of is the community 

bonds that come into my area. And they just seen what the 

government did, and they jumped right on it, and we have 

Imperial, Davidson, Outlook, Hanley forming one now, if the 

new government doesn‟t stop them; Davidson forming one 

now, if they don‟t stop them; but the town of Elbow, Mr. 

Speaker, the town of Elbow has two of them. They‟re a town of 

300 and they raised — in 10 days — raised $1 million to start 

up an industry in Elbow. And I am proud of the town of Elbow, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — And I am proud that my constituency . . . 

and I‟m glad for them that they‟ve took advantage of 

community bonds and helped their town, and I‟m just hoping 

and really, Mr. Speaker, I‟m really hoping that the government 

opposite don‟t say that‟s enough of community bonds. I kind of 

think they will. They‟ve come out now and said, oh the pond is 

dry and no more community bonds. But they‟ll likely go ahead 

because they know when they see a good thing. But, Mr. 

Speaker, what I think will happen, they‟ll come out with some 

other new name. It‟ll be the same thing, but it won‟t be giving 

any credit to the past government. And I think we got to give a 

lot of credit to what‟s happened in this 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 169 

province over the last nine years. 

 

Now the members over there are going to say, oh we were bled 

dry. The country‟s broke. The country went broke because the 

PC‟s (Progressive Conservative) . . . I heard so many people 

speak over there. There‟s been new members speaking, and I‟m 

not going to get into individual names — not very many — that 

were really going after the government. They bled this here 

treasury dry. For what, Mr. Speaker? What do we bleed the 

treasury dry for? We‟ve bled the treasury dry, if we could, for 

farmers — for farmers, Mr. Speaker. And when you bleed the 

treasury dry for farmers, you‟re also helping the business 

people in this province of Saskatchewan, and we know that, 

Mr. Speaker, and they know it. 

 

They get up here with all their speeches and all their talk. And 

they talk away and talk. They know very well. Every 

representative in this House, Mr. Speaker, every representative 

knows quite well that our farmers . . . There‟s a lot of them 

spoke here. I‟m looking at the member from Nipawin now; he 

got up and spoke. And he made a very nice speech and he was 

having a little hesitation, along with a few others, when they 

had to say that there‟s been nothing for farmers in this 

province. They had to pretty near bypass some figures awful 

quickly there. 

 

But what I‟m worried about, Mr. Speaker, is the members 

opposite. I don‟t know one, including the new Minister of 

Agriculture and the new Minister of Rural Development, that 

understands this farm scene. They don‟t really understand. No 

they didn‟t even get elected by farmers in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was approximately 650,000 voters in this 

province and 150,000, approximately, voted Conservative. 

There‟s only 125,000 farm votes. So if the member from 

Kinistino, and from Indian Head-Wolseley and Redberry — 

these people that spoke and said, we were elected by farmers 

. . . they were elected maybe by the town of Kinistino, maybe 

the town of Indian Head-Wolseley, maybe the town of 

Meadow Lake, maybe those towns, but they didn‟t get elected 

by the farmers that live on those farms and cast the vote. 

 

We are representing the farmers. We, the 10 people on the 

Conservative side, are still the spokesmen for the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t want 

anyone to ever forget that, because that is a fact. There isn‟t 

anyone . . . I‟ll challenge anyone in this legislature who 

understands the rural Saskatchewan like I do. I have spent more 

time in rural Saskatchewan going across this province, visiting 

with farmers, visiting with farmers in debt, farmers in 

problems, business men, and I know where the vote came from 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You‟ll find out. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Could I ask the members please to let 

the member speak. Don‟t interfere with the member‟s right to 

speak in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: - Mr. Speaker, I‟ve been speaking in the 

House for 13 years and I‟ve always been thrilled when I speak 

in this House. Whether I make a good job of it or not, it sure 

riles the other people up. And boy they sure get 

awake in a hurry. I‟ve watched here people speak and I‟ve 

watched their own colleagues speak and so help me, there was 

a hardly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . they done a little bit of 

that, but not really. But it sure riles up some people when I 

speak because you know you hear the facts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Now let‟s talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 

Let‟s talk about the Minister of Agriculture. I wonder if he 

knows what it means of the Farm Debt Review Board section 

16, section 20, Farm Land Security Board mediation services. I 

wonder if he understands all that. 

 

(1945) 

 

I wonder if he understands when even the time comes for the 

farmer to even go to the court room. He wouldn‟t know. He 

doesn‟t know when they go back to mediation. He doesn‟t 

know when they go over to a section 16. He doesn‟t know 

when you got the . . . how section 20 works. I‟ll tell him, and 

he doesn‟t know. 

 

I challenge him to come in this House and explain as Minister 

of Agriculture what this government on this side of the House, 

when we were government, what we did for farmers. 

 

You talk about moratoriums; we‟re going to get into that later. 

But if you want to talk about moratoriums, there‟s been one put 

together by this government — safety nets — to save farmers 

like you wouldn‟t believe. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . where did 

you ever get? Where? No place else in North America is the 

safety net as we have in Saskatchewan. All across Canada you 

have the Farm Debt Review Board, where a farmer can go to in 

trouble, whether they‟re foreclosing on his tractor or taking 

some land away, whatever. He can go there on his own free 

will. 

 

But all other places, Mr. Speaker, in Canada, every other 

province-and I am speaking the absolute facts-every province 

in Canada other than Saskatchewan, you go from the Farm 

Debt Review Board right to the court room — in six months 

your farm is gone. It‟s gone. Only in Saskatchewan do you 

have to serve notice to the lender to the Farm Land Security 

Board through a section 22, and then you‟ve got two to three 

years to try to salvage your farm. 

 

And the plan was there, Mr. Speaker. The plan was there. What 

we had in mind — and you know it quite well — that after 

about two or three years you v.t. your land back or else you . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Better explain v.t., Gerry, I don‟t think 

they understand. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well they might not understand. That is 

voluntary transfer your land. When you volunteer to transfer 

your land back. In case he didn‟t understand what I said, when 

a farmer is losing his land and he chooses to 

  



170 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

v.t. it back, it means to voluntary transfer. Now that should be 

simple enough for the member, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I‟m not going to dwell on that part any more, but we may 

have to get back on that a lot in this House in the next few 

months, the next few weeks. I talked to one of the members 

today; he figures we‟re going to be all through by Thursday or 

Friday. He thinks we can have the throne speech vote on 

Wednesday night — Wednesday at 5 o‟clock — wrap up the 

business in two days. Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got news for that 

member that told me that, because unless we have something 

for farmers . . . and when I mean farmers I‟m talking about 

every business man and almost every individual in the province 

of Saskatchewan. You save the farmers. You‟ll put money in 

the hands of the farmers. The business men that you represent 

here also have a chance to survive. And this government is not 

doing that. 

 

They can so, oh well we‟re brand new. I heard the member 

from Canora stand here yesterday in question period, or maybe 

it was today: we‟ve only been here a month. Well my 

goodness, I‟ve sitting over there listening to you talk about 

your plan for nine and a half years. What plan? I mean it‟s 

unreal. I mean it is unreal to go out and misrepresent the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan like you people did. You 

misrepresented them, and your people of Saskatchewan are 

going to see it because you said, we will have a plan to save the 

farmers in Saskatchewan. And if you lose one, one farmer, he 

said you‟ve lost too many. The member from Redberry spoke 

back here. He said you lose one farmer, it‟s too many. 

 

But you might be losing and I think, according to the Farm 

Land Security Board and the courts, that you‟re losing maybe 

one an hour about now. You‟re losing about one an hour, and 

they‟re going to snicker about it. There has been farmers going 

down by the hour. Here‟s the Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture 

will now be able to hear some of my remarks and I‟m just 

going to . . . I‟m just now going to, Mr. Speaker, challenge the 

Minister of Agriculture like I did when he — and I‟m not 

supposed to say when you‟re not here so I won‟t say that . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I think the member knows well that 

that is not . . . that is unparliamentary and we simply don‟t 

accept that in this House. I wish that you would refrain from 

doing so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I get excited once 

in awhile and I just stood up there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in June or July of this year the PC government 

put a moratorium on Agricultural Credit Corporation which 

you could not take . . . foreclose on anyone. The only time you 

could, if maybe they were going out of farming and they were 

having an auction sale or what not. That‟s the only time they 

could come in and really take over on a farm. Now we‟re going 

to be getting into this very, very seriously with the minister 

over the next little while here. 

Are you going to be foreclosing on people, farmers and clients 

of Agricultural Credit Corporation? I think they are, Mr. 

Speaker, because I‟ve heard some ACS (Agricultural Credit 

Corporation of Saskatchewan) employees said that things have 

now changed since the 21st of October — that that moratorium 

is not there. And so we‟re going to be challenging and asking 

the Minister of Agriculture to stand to his feet in this next 

while, in question period or whatever, inside this House or 

outside the House, and tell the people of Saskatchewan where 

they stand when it comes to these farmers. 

 

You won an election out there telling people in Saskatchewan 

. . . even the city people voted for you because, oh the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) are going to save the farmers. You 

said you had a plan and here‟s the big thing that you haven‟t 

come up with. You said, we‟ll we put the plan together, there‟ll 

be a moratorium. It‟ll be the first legislation in this here session 

this fall. 

 

Where is it, Mr. Speaker? Where is this legislation for a 

moratorium they‟re talking about? We don‟t even know 

anything about it, whether it‟s a debt moratorium on all farm 

debt or whether it‟s just on farm machinery or whether it‟s on 

land. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they haven‟t said one word. They used to sit here, 

the last few years and challenge us, oh you‟re afraid to put a 

moratorium on because you‟re afraid to attack the big banker, 

the big lender. Where are they, Mr. Speaker? Here‟s where 

they are. It‟s the same thing exactly. What they said about us 

. . . I challenge them. They‟re afraid of credit unions. They‟re 

afraid that they‟re going to go broke if they have a foreclosure 

. . . or if they have a moratorium. 

 

Well they don‟t understand because they could put a 

moratorium on. I believe in a moratorium if they got a good 

plan. We had a plan; a lease to own. And you know that was 

announced at election time by the Premier. It was announced at 

my nomination on September 27, a lease to own so you will not 

lose one farmer off this land. Once he goes through the courts 

he loses that land and he‟s gone through the court system and 

it‟s gone. He is offered a leaseback or a lease to own. 

 

Now, I think this is very important, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

most important thing facing all Saskatchewan right now — is 

what is the N DP government going to do about the farm 

scenario, the farm crisis in this province? This is what‟s on 

everybody‟s mind. 

 

I go home on the weekend and that‟s the first thing, what are 

these NDP that just got elected . . . I‟m keeping in mind now, 

I‟m in my home town in Craik where there wasn‟t very many 

votes for NDP, I‟ll tell you. I said I have. . . Mr. Speaker, 

someone said at the back there, a voice said, what was your 

answer? I said I‟ve got hopes that surely to goodness that the 

member from Riversdale that made these promises will keep 

his promise. 

 

Sane Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — And you know, Mr. Speaker, he‟s got quite 

a promise to keep. He promised one big promise at 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 171 

election time — balance the budget, lower the taxes, create 

jobs, go to Ottawa and get lots of money for farmers and spend 

more money on GRIP. Now when I came in here about a week 

after the election — maybe four or five days — the media said, 

what‟s your plan in your caucus of 10 when the House opens 

up and there‟s opposition? That‟s exactly what I told him: 

we‟re going to make sure they keep their promises. 

 

So, to whoever said that in the back — what did you tell them? 

I‟m telling them that we‟re going to try to do our best as an 

opposition that they keep their promises. Yes, they raise their 

expectations and we‟re going to see that they deliver. Because 

as I said before, Mr. Speaker, we are the 10 people right here 

that are here on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan. We‟ve 

always spoke for farmers and we always will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the last couple of weeks of the election I could 

hardly stand the comments, as I drove along in the morning, 

that came on from the NDP and their ads and from their own 

people talking. The first thing they‟re going to do is go to 

Ottawa and get some money. We‟re going to go to Ottawa and 

get some money. That had to be the big thing out there. But I 

wonder who in the world did they think they were kidding. 

Every individual in this room knew that there was no way that 

they could go to Ottawa and get some more money. 

 

Between the media and the NDP, they just done a tremendous 

job of hurting the premier about not being at the Rosetown 

meeting. But when you had the Rosetown meeting going on 

and the rally with the 4,000 people, our premier was dealing 

with the Prime Minister of this country and got $800 million. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Eight hundred million dollars, my friend. 

Now everybody knows that they‟re getting that, too, because 

the forms are out for the five bucks an acre. I don‟t know when 

we‟ll get it, but we‟re going to get it. It‟s coming. Maybe the 

feds in Ottawa have been slow on delivering, but they‟ve 

always delivered when they promised they would-every time. 

 

I‟ve heard the figures and I forget exactly what it was. — 

several hundred thousand dollars for this trek to Ottawa. I don‟t 

know why they didn‟t ask somebody like me to go with them, 

because they might have had some better results. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — But I wouldn‟t have been saying to the 

Prime Minister of this country, come on; we‟ve just gotten 

$800 million, and we want some more. I would have been 

saying, we thank you for the $800 million that Grant Devine 

got. I would have been saying something very, very serious. 

And I would have been serious. The $800 million, get it to us 

as soon as you can. We‟ll let the ink dry on the cheque and then 

we‟ll come for some more. 

 

And then I would have been saying, what about getting this 

NISA (net income stabilization account) out here faster? What 

about getting the stabilization here faster? 

That‟s what they should have been done down there. And why 

didn‟t they, Mr. Speaker, why didn‟t the Minister of 

Agriculture, if he understood agriculture, go and talk to Farm 

Credit down there and see if they would put a moratorium on 

farms out here? Go talk to your Farm Credit people down 

there. Go to the source where the problem is. But he doesn‟t 

understand. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I make the prediction that we‟ll sit here for 

four years, and the member said three and a half years. I 

wonder if I heard somebody else say three years. They must be 

scared already, Mr. Speaker, that they‟re not going to be able to 

hang in there for four years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m also the critic for the Public Service 

Commission. The NDP promised, Mr. Speaker, to do away 

with patronage. They promised but this hasn‟t happened. What 

about this mass firing in Crop Insurance? What‟s going on, Mr. 

Speaker? I just couldn‟t believe what happened. 

 

An Hon. Member: — I could. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Oh yes, they could understand all right, Mr. 

Speaker. They understand because they only fired the Crop 

Insurance that had 44 days in service or less, because they 

didn‟t belong to a union. Once you get 45 days in, you kind of 

got them in your . . . you‟re friends, haven‟t you? There it is 

my friends because everybody that got the letter in my riding is 

44 days or less. You didn‟t dare go to 45 days; you get 

somebody that worked 45 days because they would have been 

one of your union buds. 

 

But I think behind all this that really . . . They‟re smarter than 

what they look like in this House. They know. They know, Mr. 

Speaker, they know that these bins have to be measured in 

Saskatchewan. I think the auditor of Saskatchewan, the 

Provincial Auditor, will see to that they do in time. It will have 

to be done. It must, must happen. They fired 271 auditors is 

what they did. I haven‟t found one farmer in my constituency, 

since you done this, that aren‟t angry that their bins didn‟t get 

measured — not one. And they‟re laughing so that means they 

don‟t understand. 

 

All right, Mr. Speaker, we‟ll just tell you why they‟re laughing 

because they don‟t understand. If I was a farmer I would want a 

professional to come and measure my bins. I would want a 

professional. It‟s almost the same; what you‟ve done is just 

have a letter from Ottawa and said you didn‟t file your return, 

send in what you think you owe us. That‟s just about what they 

did. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was the minister of Crop Insurance for three 

years, and I know exactly what they‟re going to get into. 

They‟re going to be coming along with their audits, over with 

this next year or two, and they‟re going to tell the farmer that‟s 

got his cheque and he‟s spent all his money, and they‟re going 

to say, hey, you owe us . . . There‟s a mistake made; you owe 

us 3 or 4, $5,000 back. And they‟re going to be kind of upset, 

aren‟t they? 

 

When I had auditors when I was the minister, when  



172 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

auditors went and done an audit, when the farmer watched the 

adjuster measure the bins, he had hurt feelings if he owed 

money back. But so help me, Mr. Speaker, how many hurt 

feelings are you going to have if you left that farmer there to 

try to guess what‟s in that pile of wheat in that quonset? If he‟d 

moved the auger about four times and got a hump here and a 

hump there . . . These here non-farmers don‟t know what I‟m 

talking about. A couple of members over here do. I challenge 

any farmer in here that he couldn‟t come within a hundred 

bushels of measuring his own bin — can‟t do it — and then 

give it back to Crop Insurance in metric. Come on, now. 

 

We‟ve got farmers out there that can‟t even climb their own 

bins because we have right now in Saskatchewan . . . We have 

in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, one-third of our farmers are 

over the age of 65. Now lots of them are 75. Just see how they 

can . . . I talked to a farmer the other day that said, I couldn‟t 

believe it when the adjuster found wheat in that bin; I was sure 

it was empty. I was sure it was empty. 

 

But I really think that they‟re smarter than what they‟re letting 

on. They know that they have to do a blood test on these 271 

adjusters. That‟s what she‟s all about. So I‟m going to predict 

here that these adjusters are coming back in one by one by one. 

But I want to make this statement in front of God and man and 

everybody in this room: when I was the minister of Crop 

Insurance, there was only three adjusters that got fired — three 

in all of Crop Insurance and they wouldn‟t keep their mouth 

shut and kept campaigning while they were measuring bins. 

And there‟s the only three that we done. The rest were NDP, 

Liberals, Conservatives — you name it — and if they were 

doing their job we left them there and I challenge anybody to 

find any different. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — But will this government do that, Mr. 

Speaker? No way. 

 

And then they never even thought about . . . They never even 

had any feelings for these 271 people that were depending on 

this money. Some of these people that had Crop Insurance jobs 

out there were desperate, put their names in to try to get a job. 

And here we have a government that said, we‟re going to 

create jobs, and the first month they fire 271. I just can‟t 

believe this. We‟ve got government employees with years of 

experience are openly being intimidated by NDP supporters — 

now listen carefully — their own colleagues, Mr. Speaker. 

What kind of threats are being made? I‟ll tell you. That any 

government employee without an NDP membership will lose 

their job, is the most popular. This is happening right now. 

Midnight phone calls, Mr. Speaker, instructing hard-working 

individuals to pack their desk and ready themselves for 

dismissal is another popular threat. Now that‟s happened, Mr. 

Speaker, and I can prove it. Shocking stories, but they‟re true. 

 

Exactly the same they did to my good old buddy from Pense, 

Jack Nichol. When the NDP was elected in 1971, they walked 

into his office — he worked with the Securities Commission — 

and said, give us your key, 

Jack; you‟ve got 15 minutes to get out. They haven‟t changed. 

They‟re the same as they were in „71; they‟re the same in 1991; 

and they‟re going to be the same. 

 

There‟s a man in Prince Albert right now, just got fired this last 

week. Works for SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation). 

 

An Hon. Member: — What‟s his name? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well I‟d like to give you his name but I‟m 

not going to do that to the man. You‟re going to hear it in the 

press pretty soon anyway. It‟s coming out through Prince 

Albert. You‟ll find out. 

 

He‟s worked over 20 years for government but he just got 

bombed the other day because he took a leave of absence and 

was a campaign manager for a Conservative candidate. Now 

that‟s what you call pretty dirty politics when the man has 

worked and done a good job for 20 years. You‟ll know his 

name fast enough. You‟ll probably wish you never asked me or 

would ever find out. 

 

Ask the members of the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association how they feel about this NDP government and its 

empty promises. Just ask them. Ask them, my friends, ask 

them. In particular ask them how they feel about the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview. Just ask them. That member, Mr. 

Speaker, is proposing — and I‟m also the critic for Labour, so 

I‟ll be involved with him — is proposing that the NDP 

government maintain a union-contractors-only policy on 

provincial construction projects. 

 

Now look at that. One member is clapping. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Who was it? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — It‟s not hard to tell who it was. Mr. 

Speaker, the members across the way have conveniently 

forgotten that one of their election promises was to adopt an 

open tendering process for all government contracts. But they 

have to, Mr. Speaker, they‟ve got to say their thank you‟s to 

their union people. 

 

I sat here for about four Thursdays in a row when we had this 

terrible display out here about Fair Share Saskatchewan. 

There‟s about 15 to 20,000 civil servants in Regina and about 

500 to 6 . . . 700 gathered out there. And my wife and I 

watched three or four Thursdays in a row, and it was the worst, 

despicable display I‟ve ever seen. They had people out there, 

standing up there with placards on: don‟t take my mommy 

away; don‟t take my little child away from me. Well I never 

heard such carryings on in my life because there isn‟t one 

person in the province of Saskatchewan believes such trash as 

that. 
 

I had four people in my riding that were getting moved to 

different towns in Saskatchewan that weren‟t able to go, that 

came to me. They weren‟t able to go over good reasons — 

good reasons. And they came to me and we were able to work 

out a good plan for them, their family to stay right here. I had 

over 20 that phoned me and wrote me and said, I‟m not being 

moved, please give me a chance to take one of these people‟s 

places.  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 173 

If it hadn‟t have been for the NDP and their dirty tactics, and 

the media going right along with them, we wouldn‟t have lost 

this Fair Share because you know that decentralization and Fair 

Share is exactly the same thing. You know it as well as I know 

it. Every one of you know it. There‟s no difference. 

 

In the town of Davidson they were so excited when we 

announced Fair Share out there, by the time they . . . All they 

had to do was read some papers and listen to some propaganda 

from you guys: well I‟m not too sure about this now. But now 

they‟re wondering what‟s happened. Hudson Bay‟s wondering 

what happened. Oh, we thought we could vote NDP and still 

get decentralization. They found out what they‟re getting, an 

. . . (inaudible) . . . who cancelled everything was good for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know where your vote came from. You were elected 

before this election was ever called, and maybe two years prior, 

with every seat that you had tied up in Regina, Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, and North Battleford. You knew 

you didn‟t even need a farmer. And you don‟t need a farmer, 

you think, to get re-elected. But, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve got news for 

them. They‟ve got to have some farmers out there, and if they 

get so angry in the next four years, you‟re going to be gone. 

And I mean gone. 

 

We know, every one of us know in here, that we just barely got 

through the election of 1986. You beat us by half a per cent of 

the popular vote. And if you had have won, you guys would 

have been turfed four years later. Nobody could have survived. 

Nobody‟s surviving in government right from Texas right to 

Prince Albert in the grain belt. You all know that. And you 

won‟t survive over four years unless you keep up to the . . . 

keep all these promises you‟ve made. 

 

And I really hope for the people of . . . for the sake of the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan that you do keep your 

promises, being that we have to have you there again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — The people of Saskatchewan come first. 

They are first. I‟ll stay in opposition for ever if you‟ll take care 

of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead — There‟s no politics comes from the member 

of Arm River. I‟ll tell you, I‟m for people and you know I am. 

And if you doubt me, then you should have followed me 

around for the last . . . 20 years this summer I started 

campaigning. I was the campaign manager for Doug Neil when 

he was elected in Moose Jaw, and I‟ve had a lot of experience 

with people. I love people and I try to help people the best way 

I can. And that‟s why I got re-elected. And if you think it was 

easy getting re-elected with the Liberal member stopping every 

time she went through Davidson . . . and she had a right to do 

that, and she did a good job, and she made me work, I‟ll tell 

you that. 

Yes she stopped at the Husky, she stopped at the airport in 

Davidson, she stopped at Dundurn, she stopped at Allan, she 

stopped at Outlook. I tell you I didn‟t have much problem with 

the NDP member. There was no problem keeping you people 

down. 
 

The only way that I was able to come out of that election, I was 

able to say to a lot of people that were thinking about going 

Liberal, you know that they‟re really, really . . . Mr. Speaker, 

what I said to them, that they haven‟t got a plan at all. Their 

plan is . . . And I hate to say this to a new member in the 

House, but she‟s going to have to get used to hard knocks. 

That‟s the way this place is in here. 
 

But their plan was to split the vote and elect you guys. And I 

know that I had enough of my friends that were getting Liberal 

patronage out of Ottawa that says, the first thing we got to do is 

we got to vote Liberal, defeat these guys, put them in and then 

we come in. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, it kind of backfired because 

the Liberal member sitting here by herself wondering why she 

can‟t get a motion passed in this House. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Why don‟t you help her? 
 

Mr. Muirhead: - Well maybe we will, but I would like to see 

. . . I challenge one of you people. Mr. Speaker, I challenge one 

of the NDP to sign one of her motions for her because then 

we‟ll know where the real tie is. We‟ll know where the real 

friends is. 
 

Just back to this decentralization and Fair Share for a minute, 

Mr. Speaker. We‟ll just go back for a few minutes, just for a 

moment. 
 

We heard all these stories out in front of the legislature 

between the media and the NDP and the unions talking about 

all these people have to move out of these cities and what a 

crime and what terrible butchers we are. But where are the 

NDP now? Are they worried about Crown Life and Farm 

Credit? No sir, you‟re not worried about their little grandpas 

and grandmas that are going to be left without the 

grandchildren down in Ottawa, are you? You don‟t want them 

out here. You don‟t care about them. 
 

Crown Life and Farm Credit. That‟s okay now if they‟re 

coming in, but you didn‟t want them to leave this sacred 

Regina, this sacred Regina. When the Liberals were in power 

way back in the early days in this province, there was 

government agencies all over these little towns in 

Saskatchewan. 
 

It was the Allan Blakeney regime that said let‟s bring this 

government all to Regina and make ourselves a bunch of 

bureaucratic backers, and we‟ll be here for ever. That‟s what 

the plan was. The member from Riversdale knows I‟m right. 

He‟s sitting right there watching. 
 

An Hon. Member: — He‟s only on page 10 of a 40-page 

speech. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Oh gee, I‟ve got a long ways to go here yet. 

I got some words here about Barb Byers and George 

  



174 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Rosenau. I got a few words here about Barb Byers and George 

Rosenau. Mr. Speaker, they‟re the ones that you really had to 

please. You know that they were really . . . I think that there‟s 

three people in this province of Saskatchewan that you could 

pretty near put as your main campaigners out there. It is Barb 

Byers and George Rosenau, and the man the president of Sask 

Wheat Pool. They‟re all in the same pot together, only he‟s a 

better man than the union people. 

 

So I was very, very disappointed, very, very disappointed when 

farmers say to me in my constituency, which seat does Garf 

Stevenson have? Which seat does he have? He‟s the biggest 

spokesman after the election. And he was, Mr. Speaker. He 

was giving your announcements out there. We‟re going to do 

this, and we‟re going to do that. The province hasn‟t got any 

money. The province hasn‟t got any money. The feds have got 

to pay. 

 

Well I‟ll tell you, when we were sitting over there in 

government and Garf Stevenson wouldn‟t stand up and say, 

hey, PC government‟s out of money . . . but boy, he‟s sure on 

your side now. I‟m very disappointed in him, and I mean to say 

it publicly. And I‟m a Wheat Pool member. I was on the board 

of directors of our local . . . on the committee for 13 years, and 

my family still hauls wheat to the Wheat Pool. And I‟ll tell 

you, the people in the town of Davidson or Craik are very 

disappointed, and I think the next election you‟ll find that he‟ll 

be gone. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I was thinking over the weekend, if I 

ever heard of a conflict in this here tribunal, this witch-hunt 

you guys are into — boy, I tell you — he‟s involved in almost 

everything, he‟s going to look into . . . somebody representing 

the Wheat Pool shouldn‟t even be near. I say, Mr. Speaker, to 

the member from Riversdale, he should look this one over very 

carefully. Look it over very carefully about this one individual. 

That‟s quite a conflict. And I‟m serious about it. If you want to 

be really, really, you know, really be fair about this witch-hunt 

you‟re on, and see how much terrible things the Tories did over 

the last nine years, why don‟t you put the media on your . . . as 

a representative? Why don‟t you pick a representative over 

there? Why don‟t you put me on there? And I‟ll sit and watch; 

I‟d like to be on it. I challenge the member from Riversdale to 

put me on there as a member just to be a watch-dog, because I 

want to see if all the truth comes out. 

 

But oh, Mr. Speaker, I don‟t think we want to get into 

witch-hunts too much because the member from Arm River 

knows too much. We might talk about some era back before 

1971. We might talk about how Allan Blakeney come from 

native Nova Scotia in 1950-51 and how he started a law 

practice right here in this city of Regina; and in 1952 belonged 

to the Securities Commission; in „53 become the chairman of 

the Securities Commission; in 1960 become an MLA (Member 

of the Legislative Assembly), and in 1970 he become the leader 

of the NDP Party. In 1971 he become the premier and he also 

become a millionaire-and how did he do it? Because, Mr. 

Speaker, because they all know . . . I don‟t think they want me 

to continue, Mr. Speaker. I don‟t think, Mr. Speaker, they want 

me to continue, but I will. Because I‟d like to get out old 

Hansards and show you the contracts that went to that old, old 

law firm  

$275,000, $300,000. Service Printers — the member from 

Riversdale will leave if I start talking about Service Printers, 

I‟ll tell you. 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I‟ve now warned the member twice. I 

know the member knows better than that. Let‟s not get carried 

away and use practices that are simply unparliamentary in this 

Assembly. I must ask the member to refrain from doing so. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — I‟m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I‟m sorry. I did 

know better than that. 

 

Let‟s, Mr. Speaker, talk about the plebiscites in this last 

election. There was three very important ones. To me this 

abortion vote was very, very important. 

 

I wonder what they‟re going to do about it, Mr. Speaker. I 

wonder if they‟re going to listen to the people of 

Saskatchewan. I wonder if they‟re just sitting there, Mr. 

Speaker, wondering if it‟s going to go away. I wonder if they 

think they can just have Morgentaler come in and build clinics 

and nobody‟s going to say anything about it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite, don‟t try it. 

It isn‟t going to happen. There will never be a Morgentaler 

clinic in the province of Saskatchewan as long as I‟m a 

member of this legislature. It will never happen. And I know 

I‟ve got lots of support on the other side. The member from 

Nipawin, a born-again Christian, he‟ll stand up. The member 

from Moose jaw, a United Church minister, he‟ll stand up and 

be counted. And I know a lot of you will stand up and be 

counted. And you‟ll help me on this here fight to make sure 

that we‟ll be killing no babies with taxpayers‟ money in this 

province. There‟ll be no Morgentaler clinics. Never. 

 

(2015) 

 

The problem is that the fight that we‟ll have. I think 

Morgentaler himself knows that he‟s got an in here. He‟s got 

an in because he said if we can just get rid of the past 

government and get the NDP in, I‟m away. 

 

I just pray to God that it won‟t happen, Mr. Speaker. I just pray 

that God will have enough . . . will be able to speak to enough 

people, enough members, enough people in this province that 

the Morgentaler clinics will go away. 

 

I‟m also the critic for Health, Mr. Speaker. And I want to go 

back on something that happened when we were elected in 

1982. We were able to go throughout this province very 

sincerely yet sadly saying that the NDP put a moratorium on 

nursing homes and hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. Not on the 

funding but on building more. 

 

Their plan was to build nursing homes in the cities, build us the 

high-rises and bring them in. This really bothered me. And I‟m 

so thankful that when we got elected in 1982 that I belonged to 

a government and to colleagues that said, let‟s build nursing 

homes in rural Saskatchewan so that people can keep their 

loved ones in their hometown. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Muirhead: — And I‟m proud to say that I did my best  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 175 

 for my constituents of Arm River. Maybe that‟s why they seen 

that I got back here, because we had a nursing home built. We 

doubled the size in Davidson, doubled the size in Outlook; built 

new and opening an integrated facility in Craik. And we‟re 

opening one in Imperial now. We‟re building one that . . . 

there‟s one coming up in Hanley. We‟ve caught up for eight 

years of NDP government moratoriums. We caught up in Arm 

River. 

 

But I‟m asking them and I‟m asking the Minister of Health that 

she would continue on to finish the one that we started in 

Hanley. The plans are in place. It was written in blood that it 

was going to be, and I ask her not to let the good people of 

Hanley down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some information that hospital boards are 

being culled by NDP MLAs. Now I hope this information is 

right, but I‟m going to give it as it was given to me. NDP 

MLAs are instructing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I‟m just 

giving this information, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature as it 

was given to me. NDP MLAs are instructing hospital boards to 

stop any and all movement toward future planning. Mr. 

Speaker, in the Kinistino riding the hospital board was 

instructed by the NDP MLA sitting on the government side of 

the House to stop his plans for Kinistino‟s integrated facility. 

 

Now I say that, Mr. Speaker, in sincerity. And if the member 

from Kinistino can tell me that that‟s not true and prove it‟s not 

true and have the board tell me it‟s not true, then I will 

apologize in this House and take it back. But this was what‟s 

given to me. 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m getting rid of the pages fairly fast here. I‟m 

turning them over without getting into them because we kind of 

covered them as I cuffed off. We kind of covered a lot of these 

pages. 

 

What they‟re using mostly for excuses, Mr. Speaker, why 

they‟re not going to . . . We heard it from the member from 

Canora today. We can‟t do this. We can‟t do that because we 

haven‟t got any money. 

 

Well they‟ll find money. They found money for the trek to 

Ottawa. They‟ll find money for the things that they want, but 

we must have the member from Rosetown-Elrose stand up in 

this House — and I‟m challenging him again — and say what 

he‟s going to do for farmers and what is going to happen 

because they must know. 

 

I want to leave this with you, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 

Agriculture, that unless you act and act fast, that through the 

boards unless you stop this foreclosing of farmers and the final 

actions, by the end of February it will be too late for several 

hundreds and hundreds of farmers because that‟s about the end 

of taking land away for another year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member from Riversdale brings forth a Bill 

in this House that will keep farmers on the land on this 

province, I will second your motion. Mr. Speaker, I am talking 

. . . I am having a little debate here with . . . But, Mr. Speaker, I 

sincerely say that. I sincerely say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If this government will bring forth Bills — and bring them 

forth very quickly — that will do what the member from, I 

believe it was . . . I forget which one it was back here that said 

that we cannot lose one farmer, that one farmer‟s too many. 

Bring forth the Bill that‟s going to keep farmers on this land, 

and you bet I‟ll support it. And I‟m sure the member from 

Estevan will too. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: — Thank you. That‟s good. Now I can tell 

the credit union, the Royal Bank that the PCs are advocating 

us. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, too many people on the 

opposite side of the House and too many people in the province 

of Saskatchewan are always worried about the lenders and 

what‟s going to happen to the lenders and what‟s going to 

happen to the credit unions. Why don‟t they worry about the 

farmers? 

 

Let‟s go back to 1935 when they had to bring in . . . when 

prime minister Mackenzie King brought in a Bill to absolutely 

save every farm in the three western provinces. But they had a 

good plan at the end, a real good plan - a Farm Debt Review 

Board or a Farm Debt Adjustment Board. That‟s what it was, 

Farm Debt Adjustment Board, 1939. That has to happen 

because if they really understood agriculture — the member 

from Riversdale and the Minister of Agriculture really 

understood it — that you can‟t hurt a bank for taking . . . put in 

foreclosure or whatever it is on land. You can‟t hurt them at all. 

Because the way it is now, if you take the land away, they put 

it up for sale; there‟s no money to buy it and it‟s just leased 

back to the neighbour or back to him anyway. 

 

Now if they had listened to our plan, the lease to own, they‟ll 

all stay there. And if you can‟t get through the boards, I don‟t 

believe that absolutely like they‟ve said, that you can‟t lose one 

farmer, and I‟ll stand up here for all farmers of Saskatchewan 

to say that I don‟t believe that absolutely every farmer should 

have a way to stay on that land. Because there is some farmers 

that just can‟t be farming. But I think we‟ve got rid of most of 

them, the ones that abuse the system. They‟ve got them. 

They‟ve gone. They‟ve gone. 

 

When I was elected, there was 76,000 landowners in this 

province; now there‟s roughly 62,000, and the good farmers are 

left. You can‟t tell me that anybody can stand up here and says 

you‟ve got to save absolutely every farmer because there‟s one 

or two in every community that‟s impossible. It‟s absolutely 

impossible. I‟m sorry to say that, and I think that you‟ll . . . it 

just sounds like motherhood to say we‟ve got to save them all. 

Well I‟d like to be able to say that because I‟m a kind-hearted 

man when it comes to a farmer. I‟ll challenge anybody. There‟s 

been nobody has sat with as many farmers and as many hours 

that I have. 

 

And I want them saved, but boy if they don‟t want to save 

themselves, and they‟re just sitting there waiting . . . I know 

farmers right now in my riding, I‟ve told them that what you‟re 

doing, you‟re not even trying to help yourself. I‟ve got one I 

talked to the other day. You‟re not even trying to help yourself 

and I‟m sorry — this man even voted for me — I‟m sorry I 

can‟t help you because you‟re  



176 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

just sitting waiting for the NDP to put on a moratorium so you 

can ride some more years out. Now that kind of stuff . . . let‟s 

face it, let‟s be responsible people. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Are you saying you‟d support the Bill? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I‟d sure support a Bill, 

but I know that the member from Riversdale isn‟t going to 

support a farmer who isn‟t going to help himself. He will not 

do it. You have to first help yourself. You‟ve got to do like I 

did with my parents in the 1930s and „40s. We‟d get up in the 

morning and went to work and done what we had to do 

ourselves to keep ourselves on that farm. And we didn‟t look 

out and say, Mr. Big Government what are you going to do to 

save me today? We did that job ourselves first. And that‟s what 

we have to do. 

 

Every farmer that I go out and try to talk to and try to help, the 

first thing I try to do is to work through their stress problems 

and talk to them. And say, you‟ve got to pull yourself together 

and work yourself. Do every possible thing to keep yourself on 

this farm, then look towards the people of Canada to help you 

stay there. That‟s my feeling on that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I‟m very pleased to hear tonight, Mr. Speaker, that there‟s 

perhaps a Bill coming forth. Because we heard it very clearly. 

Will you support a Bill? And I said, yes I will if it will save 

farmers. And I‟m sure that we all will on this side of the House, 

if it will save farmers. But don‟t trick us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that the member from Riversdale, we 

know that the Premier of this province . . . we understand each 

other very well. We do. And you know that I am honourable 

enough to keep my word. 

 

An Hon. Member: — And I know there‟s a millionaire around 

here. Boy it isn‟t me. It‟s you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I will say in answer to that — 

I guess he didn‟t ask me the question — but I‟ve always liked 

the 13 years responding to some of his remarks. I guess I could 

say to that, if I was a millionaire, you better go talk to my two 

sons about that because they‟re having an awful battle staying 

on a farm. 

 

They‟re having as big a battle as anybody else‟s sons here. And 

it don‟t take long to lose a few dollars. But I happen to love my 

two children, my two sons, more than any other constituency in 

Arm River. And my pocket book and anything I‟ve got goes to 

them. And I‟ll tell you, it‟s getting pretty light. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP had a campaign out there that was hard 

to beat. As I said before . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — Mr. Speaker, I‟m so glad that they applause 

because I said they had a campaign that was hard to beat, but 

it‟s going to be hard to keep. It‟s going to be hard to keep. 

Because I say, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, try to balance 

budget, lower taxes, create jobs, go to Ottawa, and get money 

and enrich the GRIP 

program and enrich the NISA (net income stabilization 

account) program, and create jobs — you can‟t do it. You can‟t 

do it, but we‟ll sure help you on this side of the House to do it. 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley spoke here tonight, 

and he had nice remarks. But there‟s something I must say 

about him, about his actions on Rafferty dam. I never seen such 

carryings on in my life as the people in this province the way 

they carried on over stopping Rafferty dam. I heard a 

spokesman from the NDP or this government just in the last 

couple of weeks, saying that Rafferty dam is one of the worst 

things that has ever happened to Saskatchewan because what 

it‟s going to do is the water is all going to leave Saskatchewan 

and go down to the States. Well I‟ll tell you, that‟s got to be the 

stupidest statement, Mr. Speaker, I‟ve ever heard because we 

know that that‟s a false statement; that the dam is to hold the 

water back into Saskatchewan and keep from flooding Minot. 

And so, we have people that listen to those kinds of statements. 

They listen to them. 

 

The member from Indian Head-Wolseley, he was talking about 

gophers and deers and whatnot. He seemed to be against that 

the gopher would have to move over about 50 feet and dig 

another hole so the water could flow. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Speaker, while we got the members in such a happy mood, 

maybe we should just talk a little bit about what socialism 

really is. I want to tell the story, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell the 

story the time I cast my first vote, when I voted wrong when 

someone straightened me out about socialism. It was about 

1950. 

 

It was about 1950. Tommy Douglas was just in his swing. And 

I was casting my first vote. And my mother had gone to school 

with Tommy Douglas, and she says, Gerald you‟re going to 

vote today but don‟t vote for Tommy; He‟s a pretty good guy 

but he doesn‟t believe in what we believe in. He believes in 

socialism, which is a creeping paralysis. It‟s a communism. So 

I get on my horse, Mr. Speaker, to go and vote, and on the way 

to town I thought, why should my mother tell me how to vote. 

So I voted for the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — But, Mr. Speaker, the next morning wasn‟t 

such a happy morning for me. The next morning was a 

morning that I have never forgotten, and that‟s 41 years ago. 

And I never will forget and I challenge all the members here 

not to forget this. 

 

I was milking cows and delivering milk around town and I 

went in to the mayor of the town of Craik — Frank Parks his 

name was — and handed him a quart of milk. And he knew my 

parents would be Conservative or Liberal and he said, 

yesterday was another sad day for Saskatchewan; Tommy won 

again. I said, I don‟t think it‟s so bad. I said, I won my vote. 

 

And he said, sit down there, boy. He said, sit down and I‟m 

going to tell you a story and it‟s about Labour England. And 

they needed a Labour government after the war  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 177 

because England was knocked down, battered into the ocean, 

and what they needed was a Labour government, for the rich to 

help the poor and the poor to help the rich and the big 

corporation to help the little corporation and the little one to 

help the big and so on. It‟s going to be great. It‟s exactly what 

England needs. 

 

But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, he drove his hand into my shoulder 

and I have never forgotten. He says, now I promise you in 25 

years that England will be broke because socialism will not 

work without a hard-working free enterpriser to pay the bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: — And none of you forget that because that‟s 

what socialism‟s all about and that‟s what you people all 

believe in. We‟ve just got to share and share alike till the 

province and the country has nothing. 

 

We had 17 years of Trudeau, who couldn‟t have been any more 

socialist than you people are. And we had from 1944 to 1982, 

we had the N DP or the CCF, less the seven years with 

Thatcher, and so help me that‟s what‟s happened to 

Saskatchewan. You can‟t even get people to invest in 

Saskatchewan until the PC‟s are going to be here for ever. 

They won‟t do it because they don‟t trust you people. 

 

Why do you get elected? Why can we elect seats on the west 

side of the province and we can‟t elect them on the east? 

Because the west side is closer to Alberta. They know how to 

vote over there. They know how to invest their money. They 

will invest it. That‟s why we‟ve got the member from 

Kindersley here, Morse, and Maple Creek. That‟s why they‟re 

here. 

 

But you can‟t get them on the east side because it‟s too close to 

what‟s been traditionally NDP Manitoba — it‟s been 

traditionally through the years. And so has Saskatchewan. They 

won‟t invest in the government. The money‟s in the bank 

account in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba. But in Alberta, they 

invest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I predict, I predict that this NDP 

government by March of 1992 will be down to 40 per cent on 

the polls, and by October a year from now down to their 

lowest, 30 to 35. They‟ve never been lower than that because 

there‟s not a government that can stay popular right from Texas 

to Prince Albert, in the grain belt of Saskatchewan. It just isn‟t 

that way. I‟ve talked to custom combiners in my area, and 

there‟s a lot of them that said — you‟ve talked to farmers in 

Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas — oh, if we could just get rid of that 

Republican governor things would be all right. If we could just, 

in the next state, get rid of that Democratic governor, we‟d be 

all right. Then to get to Saskatchewan, if we could just get rid 

of — the name that I can‟t mention here — and Mulroney, we 

would be all right. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, that isn‟t the way it works. No government 

in North America is too popular today because they‟ve got a 

tough job. But so in closing, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely want to 

say to the Premier of this province that I wish him God‟s 

blessing and Godspeed to help the people of province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you 

very much ladies and gentlemen. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to congratulate you upon your election as Speaker. I know 

your personal sense of fairness will bring honour to the 

position. 

 

Mr. Speaker, fellow members of the legislature, I am proud to 

reply to the throne speech on behalf of the people of Biggar. 

And I wish to acknowledge the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway who was born and raised in the Biggar constituency 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — . . . where her parents and family still 

reside and farm. I also wish to recognize the member from 

Moose jaw Wakamow who served as United Church minister 

in the Biggar constituency at the community of Perdue and 

where his spouse is from and his in-laws still reside. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — But the proudest thing that I wish to say 

this evening, Mr. Speaker, is that the nine and a half years of 

drought are over. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, Biggar has now returned to 

the New Democratic Party and to serve the government side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Biggar has a long tradition in the CCF and 

NDP government since 1944. Woodrow S. Lloyd, under the 

Douglas government, represented Biggar from 1944 to 1971 in 

many cabinet positions. First as Education minister, he brought 

Saskatchewan education from the little red schoolhouse to the 

most respected education system in North America. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Then to premier, Mr. Speaker, where he 

guided the most significant health care program in Canada — 

medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — And against personal threats and intense 

political pressure he stood firm to achieve success for the 

Saskatchewan people, and ladies and gentlemen, later for the 

people of Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — From 1971 to 1982, Elwood Cowley most 

ably represented Biggar under the NDP banner. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



178 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Mr. Whitmore: — Under the Allan Blakeney government, 

Elwood played a key role in Saskatchewan people taking an 

active interest in resource management. The benefits of 

resource revenue provide Saskatchewan with the ability to do 

more for its people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — It is a privilege to follow the members with 

distinguished service to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. But as I said earlier, that the nine and a half years of 

drought under Tory government has seen a health care system 

deteriorate; hospitals built but without proper staffing; waiting 

lists that increased to a dangerous level. I say shame; I say 

shame. 

 

The resources: pulp and paper sold off; the Weyerhaeuser 

give-away where northern Saskatchewan‟s given to private 

interest and taken away from proper resource management for 

the Crown; a potash industry sold off at fire sale prices. And 

the last sale that took place, individuals in Saskatchewan, 

ordinary individuals, couldn‟t participate in that sale — in an 

oil industry holiday for nine and a half years that cost this 

province $2 billion. Add that to a deficit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the question of agriculture. I certainly appreciate 

following the member from Arm River this evening. The 

question of the land being taken over by financial institutions, 

that‟s a proud record-a proud record to talk about 1.5 million 

acres that are now owned by financial institutions. I think if 

you check in what‟s going on these days, you will find it 

much-higher than what it is. 

 

GRIP, the kite that they tied to, GRIP. We as a party listened to 

the farmers in terms of what changes are required in terms of 

GRIP. A meeting at Rosetown where 4,000 farmers were asked 

the question by a speaker there: what do you think of GRIP? 

Do you like it or not like it? Four thousand stood up and said 

no, we do not like the way it works. Ten thousand stood up in 

Regina and said the same thing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — We did not act as a public relations agency 

for the federal government when it came to GRIP. Manitoba 

and Alberta had difficulty with the program too. Sounds like 

another deal that was signed on the back of a cigarette paper. 

 

The question of, you know, what‟s been done? The question 

was asked by the member opposite: look what we‟ve done for 

farmers. And he talked about the question of right of first 

refusal, and it was announced during the election. Where were 

they in the past nine and a half years? Why did they wait until 

October to make that announcement? 

 

On October 21, 1991 the people entrusted us to rebuild, to 

rebuild on a philosophy of strength that guided Douglas, Lloyd, 

and Blakeney; a philosophy of common sense, co-operation, 

and community. Her Honour spoke of that in the speech, a new 

beginning based on these three elements. And we don‟t have to 

run outside the province to find such elements. They‟re in our 

communities. They‟re in our history as a people who built the 

province out of adversity. And I want to speak today about two 

communities in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, that actively 

pursue that philosophy, Harris and Perdue. 

 

Harris is a community of 250, suffering from the economic 

malaise of declining population, a weakened farm community, 

and persons travelling farther for service. Harris has a strong 

community spirit, from the local Lions club that works 

extremely hard to provide recreational and cultural services, to 

the local co-op that serves Harris and Perdue, which thrives 

because of a commitment to community-based business 

approach. 

 

That framework is the means that these people use to turn back 

problems. They formed a committee by which they formed 

ideas. They took a common sense approach, Mr. Speaker, to 

promote the town, by attracting people either by advertising 

housing available or small businesses. By placing ads in the 

newspaper six new families have moved in; six new families 

that provide economic activity for local business; six new 

families that provide economic activity for . . . to help the 

school; six families that use recreational facilities; and more 

inquiries are being received. 

 

The town council is also talking about building a facility to 

house a doctor‟s office for one-day visits, and attracting a hair 

salon, possibly a small business. Each provides a service that is 

needed in that community. No, these are not big steps. No, they 

are not megaprojects. They are concise steps to provide a solid 

future. They are steps that are not high cost, but have high 

returns. And these are steps, Mr. Speaker, that are based on 

common sense, co-operation, and community spirit. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — The community of Perdue had a desire to 

build a new town hall to serve as a recreational facility. Once 

they determined it was a go, the community canvassed the local 

community and raised $113,000 out of the community. Then 

construction began, entirely on a volunteer basis. For two years 

during the winters many people gave time and resources for 

construction, from local farmers as electricians, to those who 

prepared meals for crews. And if you ever have the opportunity 

to attend that hall — to anyone in this room — look at the 

floor. That floor is 5,000 square feet of hardwood. Individuals 

literally scoured the province in search of used wood from old 

town halls to vacant farmyards. 

 

(2045) 

 

That was only half the task. Next was the sanding. For one full 

winter individuals worked in their local shops sanding each 

piece by hand. Were these people foolish? No. They saw a task 

through the effort that could provide service but with an 

attitude at keeping an eye on dollars spent. 

 

A bowling alley was placed in the complex, which in four 

years paid for itself, and now it pays the utility bill for the rest. 

A small library was incorporated into the doctor‟s office. And 

the continued fund raising has paid for the facility. 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 179 

Now the question becomes: how does this relate to the 

government of Saskatchewan? It is the sense of community and 

co-operation that elected me, and it is that message the Premier 

carries wherever he goes — be it to Ottawa with farmers. It is 

that element, the new beginning, common sense to spending, 

and fair co-operation. To work with all elements of society is to 

work our way out of this malaise, and most importantly, 

community spirit-a spirit that lives. It is based on hope, but is 

based on a desire to work together, based on a tradition that this 

government stands for. Community spirits will make 

Saskatchewan great. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: — Mr. Speaker, when I speak of 

Saskatchewan‟s spirit of co-operation, I think of the province‟s 

greatest leader, Tommy Douglas. And I want to end my 

remarks today with his words. I believe they‟re as true today as 

they were 30 years ago, and he said: 

 

We cannot individually solve all the world‟s ills, but 

we can create the kind of social climate in which men 

will choose good rather than human destruction. Even 

one can work in human society so that steadily and 

effectively we can build a co-operative 

commonwealth in a nation and all the forces of 

reaction shall not prevail against it. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for recognizing me. 

And first of all, Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to congratulate you on 

your successful election as Speaker of the House. And what a 

race it was. From the blocks to the finish line, your opposition 

was not to be seen. And I think that bodes well because what it 

means is that we have an individual that everyone respects in 

the Chair. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — I‟m sure, Mr. Speaker, that you will give this 

Assembly just the right amount of leeway to keep it interesting 

for the member from Saskatoon Greystone. Because in the 

paper she seems to think that sitting in the Assembly and 

listening to what people have to say is a waste of time and that 

she feels ashamed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟m somewhat surprised at her outlook on that, 

and I‟d like to just quote to you what was reported in the 

Saskatoon paper: 

 

I‟ve never seen such built-in waste of time in my life as 

when one sits in the legislature . . . I mean, I can‟t believe it. 

The entire focus seems to be on wasting time. My husband 

asked me this week after the first or second day, “Well, how 

are you feeling?” I said, “I feel ashamed.” 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member feels ashamed for 

someone who has claimed to be the moral opposition, to sit in 

this Assembly and then to criticize other members from other 

constituencies for speaking about the 

 concerns of their constituency, and for putting forth what they 

expect to see in the next four years. Mr. Speaker, I should like 

to point out that as a member she used her fair share of time to 

do exactly the same thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a moment to thank the people 

of the Turtleford constituency for the confidence that they have 

shown in me, and by electing me to represent them in the 

Legislature. I am honoured again to represent the people of the 

Turtleford constituency as their member and I assure them that 

I intend to represent all the people to the best of my ability. 

 

It has been many months since anyone has stood in this House 

to represent the people of the Turtleford constituency. In fact, 

at the time of the election, the Turtleford constituency had been 

without a representative for almost a year and a half, because 

the previous member for the Turtleford constituency, after 

assessing the political climate in the province of Saskatchewan, 

jumped from the Tory ship for a job in eastern Canada. And I 

say, after he had assessed the political climate, because 

according to an article in the Star-Phoenix, the former MLA for 

Turtleford had won a bottle of Scotch for predicting the 

outcome of the election in Saskatchewan. He knew where it 

was at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Conservative premier had denied a voice to 

the people of the Turtleford constituency for 17 months. The 

constituency was abandoned by the Tory administration as 

were three other constituencies — Kindersley, Indian 

Head-Wolseley, Souris-Cannington — that they‟d also been 

abandoned and that the premier was not calling a single 

by-election although there was four seats in which to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only is the representation in this Assembly 

lost when there is not an MLA, but access is lost for the whole 

structure of government. There is no one to advocate the 

interests of the constituency or the residents. As one constituent 

confided in me, he had never had the opportunity to ask an 

MLA to do anything for him and he thought he probably never 

would. But it had bothered him after a while when he realized 

that there was no possibility for him to ask anyone when there 

was no representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the throne speech, the New Democratic 

government has made a commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan that legislation will be introduced to ensure that 

by-elections are held within six months of a vacancy. Mr. 

Speaker, that I believe, will be good legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — The people of the Turtleford constituency 

want a government that‟s accessible, they want a government 

that‟s accountable, and they want a government that does not 

neglect or abandon them when it seems of interest to the 

government to do so. On October 21 that is the message that 

the people of the Turtleford constituency delivered. And, Mr. 

Speaker, as I‟ve said before, I‟ll be supporting the legislation 

for a reasonable time period for by-elections to be held. 

  



180 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk briefly about the Turtleford 

constituency. It is a large rural constituency, stretching from 

Big River and Mont Nebo on the east side to Brightsand and 

Edam on the west. The Turtleford constituency is populated by 

people of many ethnic origins, the largest group being the Cree. 

 

We have some oil production on the west side. The forest 

industry is clear across the north side, and the area around Big 

River is split between forest industry, trucking, farming, and 

tourism. By and large, agriculture is the backbone of my 

constituency and every community is affected by the farm 

economy. We are on the northern fringe of farmable land. 

Often we feel isolated from the rest of the province and most 

farm programs respond to the prairie conditions rather than the 

park belt. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I intend to ensure that the unique requirements of 

my constituency are considered in future programs. 

 

The Auditor General wrote in his annual report that was 

released on December 3, 1991: we were unable to find a single 

definitive statement of objectives for any of the safety net 

programs. I have spoken with farmers throughout the 

Turtleford constituency, first as a farmer and then as a 

candidate seeking the NDP nomination, and then as the NDP 

candidate for the election, and during this last month as a 

member of the legislature. And, Mr. Speaker, the remarks made 

by the Auditor General came as no surprise to the farmers in 

my constituency. Farmers of Saskatchewan have spent half the 

last decade trying to understand the federal programs. Frankly, 

the federal programs cannot be defended beyond the money 

they deliver which was less than adequate. 

 

The federal programs have done nothing positive for farmers. 

The programs did not provide a direction to the agricultural 

community because there were no definitive objectives built 

into them. The programs failed to address any environmental 

concerns, and the programs not only divided the urban and 

rural community but they also divided the rural community as 

well. 

 

The agricultural community is being destroyed by an 

ever-increasing pressure, Mr. Speaker, brought about by the 

federal Conservatives, and, until the election, with the blessing 

of the Tory Government of Saskatchewan. They believed in, 

and insisted on having, low prices for produce produced by 

farmers. Basically, it was a cheap farm gate policy for 

agricultural products and their green paper indicated that all 

through it. 

 

And I‟d like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that between 1970 and 

1986 the price of consumer goods tripled, but during that same 

period the price the farmer received for his product only 

doubled. And the 1970 price for farm produce was a low year. 

The result, Mr. Speaker, is that farmers were placed into a very 

severe cost-price squeeze. 

 

And I‟d like to take some more figures in that particular 

direction. In 1949 the farmers received 60 cents out every 

dollar the consumer spent on food. By 1968 the farmer was 

only receiving 30 cents out of every dollar the consumer was 

spending on food. While the farmers‟ 

share of the consumer dollar had dropped, the food processing 

giants had experienced a dramatic increase in profits. And an 

indication of that, Mr. Speaker, is that the farmers‟ average 

annual rate of return on equity for the period 1981-1987 was a 

negative seven and a half per cent, but the food manufacturers‟ 

rate of return on equity for that period was 14 per cent and the 

corporate food retailers‟ rate was 17 per cent. 

 

If the large corporate structures are allowed to take over 

complete control of the food industry from production right 

through processing and to retailing, the consumer, I say, will 

see a dramatic increase in the cost of their food as the corporate 

sector functions on a bottom line. 

 

Agriculture as we know it today is not only critically important 

to the economy of the Turtleford constituency, but I say to the 

economy of all of Saskatchewan. 

 

The present international low grain prices were generated by 

government intervention, and I believe therefore that a solution 

should be programs that deal with the price of farm products. 

The farmer must be adequately paid for their production of 

food, and I say not more loan programs that only increase the 

farm debt and not programs that stabilize the price below the 

cost of production. And until such time as farmers are paid a 

price that covers their cost of production plus something to live 

on, and until such time as there is a predicted stability in the 

price, we will continue to have a crisis in the farm community 

and a problem in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I would like to make some comments, Mr. Speaker, if I may, in 

regards to a large group, as I indicated, in my constituency. 

I‟ve had the privilege of meeting with many of the Indian and 

Metis people in the Turtleford constituency, of listening to their 

concerns and talking to them. And I‟m committed to working 

with these people to resolve the problems that they face today 

in building for a better future. I believe that we must respect the 

spirit and the intent of the treaties and respect the desire of the 

Indian people to control their own destiny. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, a poet, F.R. Scott, wrote these 

words and I think they indicate very well why we must move 

towards respecting the desire of the Indian people. And it goes 

this way: 

Till power is brought to pooling, 

And outcasts share in ruling 

There will not be an ending 

Nor any peace for spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that quote sums up the need to address the 

issues of importance to the Indian and Metis people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — As you know, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan enjoyed a dental care plan that was 



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 181 

second to none when it was initiated by the NDP government 

in 1974 until it met an untimely and uncalled for death at the 

hands of the previous administration in 1987. The 

Saskatchewan dental plan was a school-based program and 

provided for free access to dental care for all children between 

the ages of 5 and 17. This care was provided by qualified 

dental technicians working from well-equipped dental clinics 

located in the schools across the province. 

 

The Saskatchewan dental plan was a model which attracted 

international attention and envy because of its design, its 

delivery, and the quality of care. Indeed, an independent 

evaluation of the Saskatchewan dental plan conducted by three 

highly qualified and respected experts in 1977 gave the plan 

top marks, finding that the quality of work being performed by 

the Saskatchewan dental nurses was equal to or better than that 

being provided by dentists elsewhere. 

 

In short, Mr. Speaker, this plan provided top quality service 

that was readily available and accessible to residents across the 

province. It did so very cost efficiently, as well. Further, 

because its focus was on preventive dentistry, the plan would 

have resulted in significant, ongoing saving to the people of 

Saskatchewan over a time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Saskatchewan dental plan, as 

initiated by the NDP government and before it was destroyed 

by the Conservatives, was a unique and cost-efficient, 

non-traditional way of delivering quality dental health care 

uniformly throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

future health care will have to be provided in a similar manner 

through initiatives for Saskatchewan residents, delivered in an 

innovative manner in the same way as this program of dental 

care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I spoke about the dental care program I 

spoke about agriculture, and how I assessed the situation. The 

past decade of low prices and ad hoc programs cannot 

continue, or rural communities as we know them will totally be 

destroyed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I spoke about the problems faced by the Indian 

and Metis community. These issues must be addressed in the 

spirit of co-operation, and solved. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken about the Tory indifference to the 

democratic process and their lack of sensibility towards the 

common man. Mr. Speaker, I believe that a New Democratic 

government will address these issues in the traditional 

Saskatchewan way, working with the people, for the people, 

towards a better future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Johnson: — Mr. Speaker, it is for those reasons that I will 

be supporting the government, and I will be supporting the 

motion moved by the member from Qu‟Appelle and Lumsden, 

and seconded by the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Anguish: - Mr. Speaker, I‟d like to acknowledge the 

election of you to the Chair. I look very much forward to the 

first time we have an opportunity for a contest in this, the 

twenty-second legislature of the province of Saskatchewan, a 

contest of which I‟m sure to lose, but nevertheless look forward 

to it in any event, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I would also like to congratulate the returning members to this 

Legislative Assembly, those people who have been colleagues 

over the past five years. And I would like to welcome all the 

new members. It will a great experience working in the 

Legislative Assembly. No matter how many books you‟ve read 

or how many times you‟ve watched from the galleries or no 

matter how much you‟ve talked about being a member of the 

Legislative Assembly, you never quite receive the full impact 

of that kind of an existence until you‟re actually in that role. So 

I welcome you here to the Legislative Assembly; it will be a 

great experience for you. 

 

I would like also, Mr. Speaker, to thank those members who 

were defeated in the last general election, those members who 

were very dedicated and worked hard regardless of their 

political stripe. I say that the main motive for any member who 

served in this Assembly is to forward democracy and to 

forward good programs and all the good things for the people 

in the province of Saskatchewan. I especially will miss my 

colleague, Peter Prebble, who I think worked as hard as 

member of the Legislative Assembly that I‟ve ever known, and 

certainly good work and hard work and dedication does not 

reflect whether or not you get returned to this Assembly, and 

I‟ll miss Peter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I‟d also like to acknowledge the pages and 

welcome them to this Assembly. It‟ll be a great experience for 

pages as well as new members, and I hope that you share in 

some of the frustrations and some of the glories of this great 

institution that we all serve in and have a great deal of respect 

for. 

 

I would like to also commend the legislative staff for the good 

work that they have done, and I anticipate you will do in the 

coming months and coming years to serve this Assembly so 

greatly. 

 

I also want to . . . before I go on to the main body of my 

speech, Mr. Speaker, is to pay special tribute to what I refer to 

as the group of seven, who came back here after the massive 

defeat of the last NDP government. There were seven 

members. I think two of whom are in this Assembly tonight, 

and I want to pay tribute to you for the very good job you did 

in helping return New Democrats to government in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Anguish: — I remember watching during that period of 

time from the gallery and as I recall it the seven members from 

the New Democrats that were elected sat in the middle of that 

side of the House and Conservatives completely surrounded 

them within the Legislative Assembly. And sometimes the 

shouting and the yelling was so loud, Mr. Speaker, that our 

members — those  



182 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

seven members who were there — could hardly hear their own 

words as they spoke before this Assembly. And I‟m very happy 

to see that they‟ve grown and matured in terms of their respect 

for this institution and the value that all of us have to put on the 

public record as representing our constituents and the desires 

and wishes of ourselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: - And in passing out thanks, last but certainly 

not least I want to thank the residents of The Battlefords 

constituency for showing confidence in me. And I would like 

to thank the literally hundreds of people who worked to help 

return myself here as a member of this Legislative Assembly, 

and I want to commend them and thank them for the work that 

they‟ve done. And I look forward to serving them with 

distinction and honour in a government that‟s going to change 

the direction of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I paid particular notice to some of the 

speeches that have happened in this Assembly so far. I‟m 

certainly proud of our new members and the quality of the 

speeches that they have put forward, as the first time you speak 

in the Legislative Assembly it‟s always a very intimidating and 

a very nervous experience for at least most people. And if some 

members who have spoken here for the first time did not feel 

nervous and tense about giving their presentation in this 

Assembly, I think you should step forward and offer training 

programs for all of the new members that may come into this 

Assembly in the future. 

 

Some of the Conservative speeches I found quite interesting. 

You‟d think that they were still in government. I paid particular 

notice to the member from Souris-Cannington, and you‟d really 

think that they‟d won the election the way he spoke in his 

maiden speech before this Assembly. What he doesn‟t realize, 

I‟m sure, is that if there‟d been a shift in the last provincial 

election of 3,164 votes, there wouldn‟t have been one single 

Conservative member re-elected in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Not one single member. It would have 

worked that there would have been . . . With that shift in vote 

there would have been two people to make an official party in 

this Legislative Assembly, and there would have been 64 

members of the New Democratic Party in this Assembly. And I 

know that our workers in each and every constituency 

throughout the province were striving for that, for the very hard 

work they did in the past election campaign. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I noticed the member from Estevan speaking 

today. My goodness, the scary thing about that speech is I think 

he actually believes what he was saying. Actually, the best 

speech that‟s come from the Conservative side so far has been 

the member from Arm 

River this evening. I thought he gave a very good presentation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I think much of what he said was inaccurate, 

but nevertheless the best presentation from the opposition in 

this Assembly so far. 

 

I think that the Conservative members should look at why they 

were defeated so soundly at the hands of the Saskatchewan 

voters in the last election. One was broken promises, and I 

think that was likely number one. There isn‟t a single campaign 

promise that they made, like wiping out the provincial sales 

tax, like decreasing income tax in the province — all those 

promises were broken. The free telephone that was promised to 

my grandmother in 1982 — she passed away and still didn‟t 

get her free telephone. Can you imagine that? A legacy of 

broken promises by the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, 

that‟s the number one reason why you were defeated in this 

Assembly. 

 

I think the other thing is that you had some wrong priorities: 

$369 million you have at risk to Cargill, you put at risk to 

Cargill while our farmers are going broke in the province of 

Saskatchewan; $236 million to Weyerhaeuser while rural 

communities are dying in the province of Saskatchewan; $5.5 

million to Gigatext while children go hungry in the province. 

Saskatchewan has either the highest or second-highest rate of 

poverty in all of Canada, and that lies squarely on the shoulders 

of the member from Estevan and the government that he led 

destruction through the province of Saskatchewan. Twenty 

million dollars to Promavia to fly high, while De Havilland, a 

long-established company, is going broke in eastern Canada. 

Wrong priorities, members from the Conservative Party. 

 

You talk about the NDP not having a program. I want to tell 

you that the first plank in the NDP program over this term of 

government is the commitment from every single member on 

this side of the House to make sure there‟s never again a 

Conservative government in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I want to now turn to the speech and the time 

of the member from Saskatoon Greystone. I look at the article 

that‟s already been mentioned once this evening. And I quote, 

Mr. Speaker: Haverstock says time wasted. A special from the 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. 

 

What is the purpose of this institution, Mr. Speaker? Why are 

we here? Number one, we are here to preserve democracy, the 

main function of this institution. Number two, to pass, and 

amend, and delete laws. We‟re lawmakers for the province of 

Saskatchewan. We make law. That‟s how Bills come in, that‟s 

how statutes come about, and it becomes the law of the 

province of Saskatchewan. What‟s the third thing we do? We 

approve the expenditure of public funds. 

 

I ask the member from Saskatoon Greystone, which one of 

those are a waste of time? Is it democracy that‟s a waste 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 183 

of time? Is it passing and amending laws that are a waste of 

time? Is it approving the expenditures of the public purse that‟s 

a waste of time? I ask the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

what it is that wastes the time. 

 

She holds herself up, Mr. Speaker, not to be a politician — not 

to be a politician as her candidates did around the province. But 

she participates in the political process. She thinks politician is 

a bad name. One of our jobs as New Democrats — and I plead 

with all our members to follow this course — is to restore the 

integrity in politician so it‟s not a bad word, so it doesn‟t have 

negative feelings about it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Seven years of Brian Mulroney in Ottawa 

and almost 10 years of Grant . . . the member from — sorry, 

Mr. Speaker — the member from Estevan. In their 

governments they have done more to destroy the integrity of 

this institution and the respect for politicians of anything else 

that has happened in the history of the British parliamentary 

system. 

 

And we have the member from Saskatoon Greystone that 

comes here to participate in this institution and she perpetuates 

that myth, rather than trying to set the example that we are 

people who want to do a good job for our constituents and for 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Anguish: — I would say that the member . . . Oh do I hear 

heckling from this member in the House? Do I hear heckling? 

Are we all politicians now, Mr. Speaker? I think so, I think so. 

 

I would want to congratulate the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone for setting a record already. And I don‟t know 

whether you are even aware of having set a record by taking 

your seat in this Assembly. But you have set a record because 

your family member, hon. member, is the only family in the 

history of the province of Saskatchewan to represent three 

different political parties in this institution with two different 

people. 

 

Your brother sat in this Assembly, hon. member. He came here 

as a Conservative. He represented the constituency of Swift 

Current. And then he followed his leader at that time, Mr. Dick 

Collver, to form another party called the Unionest Party in the 

province of Saskatchewan. And do you know what? The 

Unionest Party didn‟t have official party status in the 

legislature, just like the member from Saskatoon Greystone. 

And they wanted to have official party status. 

 

And I want to deal with this whole thing about the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone who says in this article she wants 

extra money. What she‟s doing is she‟s saying she represents 

23 per cent of the people in the province of Saskatchewan, so 

she wants something extra for that. She wants some kind of 

special status for that. Well what she‟s advocating is 

proportional 

representation. And I‟ll talk about proportional representation 

and we‟ll see whether the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

agrees with the system of proportional representation. 

 

But I want to go back through history a little bit, about Dennis 

Ham and Dick Collver. The Legislative Assembly recognized 

them as independent members up until April 25 of 1980. From 

April 25 to June 17 of 1980 they were recognized as members 

of a third party, and then finally on June 18 of 1980 they were 

recognized as members of a caucus. Now how did that come 

about? 

 

Dick Collver at that time launched a massive filibuster in this 

House — a political technique that some members sometimes 

use to get a point across. And Mr. Collver at that time, in terms 

of calendar days, Mr. Speaker, filibustered for 11 days in this 

legislature; 11 days Dick Collver filibustered in this legislature, 

and finally the government that wanted to work in harmony 

and co-operation, and putting forth caring and sharing for what 

people represented, relented and allowed this member and the 

friend that joined him — the member from Swift Current at 

that time — and they finally did attain being recognized as a 

caucus in this Assembly. 

 

But it was done with hard work — not throwing up your hands 

and saying, we represent such and such a percentage of the 

population of Saskatchewan, so you owe it to us to give us 

more money. No, they didn‟t say that. They presented their 

case, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly. Waste of time I would 

think, 11 days doing that, but they made a point and they 

changed history. They changed history. 

 

Well let‟s look at places that have proportional representation. 

Italy has proportional representation. How many elections do 

you think Italy has had since the Second World War, since 

1945? Well as of June 11 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What 

was that, 23? You‟re wrong. As of June 11, 1991, and I read 

from this press release: Promoters billed it as the first step in 

changing a political system that has come under widespread 

criticism in recent years because of parliamentary log-jams, 

consistent infighting, and revolving-door governments. Italy is 

currently in its 50th post-war government. 

 

Fifty governments since 1945. Is this the proportional 

representation that the member from Saskatoon Greystone is 

advocating? Because in proportional representation anyone 

who has a cause can strike up a political party. 

 

In Italy there are about 30 political parties that seek office. 

Eleven of them get enough support to form seats in that 

country‟s Assembly — 11 different parties. This Assembly has 

a hard time sometimes dealing with two political parties. I saw 

back in the past in the „70s where there were three political 

parties. Can you imagine this institution having 11 different 

political parties to deal with? I think not. One person can make 

a difference but one person cannot change the system. That‟s 

why we have a party system in the British parliamentary 

system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



184 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Mr. Anguish: — If you‟re going to carry the flag and win the 

war by yourself, you should all run as independents. Don‟t run 

as a Liberal. Don‟t run as a New Democrat. Don‟t run as a 

Conservative. Run as independents and you will throw the 

entire system into chaos, and it will be even worse than the 

criticism that the member from Saskatoon Greystone lays on it 

now. 

 

And there are strange things that happen in the proportional 

representation system as well. Another place where they have 

proportional representation in the world is Australia. 

 

They have in Australia something called the Australian Capital 

Territory — the ACT. And I was talking to a friend of mine 

who‟d been in Canberra a while ago, and a few years ago, 

under the Hon. Bob Hawke‟s government. Bob Hawke wanted 

to have a referendum on self-government for this Australian 

Capital Territory. 

 

Now the Australian Capital Territory is run completely by 

bureaucrats. Politicians have very little to do with it. The 

Australian Capital Territory is sort of a state within a state. But 

Robert Hawke, a good labour prime minister of that country, 

wanted to have a referendum on self-government so that people 

could have democratic representation in the Australian Capital 

Territory. 

 

Do you know what happened when the referendum came? 

Seventy-five per cent of the people who voted on the 

referendum voted against self-government. They didn‟t want 

politicians representing them, what they wanted was they 

wanted the bureaucrats running the Australian Capital 

Territory. So what does Hawke do? He says, well we‟re going 

to have elections in the Australian Capital Territory anyway. 

And so he went ahead and he said, we‟re calling an election 

here. Well, within days 13 political parties had sprung up — 13 

different political parties — and there were 17 different ridings 

or wards or whatever you want to call them, constituencies, 

within the Australian Capital Territory. 

 

There were all kinds of parties. Some of them were called the 

party against self-government, the no self-government party, 

the no party party, and there was even one called the party 

party party party. 

 

Well alas, a government was formed after the election, and one 

party couldn‟t form the government. And so they had to search 

out another party to join with them to form a government. 

Well, lo and behold, there weren‟t enough members in two 

parties to form a majority government so they had to get a third 

party in to get a majority government that could function in the 

Australian Capital Territory. So the final third party happened 

to be one of the abolitionist parties that were against 

self-government — actually were there to form the government 

— and they put a caveat on their participation that they had to 

have at least one cabinet post. So how quickly people 

sometimes change when they get into a situation where they 

don‟t want to participate, but if I get what I want I will 

participate. 

 

And I‟m not very complimentary to the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone for the way she conducts herself in the 

political forum in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Notice there wasn‟t much applause for that member. I may not 

have the total support of my colleagues, but I wanted to pass on 

my comments on the way I feel that you conduct yourself 

above and beyond this institution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — So, in conclusion of that part of my address 

here this evening, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that I for 

one do not support extra funding and special status for any 

independent member that comes into this Assembly. We‟re all 

equals. Maybe some are more equal when they happen to form 

the government, but we are basically equals in the eyes of this 

institution. And that‟s why Mr. Speaker is there, to make sure 

that we‟re all equal in the eyes of this institution and no one has 

special status over another member. That‟s the basis of our 

system. 

 

I want to now turn in the few minutes that I have left . . . I‟ve 

likely passed several good places to stop — some would agree 

with that more than others — but I want to talk about the vision 

for the future that I, and I believe all of my colleagues have, 

Mr. Speaker, and I believe that we must change the system. 

 

I think that if the system was ever more evidently flawed, it‟s 

been during this past decade that the Conservative Party has 

been in office in the province of Saskatchewan. All the 

devastating things that they have been able to do and inflict 

upon the people, the farmers, the workers, the small-business 

people, the institutions of this province, it certainly has pointed 

out that we have a flawed system. And I for one don‟t believe 

that New Democrats, or any other party, can come into 

government and be better administrators and make a flawed 

system that was a harmful system a good system again. 

 

So I think that the first thing you‟ll find New Democrats doing 

is looking at ways to alter the system so there‟s more 

participatory democracy in the way we conduct, and in the way 

that we govern, ourselves. I think that we have to look at the 

future in terms of finding industries that are currently here, 

making sure they develop sustainability. 

 

The big criticism that I‟ve always had in terms of agriculture 

and the Tory Party in the province of Saskatchewan is that they 

don‟t want to develop sustainability in agriculture. They want 

to keep feeding out more cash at election time, more cash from 

Ottawa, more cash from Saskatchewan, more cash from 

somewhere, but they never pay attention to developing 

sustainability in the most important industry we have. And if 

they‟ve done anything, they‟ve tried to turn farmers into people 

who have to farm government programs and not farm the land. 

And I don‟t know of one farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan that wants to farm government programs; they 

want to farm the land and make sure their crops grow and they 

feed the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — In new industry, Mr. Speaker, I believe that 

we have to look at sustainable development. If we 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 185 

have industry coming to Saskatchewan, if it cannot sustain 

itself, if it can‟t be friendly to the environment, we shouldn‟t 

have it. It shouldn‟t exist in our province. 

 

What else is our view of the future? We want fairness in the 

taxation system, Mr. Speaker. We will not allow another 

decade of darkness to fall on Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. 

Speaker. We will not allow small business to be looked at as 

the cash cow because they‟re struggling too, Mr. Speaker. And 

we will not in Saskatchewan allow the budget to be balanced 

on the backs of working people in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: — Taxation and the revenue to run this 

province, before we even get there, will be done by sound 

administration and changes, structural changes, Mr. Speaker, to 

make the system serve the people of this province better. New 

industries will pay the tax bill if more taxes are required. 

Resources will help pay the tax bill, Mr. Speaker, but we have 

to look at tax fairness in Saskatchewan. 

 

Every time an NDP government or CCF government has been 

elected in the history of Saskatchewan or anywhere else in 

Canada, all the resource companies say they‟re leaving. And 

the Tories and the Liberals always help perpetuate that line, 

Mr. Speaker. But they never leave. And we know we have to 

work with resource companies. We‟re not going to drive them 

out of the province of Saskatchewan because they will develop 

the resources if the resources are here. And they know we‟ve 

been fair in the past and they know we‟ll be fair in the future. 

 

So taxation has to be overhauled, Mr. Speaker. We don‟t want 

any more flat taxes; we don‟t want any more surprises of 

harmonization of the PST in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Tax 

fairness has to be a primary pillar of this government if we‟re 

going to be successful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, something else we have to look at in this province 

is the creation of wealth, not just the distribution of it. New 

Democrats and CCF have always been good at the distribution 

of wealth in the province of Saskatchewan, but we now not 

only have to be good at the distribution of wealth, we have to 

look at the creation of wealth. Because over the past nine and a 

half years the member from Estevan and his government have 

virtually bankrupted the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2130) 

 

We are very limited in the resources we have left to do new and 

innovative programs in Saskatchewan. But we will. We will 

find innovative ways to do that. There are people who want to 

move to Saskatchewan, if they have hope for the future. There 

are companies that want to work here because they know that 

opportunities will be developed in Saskatchewan. And we must 

welcome those people into Saskatchewan with the view of 

creating wealth within our own province. 

 

Saskatchewan could likely utilize twice the population that we 

have in the province of Saskatchewan. Just by the sheer 

existence of people, it creates wealth, Mr. Speaker. 

We can‟t continue to have our brain-drain of our youngest and 

our brightest leaving the province of Saskatchewan. We 

welcome those people back to help create the wealth that‟s 

necessary for us to do the job we want to do in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll close off by just a small quote and attribute it 

to the former government. One of the drafters of the American 

constitution said that, periodically the tree of liberty must be 

bathed in the blood of patriots. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we don‟t do that in Canada and we‟ve 

never done it in Saskatchewan, with the possible exception of 

the Riel rebellion — my friend who sits just behind me would 

be a greater expert on that than I am — but that‟s not the way 

we participate in Saskatchewan. We now participate in 

Saskatchewan with one of the most politically aware processes 

of this type of system anywhere in North America and possibly 

the world. 

 

Over 80 per cent of the people in the province of Saskatchewan 

turned out at the last election to cast their ballot. Look across 

the border in Alberta. Less than 50 per cent of the people in 

Alberta that were eligible to vote. voted in the last election. 

Look to the land of the free and‟ the home of the brave down 

south. They never get over 50 per cent of the people out to an 

election. So I call on all members of this Assembly to work 

together with the most politically astute people of anywhere in 

North America and possibly the world, because we are going to 

make a difference in Saskatchewan collectively, as a people in 

a sense of community, and not by the single-issue cause of any 

particular member. Thank you for your time, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I‟ll start out by congratulating 

you on your election. I would also like to welcome the pages as 

well as the legislative staff. I would also like to at this time 

thank my own administrative staff in La Ronge who are 

working for me on a daily basis and on behalf of the people of 

Cumberland constituency — Cec Allan and Doreen Senga. 

 

I would also at this time like to say a special thank you to a 

former colleague of mine, the member from Saskatoon, Peter 

Prebble. I would like to say that as a member sitting with him 

in four years, that I learned to respect the person in regards to 

how he presented himself here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — When a lot of people talk about politics — and 

sometimes the negative feelings come out, and there are some 

people worried about truth and honesty, and people worried 

about integrity — I might say that as a person, that I‟ve known, 

although, Mr. Speaker, we may have had disagreements on this 

and that issue, there was one thing that I knew about this 

person, that whenever he presented himself on whatever issue, 

he did it with integrity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



186 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to reflect on my, I 

suppose, my thank you to the people of Cumberland 

constituency. It is my second time here in the legislature, and 

the people of Cumberland constituency have given me a great 

deal of support over the past four years and also during the 

election. 

 

Many people would have thought that people in Cumberland, 

which supported the New Democratic Party by 61 per cent, 

would edge a little bit in regards to the devastating policies of 

the Conservatives in the past nine years. But when I looked at 

the electoral record, they voted for the new government to a 

high level of support, to the tune of 81 per cent. When I looked 

at this, Mr. Speaker, I recognized that this was not simply 

support for myself as an individual. What I was looking at, Mr. 

Speaker, was really the support for a system, the support for a 

system that allows them to stand up for their own rights. It is a 

system, Mr. Speaker, that we have come — and a lot of people 

have come — to admire right throughout the world. 

 

It is our system of democracy that, when we run into a problem 

with governments and the governments are not listening, when 

governments are not paying attention to those things that we 

talk about in our daily lives, that we can stand up and say — 

whether we have people in three-piece suits or people in 

run-down clothes — that their vote counts the same as 

everybody else, and that they have the right to stand up and say 

yes, we have a right to be heard in this system. 

 

And that is precisely what we saw in this election. It was a 

humbling experience, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the fact and 

the knowledge that people indeed will stand up and say yes, I 

want to be counted, I want to be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like — as I usually do in the legislature 

— to shift off, with due respect to all the languages of the 

province of Saskatchewan and the world, to shift off into my 

own language which is Cree, and summarize those things that I 

will be talking about. So in the next few minutes I will be 

talking about those important issues that have been mentioned 

in the throne speech and also that could not be dealt with, in 

some cases that have not been dealt with by the previous 

government in its relationship to the fiscal crisis. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I will then shift off into Cree. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I‟ll be going back into English in regards to my 

quick summary, as I‟ve done in my own language, which is 

Cree. Then I‟ll reflect back on the details that I‟ve just 

mentioned, in the English language. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it‟s extremely important to go back to the 

original point that I made. I think people are standing up for 

themselves, not only in northern Saskatchewan but the world 

over. In regards to the whole issue of democracy, people 

sometimes see it in straightforward dollar terms, in 

straightforward social terms, or cultural terms. But really the 

essential question internationally is a question of the 

involvement of people. 

 

When we look at involvement and the real consultation 

of people, democracy starts working and it starts working 

better. When we look at the issue as it reflects back on the 

government in the past nine years, I must say, Mr. Speaker, that 

we saw very little of it, or only minute quantities as we 

reflected back on the history of northern Saskatchewan. 

 

(2145) 

 

When we looked at northern Saskatchewan for example on this 

throne speech, we are trying to work forward to the future, but 

the fiscal crisis of government — which is reflected in the 

throne speech, and how it then is reflected back on the 

Conservative policies — is the real, biting aspect that‟s very 

problematic for us in the future. 

 

I heard the member from Arm River mention in his speech this 

evening the issue of the Fair Share program. Well I might add 

this much, as far as northern Saskatchewan they might as well 

have called that program fair scarce because we scarcely heard 

anything about it in northern Saskatchewan. There was 

absolutely nothing on Fair Share program in regards to 

northern Saskatchewan. Everybody knew that it was a political 

strategy for some of the key ministers to try and hold on to 

their seats, but they in return got right knocked off. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — And the other thing I‟d mention is that, in 

regards to the North on that Fair Share program, we did lose a 

lot of jobs during those nine years. We lost a few hundred jobs 

in many areas, in the public sector and also in the private sector 

with their own policies, basically because a lot of things went 

downhill in northern Saskatchewan with the Tories coming in. 

 

But that was the same also in the agricultural sector. I knew 

that there was approximately just over 1,000 jobs lost in the 

rural areas. Many of these jobs were recentralized back to 

Regina. The only time that they talked about decentralization 

was the very last year of office. The last few months they 

started talking about decentralization and Fair Share. 

 

And that is the historical record of this government. It‟s the 

same thing in regard to northern Saskatchewan, which I will 

touch upon a little bit later on. 

 

When I lived at northern Saskatchewan, therefore, back in „82, 

we lost a lot of jobs. But the particular strategy of the 

government at that time was a colonial strategy. A colonial 

strategy in many ways because the government opposite talked 

about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan of the day. 

But that Department of Northern Saskatchewan, with its 

problems, was many times better than what the Tory 

government did in nine years in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

So when I look at that fact, Mr. Speaker, I started looking at the 

issue when I started running for the election back in 1985. 

When I was there in 1985, what the Tories did when they did 

away with a full-scale and full-fledged department that could 

stand beside all of their departments in Saskatchewan, they had 

an advisory council. All they 

  



December 9, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 187 

had was an advisory council. All they needed was an advisory 

committee in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the people mentioned that maybe what the government 

should have . . . well one of the leaders of the North said, these 

people don‟t need a sounding board, what they really need is a 

hearing-aid because they‟re not listening to the people of 

northern Saskatchewan, and that‟s what one of the leaders said 

during that time when they created the Northern Advisory 

Council. 

 

An Hon. Member: — So what are you going to do now, 

Keith? 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The member says, what are we going to do? 

We‟re going to do many more things that will be many more 

times better than what the member over there had done and 

accomplished. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Well the member opposite says, what‟s your 

plan? Well the plan of the people was to knock off the Tories, 

number one. That was the number one plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — And that same plan was to get rid of the 

terrible policies, and more particularly in northern 

Saskatchewan, but as it related to the farm areas and all over 

the urban areas and all other places in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So that‟s the plan. So now I‟ll get back to your plan that you 

asked for the North. It was a devastating plan; it was a colonial 

plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Because this colonial plan was really only 

going at this Northern Advisory Council level. A lot of people 

have said, hey, this is an election strategy by the Tories. They 

said, this Northern Advisory Council will be knocked off after 

the Tories. They‟ll pretend to listen before the ‟86 election. 

And that‟s precisely what they did — „86 come around, the 

Northern Development Advisory Council came up with a series 

of recommendations in fishing, in trapping, in many areas. 

 

But did the Tories listen? Absolutely not. They never, ever 

listened. Because two years later, after they got a new minister 

from . . . I remember at that time Maple Creek, became the 

minister in charge of the North. Well, she came over here and 

the first thing that she did was-she . . . (inaudible) . . . us. Now I 

don‟t know whether or not she was really ashamed of this thing 

— the Northern Development Advisory Council — but she did 

away with it. The amazing thing was that there was absolutely 

no consultation with people of northern Saskatchewan in 

regards to the putting together of this Advisory Council and 

there was no consultation to get rid of it. 
 

It reminded me of a story on the first time in regards to the 

Conservatives when I first got into the House in „86. And I 

think the new members will have to hear this story because it 

was absolutely outrageous. 

Well, when I got into the House, I saw this brand new 

highways map, which is shown of course to everyone who 

visits the province of Saskatchewan. And this highways map 

says, the North . . . it says, the North is populated with 

beautiful lakes and rivers but no people. This is how the Tories 

came to view the North — strictly a basis for simple resource 

exploitation for the benefit of big business in northern 

Saskatchewan. But they completely neglected the people and 

even put it down in their own literature that said the people in 

northern Saskatchewan did not exist. 

 

Well anyways, the member from Maple Creek was bragging 

about the fact about our new development that was going to 

take place with the Northern Affairs Secretariat. First of all 

they did away with DNS (Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan). Now they had a junior department called the 

Northern Affairs Secretariat. 

 

So they put this thing together in „88 and away they go. Then 

the member from Maple Creek comes up and she‟s got a real 

nice brochure. Actually it was not a brochure, it was quite a 

series of a few pages of newspaper. And she was visiting the 

North. And that was of course the first minister who had 

decided to visit the North. And I would congratulate the former 

member from Maple Creek, Joan Duncan, who did that. At 

least she had the wherewithal to visit some of the communities 

in the North. 

 

So here she was visiting the North, and she said: all of a 

sudden, the North is alive. And I remember that time; I was in 

the legislature. And she got a little bit angry with me because I 

said, my goodness, after seven years you find out that the North 

and the people in the North are indeed alive. And to this day 

that policy of completely ignoring the North continued. 

 

And I went in on the election, and part of the election, and 

again it was the same old story. The Tories were saying, we‟re 

going to get your advice and your consultation. And all they 

had in eight years was this task force for the North. So they 

said we‟re going to consult you, just like they were going to do 

with fair scare. So Fair Share was a situation that was supposed 

to consult the people, at the last moment, after you‟re going to 

get devastated, and they‟re going to do the same thing in 

northern Saskatchewan. Well I‟ll tell you people weren‟t 

impressed because 81 per cent of the people voted against your 

ideas. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: —The other thing is, the Conservatives did a lot 

of subsidies, royalty tax roll backs for big companies, building 

roads for Weyerhaeuser — 32 kilometres — everybody knows 

that story. And also seven million a year for the privatized 

Cameco, into the privatized uranium mining company of 

Cameco. It was $7 million a year that benefitted the mining 

company when they did this roll back, back after „88 when it 

was privatized. 

 

Well the people who did trapping and fishing, this same 

government took away the subsidies for fishing sturgeon, for 

fishing pickerel. Now they‟ve taken it away for northern pike. 

They‟ve also taken it away for trout. The 

  



188 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 1991 

only one that‟s left now is whitefish. 

 

And when I look at that record, they have the same policy. 

They would subsidize . . . They subsidize liquor. They would 

subsidize wine, they would subsidize beer, they will subsidize 

whisky, they will subsidize everything in that area except food. 

They would not subsidize food transportation in northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

They not only knocked off the food transportation, they 

knocked off the fish transportation; they knocked off training 

programs in regards to young people wanting to enter into the 

trapping field. So when you look at this, it was not only a 

matter of not listening to the people in regards to the creation 

of new regulations in trapping and fishing, but it was just 

taking away whatever little help that the government had in 

regards to people from northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Now one of the other things that I see is this whole issue of 

somebody mentioning, what is this whole thing about 

democracy? Why is the legislature so important? Why do we 

need to stand up here and discuss issues? Because I‟ll tell you 

when I got into the legislature, our government, one of the first 

things that it did was lived up to its promises. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — Something that the Conservative government 

couldn‟t do except for its rich friends and the big companies. In 

nine years that‟s all it was able to do. Those are the only 

promises that it would live up to. When we came into this 

legislature this time around, we put in the law on the 

legislation, the Bills reflecting not only the general interest of 

people of Saskatchewan by the repeal of the PST. But I‟ll tell 

you something. I was proud this week when the first Bill in the 

legislature was one on economic development corporations of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — The economic development corporations in 

northern Saskatchewan were now on par with the economic 

development corporations in the South. The PC government 

had neglected to put them on an equal basis. They would be 

unable to get . . . the corporations in the North couldn‟t get into 

industrial and commercial activity because of the way the PC 

government had viewed the people in the North in their same 

old colonial fashion. We came up this week and we put in Bill 

No. 1 to change that and say, yes, the people of northern 

Saskatchewan and their corporations are number one on our 

list. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — As I look forward into the future, I can see my 

vision in this way. I would like to say, as I mentioned before, 

the importance of democracy and openness, which is 

mentioned in our throne speech. I would like to say also, in this 

week with the devastating reality of the 14 women, and also the 

fact that we saw the movie on Helen Osborne and the murder 

in The Pas, Manitoba, the tremendous level of discrimination, 

racism, and sexism 

and handicapism that is still part of the system. One of my 

visions is to be able to look forward into the future and say, 

yes, we are going to work to do away with that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: — I would also like to say that in northern 

development we have to look at economics and environment 

together, as well as poverty. We have to say yes, to sustainable 

development and be able to look forward to the future that way. 

 

You know I would like to say yes, we have started on this 

throne speech towards a system of justice and fairness. So I 

look forward to working with the new NDP government of 

which I am part of, and say yes, not only to the people of 

Cumberland, but to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 10 o‟clock, this House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 


