




















































Hansard: December 04, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 33 

 December 4, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Special Nominating Committee 

 

Clerk: -- Mr. Lingenfelter, as chairman of the Special 

Nominating Committee set up to propose lists of members to 

be on the select standing committees of this Assembly, reports 

his first report which is tabled in the Assembly today and is 

distributed to all members and will be in the Votes and 

Proceedings this evening. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the first report of the special committee appointed to 

prepare lists of members to compose the standing committees 

of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank the committee 

chair in particular and the Special Nominating Committee in 

general for my inclusion on both the Crown Corporations 

Committee as well as the Public Accounts Committee. 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Friday next move: 

 

 That this Assembly, on the occasion of Canada's National 

Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against 

Women, recognizes the seriousness of this problem and 

expresses its determination to eliminate this violence in our 

society through programs which include prevention, public 

education, support services, and the strict enforcement of the 

law. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce a group of Girl Guides who are seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are being accompanied by Heather 

Snowdy and Nancy Hordern and I will be meeting with them 

immediately after the proceedings here in order to have drinks 

and pictures.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today, 

Mr. Speaker, to introduce to you and through you to members 

of the Legislative Assembly, 23 grade 2 and 3 students seated 

in your gallery.  The students are accompanied by teachers 

Dianne Stark, Darlene Dixon, and chaperons Bev Cherney, 

Scott Gray, and Serina Tong. 

I will be meeting with this group at 2:30 for pictures and later 

in the members' dining room for refreshments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all hon. members to join me in 

welcoming this group from Dr. Hanna School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I want to introduce to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, the executive members of the Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan who are visiting with people in the 

legislature today -- with MLAs (members of the Legislative 

Assembly) -- to discuss various issues of concern to the Metis 

community. 

 

These members include the provincial secretary of the Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan, Gerald Morin; treasurer of the Metis 

Society of Saskatchewan, Phillip Chartier; area director of the 

Metis Society of Saskatchewan, Winston McKay; researcher 

with the Metis Society of Saskatchewan, Ivan Morin; advisor 

with the Metis Society of Saskatchewan, Clem Chartier. 

 

Welcome to the legislature.  I hope your meetings are 

interesting and worthwhile; and have a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, allow me 

to extend a warm welcome from the members of the opposition 

to the Metis Society as well.  I had a moment just to speak with 

these gentlemen in the cafeteria this morning and enjoyed the 

time, and feel free to call.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to 

you and through you to the other members of the Assembly the 

executive director of the Teachers' Federation, Mr. Fred 

Herron, who is with us in the gallery . . . in your gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish also to note the presence of 

Mr. Fred Herron, a constituent of Saskatoon Wildwood, and I 

hope that he has very fruitful deliberations in his time here in 

Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to add my voice from this side of the House -- I guess I 

can't say from this side of the House any more -- but from the 

members of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, also to Fred Herron as 

executive director of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' 

Federation).  And certainly in my role as critic of education I 

intend to work very closely with him and I think that in the 

future we will have many productive meetings together.  So 

welcome here this afternoon, Fred. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



34 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 

to all members of the Assembly five grade 11 and 12 students 

from Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw who are seated in your 

gallery this afternoon, Mr. Speaker.  They're accompanied by 

their instructor, Brian Swanson. 

 

This is a special group, special in the hearts of the member 

from Moose Jaw Wakamow and myself in that they are 

members of a government club at Central Collegiate in Moose 

Jaw; young people who take a great interest in the goings on of 

politics at all levels and who have made it an early priority with 

the new government to come over and take in a session of the 

Legislative Assembly.  That may very well be . . . I ask all 

members to note these young people are here because it may 

very well be that some day one or more of them will take a seat 

on the floor of this Assembly if their interests are realized. 

 

I also would like to pay special recognition to Mr. Swanson 

who just recently led the polls in the municipal elections for the 

city council in Moose Jaw. 

 

Following question period the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow and I will meet with this group.  They've been on 

tour of the building and we'll join them for pictures and 

refreshments and a visit, and we look forward to doing that.  

And I ask all members to join us in welcoming them to the 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We may have saved 

the best for the last.  Mr. Speaker, I simply want to join my 

colleague, the member for Moose Jaw Palliser, in welcoming 

government club to the Legislative Assembly today.  While I'm 

a graduate of another high school in Moose Jaw -- I won't say a 

better high school; another high school in Moose Jaw -- I have 

much regard for Central Collegiate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and all members, this high school is very active at 

all times, but particularly in this season.  They have just 

completed a production of Charles Dickens's Christmas Carol.  

Just this morning the swing choir from Central Collegiate 

entertained at a banquet on behalf of The Arthritis Society in 

Moose Jaw, which we enjoyed. 

 

And I want to welcome this group of Central Collegiate 

students and their teacher, Brian Swanson, to the Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I too would like to recognize and 

introduce an extra person, Mr. Speaker.  Over here I would like 

to recognize the Metis Society of course, you know, officially 

at this time using our language, which is Cree. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, at the end there I mentioned the name of 

Mr. Earl Cook who happens to be from my constituency in 

Cumberland, and I mentioned that I 

would be meeting with the group and also Earl after question 

period. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Federal Funding for Agriculture 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, as many people in Saskatchewan 

suspected, as we approach Christmas we find that the 

government of the day was unable to get more money for 

farmers out of Ottawa.  As a result of the information in the 

paper today I want to direct a question to the Premier. 

 

Given the comments from the federal Minister of Finance that 

the $800 million that they've allocated plus the $2.8 billion that 

will be going out between now and February or March is all the 

money that's coming for the farmers -- and obviously we know 

that there's a crisis there -- does the Premier of the province of 

Saskatchewan now admit that he may have to be there for the 

farmers before Christmas?  And if he thinks he does because of 

the crisis, would he now explain to this legislature what he's 

going to do for the farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would tell 

the member from Estevan that this government and this 

Premier intend to be with the farmer at all times as we were at 

the time of the Ottawa trek. 

 

I'd also say to the hon. member from Estevan that I read the 

remarks of Mr. Mazankowski in the paper today, but I want to 

tell you that those remarks are exactly the same ones that he 

told me when I met with him in Ottawa.  I didn't accept those 

remarks at the time that I met him in Ottawa.  I subsequently 

went to talk to the Prime Minister who said, as I reported to the 

member yesterday, that he would reconsider this matter with 

Mr. Mazankowski and other officials and that he stood by the 

farmers.  I'm going to await the Prime Minister's response in 

this matter. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Christmas is 

approaching and there is a farm crisis.  And the Premier of 

Saskatchewan, not knowing if there's going to be any more 

money coming, says he's going to wait. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is simply this: how long will he 

wait?  What if there's no money for farmers by Christmas, or 

there's only half the amount that he expected, or there's not 

nearly enough for people because we've got children 

concerned, mothers concerned, farmers concerned, rural 

municipalities concerned; what will he do other than wait?  

What will happen on Christmas day in Saskatchewan if there's 

not enough money?  What will the Premier say to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan and to the farmers? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I tell the hon.  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

member from Estevan in response to the question, that I will 

tell the farmers and the people of Saskatchewan what I've been 

saying to them before the election and after the election and 

now:  that the federal government owes a big responsibility to 

the farmers of this province to make an adequate cash payment. 

 

And I would say to the member from Estevan that what he 

could do for the farmers is to join us in that submission.  What 

he could do . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- What he could do is join me and the 

Leader of the Liberal Party in making one little phone call to 

his friends in Ottawa and telling them how urgent this crisis is 

-- and it is urgent. 

 

Now the Prime Minister said that he would in fact say to the 

Minister of Finance and the Minister of Agriculture that he 

wants these projects reviewed.  I take the Prime Minister's 

word.  Let's see what he comes up with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to address this question to the new Premier of Saskatchewan 

who has raised expectations among farmers that he can deliver 

money.  I ask the Premier to put a great deal of effort forward 

knowing that I made the call and I made the trip resulting in 

about $800 million, 2.8 billion so far. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- In the last few years, Mr. Speaker, 13.3 billion 

in the province of Saskatchewan alone, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

asked the hon. member: would he consider my plan if he wants 

a strategy to get billions of dollars into the hands of farmers?  

Would he consider my plan of co-operating with the federal 

government, co-operating with other governments -- like 

Ontario that's come up with $35 million for farmers; in addition 

Manitoba and Alberta that have come up with more money -- 

would he consider my plan and say, look, I'll phone the 

Minister of Agriculture or the Prime Minister and I'll put 2 or 

$3 million on the table to make sure that 300 or $400 million 

gets in the hands of farmers by Christmas.  I'll co-operate like 

that to show the goodwill because farmers are more important 

than politics in the province of Saskatchewan.  Would the 

minister do that . . . Would the premier do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's important to 

note the terminology and the phraseology used by the member 

from Estevan in asking his question.  I made the trip to Ottawa.  

I got the money.  I did this, my plan this. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And he is supported by his caucus just 

now in this statement.  Well I want to say now to the member 

from Estevan, he may have made the trip and the money may 

have come, but I tell you that money came not because of your 

trip, it came because 4,000 farmers in Rosetown and 3,000 in 

Weyburn said they 

needed the money.  That's why that money came. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I'm in Ottawa with the Leader of 

the Liberal Party and all the other political leaders and all of 

the coalition of farmers in Saskatchewan, across western 

Canada, because that's where the farmers want us to be.  It is 

the responsibility of Ottawa.  They acknowledge it and 

everybody else does, that this money should be coming up. 

 

And I'm saying to the premier, former premier, I'm saying this 

to him with the greatest of respect, rather than saying things 

like, well you know, how have you succeeded and where is the 

money going to come from and what are you going to do, what 

you should be doing still is joining us in this coalition -- 

non-political, non-partisan approach -- of getting the money in 

the hands of the farmers of Saskatchewan.  That's what you 

should be doing.  That's the best thing you can do for the 

farmers of this region. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The new Premier of 

Saskatchewan reminds us all of the fact that when he had the 

opportunity to help farmers, when interest rates were 22 per 

cent, he blamed Ottawa. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker . . . and he laughs.  Listen.  They wouldn't 

debate it yesterday but they laugh today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan need money at 

Christmas time because there's a crisis and the new Premier 

won't deliver, and he won't even say I will co-operate, he won't 

even follow the lead of his NDP colleagues in Ontario and 

come up with a little bit of money to lever more money -- 

which we all know is possible -- Mr. Speaker, what kind of 

message is he going to leave to the families at Christmas time 

in the province of Saskatchewan when he results in no more 

money coming to the province of Saskatchewan and his trip 

was a complete failure?  

 

What's he going to say to the people of Saskatchewan that he 

promised he would help -- more than the $13 billion we've got 

in the past when there were no farm rallies . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I presume that within 

lies a question in the remarks made by the member from 

Estevan.  I will assume that the question is the last sentence 

about what am I going to say.  I'm going to say what I've said 

before and what I'm saying and what I'm going to say in the 

future: that the federal government from Ottawa has let down 

the farming community, has let down the farming community. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'm going to say to the farmers that the 

farmers are telling us.  You don't have to accept my words for 

it, Mr. Member from Estevan.  If everything was as you say 

that it was, you wouldn't have had 4,000 in Rosetown, you 

wouldn't have had 3,000 in Weyburn,  



36 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

you wouldn't have had 10,000 at the Agribition.  The farmers 

are telling you.  That's why you're sitting over there with that 

small rump group.  They're telling you that your policies are all 

misplaced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I say to the member of Estevan in 

closing this answer: if you want to help, join the coalition, join 

the farmers who are leading this.  Don't sit on the sidelines and 

in effect carp.  Come in there with positive suggestions.  We'll 

listen to your positive suggestions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  If the hon. 

member is so confident that he has got money for people and 

he's got the answers, would the hon. member, would the 

Premier, tell this House now why he had his Minister of 

Agriculture duck the debate yesterday?  Why did the minister 

of rural affairs duck the debate, and why the NDP wouldn't 

even debate the crisis going on in the province of 

Saskatchewan in agriculture? 

 

If he's so confident that he has got all the answers, why 

wouldn't he debate and why wouldn't he have his two new 

ministers stand in their place and debate and vote here in the 

House?  Why, Mr. Minister?  Why send them out of the House 

if he's so confident that he has the answer?  Do you know why, 

Mr. Speaker, because I don't think that he has the answers for 

agriculture and he never did. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member 

from Estevan, with the greatest of respect, that not even he has 

all the answers to all of the issues.  Not even he. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Thirteen billion dollars worth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thirteen billion dollars worth, the 

member from Rosthern says.  And talking about ducking, talk 

about ducking, the leader of the Conservative Party in the 

province of Saskatchewan ducked the big debate when 4,000 

farmers in Rosetown wanted to . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The Leader of the Conservative Party 

ducked his obligation to his constituents by not even going 

with us to Ottawa to plead the case for the farmers.  He ducked 

it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we are doing here on behalf of western 

Canadians is saying to the Ottawa government we need more 

money, more immediately, and we need improvements to 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) and to NISA (net 

income stabilization account).  We've done the best that we can 

thus far in mounting that case. 

 

The member says, what is going to be the outcome?  I say to 

him, I do not know what the outcome is going to be.  But 

I do know that we have tried, and we're going to continue to try 

to get what Ottawa has to do -- and that is fulfil its obligations 

to the farmers of Saskatchewan and to western Canada, and 

you should be with us, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary.  I'll just ask 

the member once more because he didn't answer the question. 

 

Why?  Why wouldn't you debate the agriculture crisis and look 

at solutions?  You asked me for my co-operation, a lot of 

suggestions for that co-operation.  Why did you ask your two 

new members to duck the vote?  Why did you do that? 

 

The first chance the new Minister of Agriculture's got to stand 

on his feet in agriculture in this legislature and you say, stay 

out of the House.  Why, Mr. Speaker, did that member ask his 

ministers to duck the debate, and why wouldn't he debate 

agriculture here yesterday? Would he answer that question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it's pretty hard to know 

how to answer that because . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well I guess it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- It is.  It is because it's not a very 

credible question, and the former premier knows that entirely.  

But I will say to the member from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, very 

clearly, in about 15, 20 minutes time from now, there will be a 

debate on the Speech from the Throne, and the hon. member 

from Estevan will have his chance.  We all look forward to his 

contribution to debate. 

 

And I'm sure that he won't duck his responsibilities and that 

this afternoon he'll take part in the debate at the earliest 

opportunity, as all members will. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Implications of the Milgaard Case 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a question today for the 

Minister of Justice.  Most everyone is familiar with the David 

Milgaard case, and I want to ask the minister if it is his view 

that the potential innocence of one person is less important than 

maintaining the reputation of the Department of Justice, or its 

prosecutors, or the Attorney General? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Thank the 

member for that question. 

 

The federal Minister of Justice has made an order that this 

matter will be reviewed by the Supreme Court of Canada.  We 

believe that that's a suitable disposition of this case which has 

received a great deal of publicity lately.  We believe very 

strongly, as do the members opposite, in the integrity of our 

justice system. 

 

But that having been said, this is in our opinion an 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

appropriate order for the federal minister to make, and 

Saskatchewan will be playing such role, performing such 

function before the Supreme Court of Canada as is appropriate, 

considering that we were the prosecuting jurisdiction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have a new question to the minister, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The member for Regina South has publicly stated that, and I 

quote: 

 

 It doesn't matter if Milgaard is innocent . . . I'm not primarily 

concerned with his guilt or innocence.  What I am concerned 

with is that (the media) and the lawyers are selling us down 

the river. 

 

Mr. Minister, it seems that the member is more interested in his 

own reputation and safeguarding the then attorney general than 

the principles of fundamental justice. 

 

What are you prepared to do, Mr. Minister, to assure the people 

of Saskatchewan that the attitude did not prejudice the 

prosecution of David Milgaard? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina 

South was expressing his own personal views and not those of 

the government.  The views of the government are as I have 

stated.  The prosecution of David Milgaard took place a long, 

long time ago.  And the member from Regina South was, I 

think, not the prosecutor on the case, so that he wasn't 

defending himself or the way in which he may have been 

involved in the case.  He was speaking simply from his own 

personal perspective. 

 

We don't put a muzzle on our members; we don't tell them that 

they can't express their views.  But I want to tell the House and 

the hon. member that he was not expressing the views of this 

government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Given that David Milgaard was prosecuted, or 

the appeal process was assisted, by the member from Regina 

South and he also assisted in the prosecution of Larry Fisher, I 

believe, and that these prosecutions occurred under the same 

attorney general and given that there is now sufficient question 

about the guilt of Mr. Milgaard to warrant a review by the 

Supreme Court, is the minister prepared to admit that 

something clearly went amiss in these prosecutions? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- That, I think, Mr. Speaker, is the precise 

question that will be before the Supreme Court.  As I 

understand it, they're going to be reviewing the record, and I 

believe there is also provision for the consideration of any new 

evidence that may be offered by anyone. 

 

Speaking again for the government, we are satisfied with the 

process that has been set down by the federal minister, and 

we're prepared to fully play our part in seeing that process 

through to a conclusion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question.  I think this is a 

very serious matter and I view it as a serious matter.  And I 

view it in as serious a matter as I want to ask the Premier of the 

province to ask the member from Regina South to apologize in 

this Assembly for the remarks that he made in relation to the 

conduct that, and I quote: "It doesn't matter if Milgaard is 

innocent . . . I'm not primarily concerned with his guilt or 

innocence." 

 

I respect the Department of Justice in its role in this province 

and to the people of Saskatchewan, and I'm going to ask the 

Premier to ask that member to apologize not only to this House 

but to the public of Saskatchewan for that comment. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, with all respect to the hon. 

member, I don't think this is a question to play politics about, 

and I think that's what he's doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have said that I have clearly stated 

what is the view of the government.  I have clearly stated that 

the remarks of the hon. member from Regina South are the 

member's own opinions.  I have said that we don't muzzle our 

members on this side of the House but I've clearly 

disassociated us from those remarks.  It's not a question of 

having him apologize or reprimanding him or anything like 

that.  He has stated what his views are and I have stated that 

those are not the views of the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have one more question.  The 

seriousness of this is a concern that I raise and it's as serious as 

. . . implied an implication that is not relevant to today's time, 

but it's also serious enough to make me believe that the Premier 

needs to do exactly as I asked. 

 

I have stood in this House and had members of my government 

apologize to the Assembly.  And I think it was on the basis of 

the conduct of this House, respect for the Department of 

Justice, respect for the Assembly, respect for the distinction 

between the Assembly and the Department of Justice, that this 

member needs to apologize to this House for those remarks that 

he made. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There's no 

question that this Milgaard matter is a serious matter.  It's 

always a serious matter when there are serious allegations that 

anyone may be in prison who is not guilty, who is innocent.  

And that's precisely what the Supreme Court is going to review 

and look into.  And the process by which they have decided to 

do this is satisfactory as far as the government is concerned. 

 

The member will know perfectly well that the member from 

Regina South is a very distinguished lawyer with a very 

distinguished career in the public service of this province in the 

role of prosecutor. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



38 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- And as in the case of any citizen of this 

country the member from Regina South has a right to express 

his own view. 

 

I will say, as Minister of Justice on behalf of this government, 

that his view does not happen to be the view of the government 

of this province and I've tried to make that clear to the hon. 

member. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier.  When a member of this Legislative Assembly says 

that he is not concerned with justice of either innocent or guilt . 

. . I'll read what he says: 

 

 I'm not primarily concerned with his guilt or innocence.  

What I am concerned with is that (the media) and the lawyers 

are selling us down the river.  The whole judicial system is at 

issue -- it's worth more than one person. 

 

Now what I'm saying and asking to the Premier: when a 

member of the Legislative Assembly said the judicial system is 

more important than one life, one person, whether the person is 

a farmer, a Metis person, a white person, male, female, 

whatever, he's putting himself, or at least the Premier's cabinet 

or the caucus or this Legislative Assembly, in a pretty difficult 

light. 

 

The Premier of the province of Saskatchewan is sitting here, 

Mr. Speaker, with his member, part of that government, as a 

reflection of the part of the administration.  Now that member 

has said that the system is above the law. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I would ask the member to put his 

question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I would ask the Premier, would he take his 

place today and clearly state his views with respect to the 

statement that this member from Regina South has made.  And 

if he does not agree with him, will he ask him to publicly 

apologize for including all of the members of the legislature in 

that statement, because it's not accurate and it's not fair.  Would 

the minister do that?  Would the Premier do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how 

many times I can go around on this question, but I want to 

make it clear to the Leader of the Opposition that the speaker 

from Regina South, that the member from Regina South was 

stating his own views.  The Leader of the Opposition has 

selectively quoted from a newspaper as to parts of those views 

with which he takes exception, and I dare say that the member 

from Regina South would be pleased to meet with the Leader 

of the Opposition and put those remarks in proper context.  We 

don't think that there is any necessity to call on him to 

apologize to you or to the House or to anybody else.  He's 

expressing his own views.  Those are not the views of the 

government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Justice has responded because the Premier has failed to 

answer the question.  And he says there's no need -- I'll repeat 

his answer, there's no need, and I want the media to at least 

acknowledge the answer -- there's no need to apologize to this 

House for a statement that isn't made like this.  There's no need.  

Did you hear that from the Minister of Justice? 

 

I would like the Premier to stand in his place and now condone 

what the Minister of Justice has just said.  Would the Premier 

stand up and say there's no need to apologize if somebody says, 

I'm not primarily concerned with guilt or innocence; what I'm 

concerned with is the system above the people. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

from Moose Jaw, if he wants to respond on behalf of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If the member has a question, could 

we have the question, please. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Premier.  Does the Premier agree with the 

statement that was made by the member from Regina South?  

Does the Premier agree with the Minister of Justice that the 

member need not apologize for a statement like that?  And does 

the Premier agree that it has something to say about the attitude 

of this Assembly or the government or anybody else when a 

member can say that and not even be asked to apologize in this 

legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the really unfortunate and 

sad part of all this is an attempt to try and squeeze politics out 

of a situation where there is no politics involved. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- The government of the province of 

Saskatchewan is satisfied with the disposition of this case made 

by the federal minister, and we are prepared to co-operate with 

that order in seeing this case through to a conclusion.  And that 

is that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would 

ask for leave to introduce several routine motions. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Referral of Public Accounts to Standing Committee of Public 

Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney: 

 

 That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 

tabled as sessional paper 142 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

during the fourth session of the twenty-first Legislative 

Assembly, and the Public Accounts for the fiscal year 

1989-90 as tabled this session, be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Report of the Provincial Auditor to the Standing 

Committee on Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- By leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the Report of the Provincial Auditor, tabled as sessional 

paper number 137 during the fourth session of the 

twenty-first Legislative Assembly, and reports tabled this 

session, be referred to the Standing Committee on Public 

Accounts. 

 

That's seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Recommendations to the Standing Committee 

on Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move: 

 

 That the recommendations of the public documents 

committee under The Archives Act respecting disposal of 

certain public documents contained in the sessional papers 

120 tabled during the fourth session of the twenty-first 

Legislative Assembly, and any such recommendations tabled 

this session, be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Annual Reports and Financial Statements to the 

Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- By leave, I move, seconded by the 

member for Regina Hillsdale: 

 

 That the annual reports of the financial statements of various 

Crown corporations and related agencies, as were tabled in 

the fourth session of the twenty-first legislature and not 

reported upon by the Crown Corporations Committee during 

that session, and the annual reports and financial statements 

as tabled in the present session, be referred to the Standing 

Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Report to Standing Committee on 

Communication 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Finally, Mr. Speaker, and by leave 

of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the member for Regina 

Dewdney: 

 

 That the annual report of the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Library tabled this session be referred to the 

Standing Committee on Communication. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to begin, 

Mr. Speaker, by congratulating yourself on your election.  I 

appreciate the sincerity and integrity that I know you bring to 

this task.  And I also congratulate the member from 

Qu'Appelle-Lumsden who moved the Speech from the Throne, 

and the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood who seconded 

the Speech from the Throne. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, Regina Lake Centre 

constituency reflects the many diverse interests, cultures, and 

occupations that are found throughout Saskatchewan.  But I 

believe it also reflects many of the concerns. 

 

The business district includes both the innovative downtown 

merchants represented by Market Square, and as well the many 

small, independent businesses that populate Albert Street, 13th 

Avenue, Hill Avenue mall, and River Heights mall. 

 

Many of these businesses contacted me directly over the past 

few months to express their concerns over the PST (provincial 

sales tax).  It was their view that it depressed consumer 

willingness to spend and was creating a downturn in business 

activity.  And they also have concerns over the complex system 

of tax administration in Canada which is eating up productive 

business time with paperwork. Most of these businesses have 

been around for the long haul and have managed through ups 

and downs, but are now under more pressure than they've 

previously experienced. 

 

Many people in Lake Centre are the working poor who are 

fully employed but earning minimum wage or employed in 

subsistence industries such as arts and cultural activities, small 

private contractors, independent tradespeople, and people who 

work in charitable organizations. 

 

They were concerned with taxes such as the PST, and they're 

still concerned about the GST (goods and services tax).  But 

they're also concerned with issues such as minimum wage, 

support starts and cultural development, support to the NGO 

(non-governmental organization) sector, and fuller 

participation in the economy as well as long-term benefits and 

pensions. 

  



40 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

Mr. Speaker, in Regina Lake Centre there are many business 

and professional people who have seen a steady decline in their 

purchasing power and quality of life -- people who are 

concerned whether all children will have access to post 

_secondary training and education and jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Many are angry that children have been 

compelled to leave the province to seek employment, and they 

also have expressed concern that health care remain a priority. 

 

Regarding their occupations, many of these professionals 

provide contractual services or fee-for-service activities and 

express concern over fair tendering and fair contracting 

policies of government. 

 

In Regina Lake Centre many working people and the unions 

who represent them are concerned about occupational health 

and safety, workers' compensation, improvements to labour 

relations, and the increasing and well-documented trend to 

part-time, low-pay service sector jobs and the contracting out 

of jobs that were previously in the union. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the non-government organizations that serve 

people's needs at the most direct level in the community are 

concerned about their long-term ability to continue providing 

these services.  The communities they work with have 

substantial problems with substandard or too expensive 

housing, inadequate incomes, family disintegration, cultural 

alienation, racism, family violence, and an inability of families 

to meet the basic needs of themselves and their children for 

social, economic, and political participation. 

 

For the most part these organizations and the people they serve 

are without an effective voice in decision making.  And to 

complete a tour of the constituency, there are those who are 

firmly seated in poverty, who concern themselves primarily 

with survival and can only dream of the many things that we 

take for granted for ourselves and our children. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously this is the bad news, but there's 

also a lot of good news.  Despite these many concerns, Regina 

Lake Centre is a very diverse and interesting place to live.  It's 

the site of many historic buildings such as the Holy Rosary 

Cathedral, and a considerable number of designated heritage 

properties and homes. 

 

People in this constituency are willing to organize and take 

action on problems.  As we go on a walk about the 

constituency, we would encounter Market Square, the 

Cathedral Merchants' Association, many innovative, 

independent small businesses, the Saskatchewan Writers' 

Guild, Bridge Artists' Co-op, AIDS Regina, Transition House, 

Rainbow Youth Centre, the Saskatchewan Coalition Against 

Racism, the Mental Health Association, the Saskatchewan 

Action Committee on the Status of Women, Myers House, the 

YMCA and the YWCA, and the Cathedral Heritage 

Association. 

 

This is a very small list of the organizations headquartered in 

Regina Lake Centre, but they are an example of the fine efforts 

of community-minded people to improve the 

quality of life. And as I briefly passed over their names I hope 

it reminded everyone of the value we get for our dollar when 

we individually and collectively invest in these organizations. 

 

Most recently I had the pleasure of attending the 51st annual 

Rotary Club Christmas Carol Festival at Knox Met Church.  

The proceeds from the volunteer efforts of all the choirs that 

participate from schools and organizations across the city go to 

help families at Christmas. 

 

I want also to mention briefly to you, Mr. Speaker, the 

extensive development of seniors' high-rises in this area.  There 

are seven in all, and several private nursing homes.  My visits 

to these places are always a time to make new friends, learn a 

little history and to realize the importance of good, affordable, 

safe housing and home care programs as we age, hopefully 

gracefully.  People who have come from many different 

circumstances and incomes find a common denominator of a 

good quality of life and the respect that's demonstrated through 

the support and caring. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this leads me to the next topic I wish to 

pursue, which is that of public service and respect for the 

public who are served.  As most children, I learned many of my 

attitudes from my parents, Hubert and Elsie Elkin, who are a 

part of this tradition in Saskatchewan.  Like many of the 

founders of the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation), they are ordinary people with extraordinary vision.  

They named their problems and took action on the solutions. 

 

My father was a union organizer and deputy minister of Labour 

in the government of Tommy Douglas.  My mother has always 

been a political analyst who has had a great ability to see the 

writing on the wall, so to speak.  And as well, they have 

willingly provided substantial direct assistance to people who 

need help, which has often been me over the course of my 

existence. 

 

Hub and Elsie kept our home open to political gatherings, and 

it was here that I became aware of the benefit of debate and 

discussion and the development of new ideas and innovations 

as we challenge each other to think more deeply and to 

consider other perspectives. 

 

I also learned the highest respect for public funds, and the use 

of those funds in the service of the public interest.  Through my 

childhood eyes, I believed the CCF could work miracles, and 

for many years we did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the Second World War period up to the 

1980s, many innovations in the creation of social and economic 

infrastructure were accomplished.  For example province-wide 

electrification; conversion from domestic and industrial coal 

burning to oil and then gas; 62,000 miles of road modernization 

plus paving in small communities; development of oil, gas, 

phosphate, sodium phosphate, and uranium; assistance to farms 

and towns to provide indoor sewer and water facilities; hospital 

construction and provision of medical and hospital insurance 

subsequently adopted by the whole country; provision of a 

money-saving auto and property insurance scheme; progressive 

labour legislation including reasonable minimum wages, 

support for free 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

collective bargaining and extension of the right to bargain to 

public employees -- this was one I hadn't known about but was 

pleased to hear -- reduction of working hours from 54 to 60 

hours for a six-day week to a 40-hour five-day week with paid 

annual vacation and public holidays, and yearly improved 

workers' compensation. 

 

Nursing homes for seniors, and the development of a system of 

provincial parks; air ambulance service -- these are just some 

of the examples of the bold efforts to move the province 

forward.  And this infrastructure still exists today, but we are 

now facing a new challenge -- to bring the same level of 

innovation to the issues and circumstances of the '90s. 

 

One of the reasons these programs were so successful and 

supported, Mr. Speaker, was the fact they were built on the real 

needs of real people in communities.  They did not come from 

our attempt to be like somebody else, and they did not come 

from a need to find a quick fix to a long-term problem.  They 

are the result of the shared thinking of people who had a very 

long-term vision of this province that exceeded the four-year 

mandate of any particular government's term of office, and they 

were programs that built for the future.  To use our leader Roy 

Romanow's example, they were like a seed planted in the 

expectation that it would grow a tree, in the shade of which we 

might stand in our lifetime. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the midst of responding to all the emergency 

and crisis needs in our society, it's important to keep this 

long-term vision in mind, if we are to add our contribution to 

the long-term social and economic infrastructure of our 

province.  Now as never before, people are requesting and 

demanding a voice in these important decisions that affect 

them.  But they are also asked to come up with a considerable 

portion of the money to fund government initiatives, and they 

wish to ensure -- as any wise consumer does -- that they're 

getting value for their dollar. 

 

If I could put it more bluntly, Mr. Speaker, they are concerned 

with who pays and who plays.  When they say they want a 

first-class public service, they mean they want a public service 

that's hired based on competence and ability to understand the 

task at hand, not a public service that travels first class. 

 

Mr. Speaker, democratic reform and accountability to the 

taxpayers and citizens of this province were two of the reasons 

I ran for this office.  I've worked for many years with young 

people, people in poverty, and aboriginal people, who share a 

common bond of historical domination.  The response to each 

of these areas of concern may be different, but the need to 

establish significant roles in decision making is the only 

practical solution to these long-term structural problems. 

 

For the people who traditionally serve communities in the 

non-government sector, more direct working relationships are 

needed where we move from a relationship of monitoring and 

assessment to a relationship based on mutual accountability 

and trust.  The dialogue must be opened up so we can benefit 

from their extensive knowledge of the community. 

For professionals in the civil service and outside the civil 

service we need to set up mechanisms that facilitate the 

application of their professional knowledge to our social and 

economic conditions.  For primary producers, small-business 

people, workers' co-ops, producer co-ops, we need to establish 

a working relationship to help develop the long-term financial 

and physical infrastructure to support their activities. 

 

In the end result, what I'm talking about is sustainable 

development.  Sustainable development is about opening doors.  

In fact it's about making sure we won't close any doors our 

children may want to go through in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sustainable development respects and enhances 

our ability to be involved in the decisions that affect our lives 

and the lives of our communities.  It does not see us as an 

inconvenient appendage of the economic system but instead 

places our environmental health and human well-being at the 

centre of policy development. 

 

As a society, one of our difficulties has been the inability to 

develop the democratic institutions that are equal to the 

challenges of the '90s, but we have made some steps in this 

direction and are formalizing a process for this work to 

continue.  As an elected representative, one of my objectives 

that I share with my colleagues is to see this work continue at 

the government level but also at the constituency level. 

 

Another personal objective is to contribute to the goal of 

eliminating waste and mismanagement.  As you know, Mr. 

Speaker, there are considerable federal and provincial dollars 

spent in the fragmented pursuit of solving social, cultural, and 

economic problems. 

 

Over the years my experience has been that these programs are 

developed at a distance from the community and are often 

evaluated in terms of how well the community meets the needs 

of the program, not how well the program meets the needs of 

the community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need an integrated network of universally 

accessible and easily understood social and economic programs 

built on a long-term base of social, financial, physical, 

environmental, and organizational infrastructure that will 

sustain us into the future. 

 

These approaches to sustainable development need to be 

shaped within the overall context of a commitment to basic 

human rights.  Canada recently signed the International 

Covenant on the Rights of the Child.  This covenant is a 

turning point in our society when children who were previously 

seen as property, as were women, have now been granted rights 

that are enforceable under international law. 

 

The covenant deals with three main categories of children's 

rights: the right to survival, with adequate food, shelter, clean 

water and primary health care; the right to protection from 

abuse, neglect, and exploitation; and my personal favourite, 

which is the right to develop in a safe environment through the 

provision of formal education, play, preventative health care 

and the opportunity to participate without discrimination in the 

social, cultural, religious, economic, and political life of the 

community.  



42 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

Saskatchewan is also subject to these principles and will have 

to work to ensure that they're reflected in our legislation. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to return briefly to the topic 

of the economy and jobs as these areas provide us with the 

financial resources to meet our social objectives.  As we deal 

increasingly in a global economy, we have been warned of the 

need to diversify and not to put all of our eggs in one basket.  

I'm equally concerned, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward to 

deal with farm issues, the constitution, and new trade deals, 

that we don't put all of our eggs in somebody else's basket. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan must control its 

own wealth and resources.  There may be occasions when 

megaprojects make economic sense -- we would need to weigh 

the costs and benefits -- but it's always been in Saskatchewan 

most of our efforts will be at the community level, both in 

meeting our provincial needs and also connecting with markets 

in Canada, the U.S. and internationally. 

 

Integrated, small-scale, non-polluting, community-based 

development will place more money in the hands of local 

entrepreneurs, co-ops and community economic development 

enterprises.  This is the kind of investment that will employ 

local people and will help us move out of our deficit position 

by returning money to Saskatchewan communities.  If linked in 

a thoughtful way to our education system, we will enhance a 

new generation of people who are able to integrate social, 

environmental, and economic objectives. 

 

In concluding, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to emphasize the the 

honour I feel at having been entrusted to serve Regina Lake 

Centre constituency.  Portions of this constituency were 

recently represented by Louise Simard and Ned Shillington and 

I know from going door-to-door over the past two years that it's 

evident the respect and goodwill felt for these two members of 

the legislature. 

 

To represent such a diverse and talented community is a 

responsibility I respect deeply, and I'll continue to work for a 

community voice in democratic reform, government 

accountability, and sustainable development of social, cultural, 

economic and environmental well-being within the framework 

of human rights. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with my colleagues, 

the members of the opposition and the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone in serving the pressing needs of our constituencies 

and our province. 

 

Thank you for your attention. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well the honeymoon is over.  Mr. Speaker, 

thank you for this opportunity to participate in one of our 

democracy's most important events, the reply to the address 

from the throne. 

To begin my first speech in this Assembly, I would like to 

thank from the bottom of my heart, the good people of the 

constituency of Maple Creek, from the Great Sand Hills, the 

great Cypress Hills, and the banks of the South Saskatchewan 

River -- the greatest people in Saskatchewan.  And they are 

good people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With many new members there may not be a great 

understanding of my constituency, so let me share with you 

some of their values -- their way of life -- values that I have 

delegated to represent in this Assembly. 

 

They are a hard-working people, Mr. Speaker, people who take 

their living from the land by coaxing crops from the soil, 

nurturing livestock on the pastures, or drawing something of 

nature and nature's resources from under the ground itself.  We 

are dependent on agriculture and energy for our survival in 

Maple Creek constituency. 

 

We are people of committed family values who believe that 

how you treat the family next door is as important as how you 

treat your own family.  We believe in working for a living and 

getting an honest day's pay for an honest day's labour.  And in 

many ways we are a deeply traditional people. 

 

We inhabit that part of the province that shares with the 

members for Estevan, Souris-Cannington, 

Bengough-Milestone, Shaunavon, and Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 

a history of overcoming those who say: you can't do it, you 

can't succeed. 

 

Those constituencies all have at least a part of what is known 

as the Palliser Triangle within them.  And if you recall your 

high school history, Palliser was not a very positive fellow.  He 

said these lands were, and I quote, unfit for human 

consumption.  Well we have worked hard for over a hundred 

years and we have proven Palliser wrong. 

 

And that is the kind of people we are.  And I am proud to 

reflect that in my first speech to this Assembly.  I say sincerely 

that it humbles me to be given the responsibility and the honour 

of representing such people here. 

 

And it is also an honour for me to have, as my maiden speech 

to the Assembly, a speech in reply to the address from the 

throne.  Mr. Speaker, Her Honour is to be commended for her 

exceptional performance on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan in delivering this speech, and indeed in all of her 

duties. 

 

Let me say, sir, that I take the proper title of our side of the 

House very seriously -- Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition.  Her 

Majesty's "Loyal" Opposition. And now is as good a time to 

reflect on these things as we speak in response to Her Honour's 

address.  There is a purpose to all of this ceremony and these 

oaths of fealty to the Crown. 

 

There is a tremendous, important purpose to having the 

personage of the Crown appear before us and present the 

values of our democracy to this Assembly and to the people of 

our province.  It is perhaps now more than ever important to 

realize, as we face a government that lacks the formality and a 

designation as a loyal government and  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

one that perhaps, because of the strength of its numbers, 

appears to be forbidding, what loyalty to our democratic 

system, our parliamentary values, means. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the address written by this government reflects 

nothing that would demonstrate a real, imagined, or even a 

pretended loyalty to these principles.  More certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, the actions of this government make no pretence at all 

about the low esteem in which it holds the fundamentals of the 

legislative, democratic, and judicial processes that are so vital 

to our freedom and so vitally represented in the ceremonies in 

which we have just been engaged. 

 

This government came to power on a promise of open 

government, yet immediately puts into action a secret tribunal.  

It came to power on the promise of a non-partisan approach, a 

disavowal of political patronage.  Yet every action, every word, 

has been an act of political partisanship rarely matched in our 

province and indeed in our nation. 

 

I know, Mr. Speaker, that the political climate is ripe for the 

government to continue its political campaign.  I understand 

full well the continuing anxiety of the people and how this 

anxiety creates for the government the conditions necessary to 

ignore the basis of democratic practice.  I understand this, but I 

cannot accept the response of the government. 

 

This has been, Mr. Speaker, a government that borders on 

hate-mongering.  I say to you, sir, that even Joseph McCarthy 

allowed the media into its monkey trials -- but not this 

government with its Gass tribunal, its Gass kangaroo court.  

And the NDP say if there is nothing for the Gass kangaroo 

court to find, why would you protest. 

 

Why would we protest, Mr. Speaker?  Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a 

political tribunal -- a political kangaroo court.  And we know 

full well that where such a vile exercise is put into motion, 

where there is nothing to find, something will be manufactured. 

 

Matters of public policy that have been tested through the 

electoral process become the subject of a semi-judicial 

kangaroo court, not a matter of public debate.  We know also 

that this tribunal is unbalanced.  It is very similar indeed to the 

local committees called soviets in that other country where the 

government and the party became one.  Members of the local 

soviet were partisan activists; members of the Gass tribunal are 

partisan activists.  Members of the soviet were charged with 

finding out why the thoughts and actions of those not in the 

party were bad; members of the Gass tribunal are charged with 

finding out why the thoughts and actions of those not in the 

NDP are bad. 

 

Members of the soviet conducted their hearings in secret; so 

does the Gass tribunal.  Members of the soviet could force 

people to appear before it against their will; so can the Gass 

tribunal.  And as I say, even Joseph McCarthy allowed the 

media into his tribunals. 

 

What this government has done, having seen an opportunity in 

the form of public disenchantment, and eager to avoid that 

disenchantment transforming into 

actual government responsibility, this government has said, let 

us continue to prosecute the opposition.  Let us generate a 

hatred so intense that we the NDP, can escape any 

responsibility to make things better.  This government has 

started off in corruption and so it can only end in corruption.  

And today, Mr. Speaker, I say that it is a disgrace to every 

member of the New Democratic Party in this nation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a true search for reform is needed.  A true search 

for reform that is in fact, in thought, and in deed, non-partisan, 

but aimed at improving the access of the people to their 

government; improving the accountability of government; 

improving the spending practices of government.  This is a 

search that is needed most surely in every province. 

 

And if, Mr. Speaker, the Gass tribunal was charged with 

examining and recommending ways and means of improving 

the financial life of the government and investigating methods 

of accounting, and with those investigative methods of 

accounting and administration that could eliminate duplication, 

waste and secrecy, then, Mr. Speaker, we would cheer on the 

tribunal.  Indeed such a body would no longer be a tribunal, but 

rather a genuine inquiry as envisaged under the Inquiries Act. 

 

But the monstrosity we have been presented with is an exercise 

in hypocrisy and dishonesty so profound that future generations 

will read of it in the history books as evidence of a government 

drunk with its own majority, bitter beyond its own memory, 

and vindictive to the point of betrayal of democracy.  And it is 

also shameful, Mr. Speaker.  I say to the press gallery through 

you, it is shameful that the media -- who are charged with 

protecting the democratic system by virtue of their charter to 

free speech -- it is shameful that they have not only recognized 

a honeymoon for this new government but that they have been 

active partners in that honeymoon. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I frankly find it incomprehensible, Mr. 

Speaker, that such an important, historic and frankly disgusting 

act should take place, attacking the media's right to gather and 

present information to the public on the vital processes of 

government, and yet the media neither condemn nor comment 

on this act. 

 

Let our friends in the gallery be cautioned that there is a risk in 

participating in a honeymoon if you do not engage in safe 

practices.  There is loose in this province a political virus and 

the only prophylactic is a strong scepticism, the demand for a 

clear and honest explanation, of willingness to dig out the 

controversial evidence. 

 

How is it, Mr. Speaker, that 250 crop insurance adjusters were 

fired in this province and there was not one word in the media 

when it happened?  Why is it that the media have not 

demanded explanations of this cover-up from the government 

that engaged in it? 

 

How is it that an absolutely and unconditional vacuum in 

administrative control and accountability was allowed to occur 

uncommented?  It is only a fool, flush from a 

  



44 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

honeymoon evening, that believes it is possible for the same 

few ministers to be in actual administrative control of virtually 

every Crown corporation after firing every non-NDP cabinet 

minister on all of the boards of directors. 

 

We have been left with absolute political control and 

essentially no administrative control in the Crown sector.  How 

is it that political operatives have been allowed to be placed in 

the departments of Crown corporations without even the 

suggestion of investigative reporting to look into the situation? 

 

What has happened with the honeymooners, Mr. Speaker, is 

that they have concluded that it is all natural, that it's all okay.  

Forget that hundreds of non-partisan people are being fired.  

Forget that Crowns are operated without genuine boards of 

directors.  Forget that the Gass tribunals are politically 

mandated and held in secret.  Forget that in the Premier's office 

they have set up a special media unit to circumvent the 

independent information service.  Forget it all.  Because after 

all, the NDP are entitled to a honeymoon, aren't they? 

 

Mr. Speaker, leading up to this session we have had many 

indications of the government's arrogance and its assumption 

that because the people elected an NDP government, somehow 

that is a message that the people do not believe that there 

should be an opposition.  Let me remind the members opposite, 

and particularly the person running the government over there, 

the member from Elphinstone, let me remind him and his 

protg from Riversdale of a few facts. 

 

While the number of seats resulting from the election have 

indeed disproportionately accrued to the NDP, that is not the 

case with the vote.  The loss of the government of the people 

was in actuality a rather narrow loss.  A very large number of 

seats were lost to the split in the free enterprise vote.  A 

significant number of seats were lost by very narrow margins.  

Indeed the antidemocratic conniving of members opposite was 

such that it will likely never be established what influence the 

movement of union voters from Regina to certain rural seats 

had. 

 

(1515) 

 

But my point, Mr. Speaker, is only that the representation in 

this House should not go to the members' heads.  The people do 

indeed desire an opposition.  And more than ever I suggest that 

they want a government that pays some attention to the 

criticism of its opposition and that does not simply assume to 

itself the glory of some kind of political godhead. 

 

But what do we see coming from the people across the way?  

In announcing this session, the minister of everything under the 

sun, the member from Elphinstone, announced the session 

would last two weeks. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it is a change in the practice of this 

Assembly, indeed, if the late member for Shaunavon 

centralized to member from Elphinstone can simply declare 

how long this session will last.  He will get his two-week 

session one way and one way only, and that is to prorogue the 

Assembly in the midst of interim supply.  I 

can be pretty sure of that, Mr. Speaker, based on a couple of 

things. 

 

First, the government and most particularly the minister of 

everything under the sun have shown an absolute unwillingness 

to be forthright with the release of any information except that 

which they hope will embarrass or attack the opposition.  

Secondly, this opposition is not embarrassed, and it fully 

intends to have answers to its questions before it will agree to 

rise from the Committee of Finance.  And we have a lot of 

questions for that committee that I shall leave for the 

appropriate time. 

 

But we also have questions that need answering now, indeed, 

answers, Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago.  I look to my portfolio 

in the opposition cabinet, and I want to know where the 

government is at with rural development.  I tell you there is no 

knowing the answer to that from the stand-in minister.  It 

appears that only three people have any authority in this 

government, this triumvirate. 

 

We have the minister for Executive Council, and what a hefty 

responsibility that is for the member from Riversdale.  Think 

about that for a moment.  With all his concern about keeping 

the cabinet small and doubling up duties, what does Riversdale 

do to share in the burden?  He takes on the ministry of 

Executive Council -- pretty time-consuming stuff that. 

 

Well they have succeeded in keeping the cabinet small, Mr. 

Speaker, really small.  In fact we have a cabinet of three, with 

seven others collecting pay cheques as public relations objects.  

So in the triumvirate, we start by mentioning one that perhaps 

doesn't belong because there is some unclarity as to the 

responsibility he actually is willing to carry.  But in theory, the 

leader has some authority, so I feel we must include him in the 

troika. 

 

After that we have the member from Dewdney, late of 

Humboldt but centralized to Regina.  This is the minister of dirt 

of/and deception.  The member from Dewdney wields his 

power through secret tribunals, falsified figures, and creative 

accounting.  But make no mistake.  His power is real, and his 

seat on the triumvirate firmly entrenched. 

 

Finally the third knot of the triumvirate, the pinnacle, Mr. 

Speaker, of the power in this oligarchy, the minister of 

everything under the sun and past president of the New 

Democratic Party, the member for Regina Elphinstone.  Here 

we have a piece of work, Mr. Speaker, that nature never 

imagined.  This is a man who said what was needed in this 

province is, quote, a political revolt.  This is a man who 

cheered while his colleague, one Barb Byers, proclaimed to the 

gathered faithful, and once again I quote, we will make this 

province ungovernable. 

 

And this, Mr. Speaker, is the man who is proud, Mr. Speaker -- 

proud, mind you -- that the NDP actually succeeded in a time 

in making the province ungovernable in fact.  His power 

accrued to him through political revolution, through taking 

hostage the people of Saskatchewan, through political 

terrorism.  And of this he is proud. 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

This, Mr. Speaker, is the man who is running our province, a 

man who has demonstrated so little respect for the principles 

and practices of democracy that it is hardly surprising that he 

presents himself as one who will dictate to this House such 

basic matters as the length of its sitting. Taking pride in 

generating fear and hatred -- the essential components of 

political revolt -- is a powerful statement in itself and one 

which the people will heed in due time. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, with respect to rural development, we can 

assess the power structure of the government, which is 

essentially a triumvirate, and we can better understand the 

impotence of the poor fellow the three have asked to stand in 

for that portfolio.  Lest there be any question about whether the 

three were serious when they picked the seven mannequins, all 

we need do is review the performance of the stand-ins. 

 

The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities recently 

had their convention.  It is an old organization that has been a 

huge part of the growth and development of this province.  It 

has a history of genuine co-operation and a generous response 

to real leadership.  The SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) is as close as you can get to the people 

when it comes to elected government.  And that's a fact the 

triumvirate would do well to remember. 

 

In any event, this important organization invited the new 

minister to share with them something of his assessment of the 

situation in rural Saskatchewan and the situation that rural 

Saskatchewan faces, an overview of where his government 

might be headed with rural development, some insights into the 

thinking that's been going on. 

 

And I believe the time provided the minister was 90 minutes -- 

a measure of the importance placed in this meeting by the rural 

councillors.  Here's 90 minutes, Minister, and if you need a 

little more to cover the ground, we'll try to find it for you.  Give 

us your thoughts, your visions, a sketch of the leadership you 

hope to provide rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And guess how long that speech took, Mr. Speaker?  About 

five minutes.  The Minister of Rural Development, in one of 

the most important general meetings he will be privileged to 

participate in in any given year, had five minutes worth for the 

people. 

 

These are down-to-earth people, but it is a grave mistake to 

think they are fools.  They are not.  They have been at this 

business of defending and building and protecting rural 

Saskatchewan for more time than this place has been a 

province.  And this government has five minutes for them. 

 

What did the minister say in his five minutes?  He said, I'm not 

here to give you solutions; I'm here to ask you for solutions.  

And as one wag in the crowd pointed out, the question then 

becomes, what's the use of the man?  What's the use of a 

minister who expects the people to solve their own problems? 

 

And of course there has to be co-operation.  SARM is 

experienced and extremely capable of productive 

co-operation.  The truth is the SARM basically wrote the new 

rural Act passed on to the previous government. 

 

So don't write it off, to call for co-operation -- these people 

know all about co-operation and are more than ready to 

co-operate -- but they expect some leadership.  They expect 

some responsibility to lie with the provincial government and 

they certainly expect their minister to do more than to spend 

five minutes telling them that it's all out of his hands. 

 

Surely the triumvirate has not so disembowelled the seven that 

they can do nothing.  It almost makes you feel a little pity for 

the seven, but that's not what being in cabinet is all about.  If 

the minister of everything under the sun is fighting against 

rural development, then for Heaven's sakes screw up your 

courage and take him on.  If the man with the funny figures 

tells you all of the election promises, all of the commitments to 

rural municipalities from the NDP all of these years, were 

without truth and don't bother, then show some dignity and 

refuse to be used like a pawn. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You, Mr. Minister from Canora, represent at 

least four years of promises made by your party and even made 

by members of the triumvirate itself.  Integrity requires you to 

try to act on these promises and forget about the game of 

saying, gee we were surprised there was no money there when 

we came to power, because that kind of dishonesty is just too 

simple to dismiss. 

 

Every budget the previous government presented -- go back 

and look, every one of them -- your triumvirate indeed denied 

that the government should cap spending for rural 

municipalities.  The government of the day told you there was 

no more money.  You were told this over and over and over 

again.  And you always said, there is money if only you closed 

the trade offices.  And we said, that won't do the trick.  Well 

you've closed the trade offices, so now get the money to the 

RMs (rural municipality) as you promised. 

 

You know it's going to be interesting how the triumvirate and 

their mannequins respond to their own quotes from the budget 

debates past.  I look at the member from Melfort and I can't 

help but shake my head.  This woman was the mayor of 

Melfort.  She made a career out of demanding more money 

from the province -- a veritable career, Mr. Speaker.  Indeed 

her most recent crusades were that the province wasn't 

providing enough money to support the water projects and that 

the province wasn't willing to spend money to build a regional 

college in Melfort. 

 

She was told, with all of the mayors, we are going to have to 

hold spending increases to zero.  We'll do the best we can on 

the upside, and in fact we found a very significant sum of 

money for the water project in Melfort, but in general we'll 

have to hold it to zero. 

 

What was the member's rallying cry?  No, it's not enough.  I 

won't accept it, she shouted.  And to prove that more support 

could be provided to the municipality, she 

  



46 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

declared that she would run for the NDP and an NDP 

government would deliver the goods. 
 

Well, member for Melfort, the chickens are home.  You said it 

could be done; you said it would be done.  Stand and deliver. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But no, just one more mannequin in the 

display window.  Well let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, this 

opposition will not let the triumvirate off so easily as their own 

stand-in members seem willing to do.  We say, stand and 

deliver. 

 

Rural development is an absolute priority in this province, and 

you have frittered away almost every opportunity to achieve it.  

You have misled the people about decentralization in such a 

grand fashion that I'm actually surprised to see some of you 

enter this Chamber. 

 

During the election, the minister for Executive Council did not 

yet have so many portfolios or so many heavily weighted 

governmental responsibilities, so he had lots of time to 

consider what he should say in regard to decentralization.  He 

made an absolute commitment to the communities involved in 

decentralization.  And what he said was that he would examine 

each announcement relocation on a case-by-case basis -- a 

case-by-case basis, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact when the members on this side reported our belief that 

the union leaders had gotten to the member for Riversdale and 

that Fair Share Saskatchewan would be cancelled outright by a 

new NDP government, the leader of the NDP loudly, clearly, 

and very aggressively denied that that was true.  Indeed when it 

was reported, the member's response was reported in the 

Tisdale Recorder.  And, Mr. Speaker, if a page will stop by, I 

will lay the news clipping on the table for the record.  And I 

quote: 

 

 "For the PC's to say that we would cancel Fair Share is an 

outright lie," Roy Romanow added. 

 

So the member said he would not cancel it.  But in fact the 

member had not been honest with the people of Tisdale or the 

people of Saskatchewan.  He did not study them on a 

case-by-case basis.  He did exactly as we had reported when 

we got the news of the deal with the union leaders, and that is 

that he cancelled Fair Share outright -- the first betrayal of the 

member of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

(1530) 

 

And I ask the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, get up in this 

Assembly and let's hear from you.  Where were you, Mr. 

Member, when your leader was putting these false hopes into 

your own people?  Where were you, Mr. Member, when the 

slick lawyer talked up the folks of Hudson Bay?  Where were 

you when these commitments were made, and where are you 

now that they have been broken?  Will you speak on behalf of 

your own constituents, or will you artfully dodge the 

responsibilities placed squarely on your shoulders by your own 

leader? 

 

And I ask, Mr. Speaker, the member for Pelly, where were 

you when the triumvirate plotted to take the New Careers 

opportunities corporation out of Kamsack?  You had better get 

up in this debate, Mr. Member for Pelly, and you had better be 

prepared to account to the people of Kamsack on your stand 

against them. 

 

And let me give you something to think about, something the 

people of Pelly already know.  If it was Rod Gardner sitting in 

that chair, he would not hesitate for one minute to stand up and 

give his own government the what-for if it was an attack on his 

constituents, the way your government is attacking it.  Show a 

little courage and defend the people you are elected to 

represent, and stop this raping of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

What about community bonds, Mr. Speaker? -- a program that 

members on this side are extremely proud to have created, 

extremely proud.  It is a program that puts the power of 

development and developing rural communities into the hands 

of rural people themselves. 

 

Now we've heard all kinds of rumours and even innuendoes 

from the minister of everything that they have changes in store 

for that program.  Here again we have the member for 

Elphinstone willing to talk to the media but unwilling to reveal 

his plan to this Assembly.  So I say to the Minister of Rural 

Development, I say to the the chorus line behind the front 

benches, you had better find out what the triumvirate has in 

store for community bonds because if it's anything like that -- 

what they mean when they say they like NDP-style 

decentralization -- you'll know they've got it donkey 

backwards. 

 

And let's just touch on that for a moment.  The members 

opposite said they support decentralization, just not Tory 

decentralization.  And now we know what the NDP 

decentralization is.  It used to be called centralization, taking 

jobs and putting them in the capital city.  That's NDP 

decentralization.  Decentralize them from rural areas to the big 

cities.  God help us all if their logic works the same way with 

community bonds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been talking for some time, but you 

understand there is so much left out of this throne speech, in 

fact almost everything has been left out of it that it requires a 

lot to be said.  Let me say that I know that this loyal opposition 

will not simply be an opposition that criticizes without offering 

alternatives.  We intend to hold the government accountable in 

strict and uncompromising terms.  But we will also be 

promising real alternatives, and we will be proposing those 

alternatives, real suggestions to better the lot of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And time will tell, Mr. Speaker, just how 

sincere this government is in wanting to improve things, and 

one measure will be how much attention they will give the 

legitimate concerns and ideas of Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the consideration of my remarks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Firstly I'd like to 

congratulate you on your election and wish you the very best as 

you carry out your important duties.  I am proud  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 47 

and honoured to represent the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld in 

this Assembly.  My riding is located entirely within the city of 

Saskatoon, the beautiful city of Saskatoon, I might add, a place 

that I'm sure is near and dear to the hearts of all members of 

this Assembly. 

 

It contains people from all walks of life, and it's my duty, Mr. 

Speaker, to represent all of them as best I can.  They all believe 

in our province and its future.  They all hope for economic 

recovery and social equality, not just for themselves but for 

everyone. 

 

And what they have in common, Mr. Speaker, is more 

important than any divisions among them.  They desire that we 

recognize that we are united as a community, and we must 

co-operate in attempting to meet the challenges and 

opportunities facing our province.  Or as the throne speech said 

it, we need a renewed spirit of co-operation and community in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- And in that spirit, Mr. Speaker, I will be guided 

by the wisdom and advice of the people who elected me and 

also the wisdom and advice of all members in this House.  Like 

all members, I come here to represent my neighbours.  Among 

my neighbours are small-business people who work long hours 

with modest reward because of the agricultural crisis and 

economic downturn.  Some have lost their businesses.  Many 

are concerned for their future.  They look to us for measures 

that will improve the economy of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have started.  I believe that the initiative 

demonstrated by the Speech from the Throne with respect to 

rollback of the PST and cancellation of harmonization is a 

positive first step from this government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Many of my neighbours, Mr. Speaker, are 

working people who have been let go in middle age and face 

unemployment for the first time in their lives.  They too look to 

us to restore economic activity in our province and to restore 

their dignity to them.  My neighbours are also parents who see, 

for the first time in the history of our province, the educational 

and job opportunities of their children lessened from that of a 

generation ago. 

 

My neighbours include women and young people working at 

part-time jobs without adequate wages, hours, or benefits.  

They include students, Mr. Speaker, with the ability and the 

will to get an education, but without access to education and 

without opportunities for work. 

 

And I'm particularly mindful of their situation, Mr. Speaker, 

because it was my privilege to be provided by the federal and 

provincial governments, as were members of my generation, 

with accessible, affordable, first-class education.  And I believe 

that every young person is entitled to the same opportunities 

that I and my generation received. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Cline: -- Many of my constituents, Mr. Speaker, are 

minimum wage workers and poor people, especially women 

without the resources to feed, clothe and shelter their families 

as they should be.  Some are injured workers who have been 

denied recourse to benefits, medical services, and retraining 

that they should receive. 

 

They look to us to ensure improved occupational health and 

safety to prevent injuries in the work place, one of the leading 

causes of disability in Canada.  And they look to us to ensure 

that the administration of the workers' compensation system 

will be fair and will be seen to be fair. 

 

My neighbours include many Indian and Metis people facing 

poverty, unemployment, incarceration, discrimination, and the 

social problems accompanying poverty.  They are denied their 

fair share of this province's resources.  I believe that we must 

commit ourselves to bringing about a fair and final settlement 

of aboriginal land claims in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we must work 

with Indian and Metis organizations to do all that we can in our 

schools, in the work place, in our social programs, and where 

appropriate by the transfer of jurisdiction, to end the cycle of 

unemployment and poverty among Indian and Metis people. 

 

Although I represent an urban riding, Mr. Speaker, some of my 

constituents are farmers who live in the city by choice or 

because their spouse has a job in town.  In fact I was surprised 

when I was canvassing one day in the election to find on one 

small crescent five full-time farmers, and it made me realize 

that we do have much in common sometimes that we don't 

realize.  Many of our neighbours farm and of course many of 

the people in rural areas work in the city. 

 

We are all familiar, Mr. Speaker, with the international and 

domestic policies and pressures which conspire against the 

ability of our farmers to meet production costs, let alone obtain 

a fair rate of return for their production. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, fortunately many of my constituents are 

comfortable, but they too look to us to meet the challenges, the 

serious problems I've described present, because they do not 

wish to live in a have or have-not society.  They share by and 

large a belief that we are our brother's and sister's keeper, a 

belief, Mr. Speaker, that is fundamental to the fibre of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- So, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot of work to do.  

We are accountable to our neighbours to face these problems in 

a responsible manner.  We will not solve all of them nor can 

we expect to solve any of them alone without the co-operation 

of business, labour, and other sectors of our society. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that to be involved in politics one must 

be somewhat of an optimist.  While we must recognize our 

problems, we must not be immobilized by feelings of despair 

or cynicism, rather we must view these 

  



48 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

difficult times as a time of challenge and opportunity, a time 

for creative thinking and a time for decisive action.  The 

common sense and goodwill of our people and our common 

belief that we are a worthwhile community will see us through 

the problems of today and we will build a better province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one need only look at this magnificent Chamber 

in this wonderful building to appreciate the vision that our 

predecessors had for our province.  When one recalls that just 

after the turn of the century men and women built this great 

Legislative Building on the cold, bald, treeless, and flat prairie, 

one can appreciate that they proceeded with a great sense of 

vision, a great sense of optimism, and a great sense of hope for 

the future. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas had vision when he took 

over a bankrupt province in 1944.  He built in this province and 

he rebuilt.  And so shall we, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I pledge to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members 

of this Assembly, and to the people who sent me here, that I 

will do my part in our province's work. 

 

And once again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to very sincerely 

thank the people of Saskatoon Idylwyld for electing me, and I 

will not break faith with them.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for recognizing 

me.  It is indeed an honour to rise from my place in this great 

Chamber to represent the constituency of Saskatoon Greystone 

and in fact the many thousands of Saskatchewan people who 

supported the Liberal Party in the recent election. 

 

I want to begin my remarks by congratulating the Premier and 

his government on the decisive victory that they achieved.  I 

hope that the hon. members elected to government will prove 

over the next four years that they are truly worthy of the 

enormous trust which has been placed in them by the 

electorate.  And the people will be watching, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want all of us to realize that when the people of Saskatchewan 

gather at coffee time every day at home, at work, the coffee 

shops all over the province to evaluate the government, they 

are talking about all of us in this building.  Therefore I have a 

vested interest in your performance, and I encourage you to do 

well for the people of this province first and foremost, but for 

our reputation as elected representatives and for government 

employees as well. 

 

The people have waited for a long time without a responsible 

administration in this province, Mr. Speaker, and I hope the 

wait is over.  I sincerely hope that this new government will do 

more than simply acknowledge the level of cynicism that exists 

in Saskatchewan today, and will take proactive steps to restore 

the level of trust in this institution. 

It will not be easy but I do believe that it can be done.  In fact 

much of what needs to be done can be done without financial 

cost.  The people must be assured through legislation that this 

government is willing and committed to real change.  The 

Premier spoke of reform during the election.  I know the hon. 

member from Saskatoon Eastview spoke of these reforms 

during the election as well, as did many others on the 

government side.  And so did I and all of our Liberal 

candidates, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Most significant to us was the introduction of the first ever 

code of ethics by all candidates in a political party.  And I'm 

pleased to see that the Premier is following and will introduce 

such a code for the members of this Assembly, given that the 

proposed reforms will affect all members of this Assembly and 

all Assemblies of the future.  I submit that it would be an 

excellent place to involve all-party committees. 

 

Both the Liberal Party and members of the government 

promised the people of Saskatchewan that they would have set 

election dates, and people voted for that change.  People want a 

budget delivered for the province at the start of every fiscal 

year, just as they see happen in the business world, even in 

their own lives as well. 

 

There must be no more ducking the numbers, Mr. Speaker. I 

applaud this government's decision to introduce appropriations 

in this session, and I'd like to urge the government to consider 

changes to prevent governments from running the province on 

special warrants under normal circumstances.  We must set 

time parameters during which the government is obligated to 

produce a budget. 

 

I applaud the initiative shown in the throne speech which 

promises public consultation on the proposed reform package.  

And I urge the government to strike a committee on 

government reform to investigate change and its implications 

on procedure in this House, to propose legislation including 

free-standing votes for all members of this legislature, and to 

deliver this package in the next session. 

 

There will be many things that this government is prevented 

from doing due to serious financial circumstances in which the 

Conservatives have left us, but government reform will be a 

positive step toward restoring the confidence of Saskatchewan 

people in their government. 

 

During the election, all three parties took some positions on 

government reform.  The Liberals, I believe, and I hope that 

several will concede that we were amongst the strongest 

advocates of government reform in the nation.  The NDP 

supported some important reforms to the system -- those I 

mentioned moments ago. 

 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, there is common ground here among 

75 per cent of the voting population at least.  It was the 

Conservatives however, who were out of touch and expressed 

little interest in reform.  They were a government, Mr. Speaker 

. . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

Ms. Haverstock: -- It is with regret by the way, that I notice 

that the hon. member from Estevan is not here this afternoon.  

They were the government, Mr. Speaker, who believed that 

they were all knowing, all seeing, and all powerful. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they were all wrong. 

 

The people of our province became so concerned about 

Conservative government somehow being returned, that many 

people voted against the Conservatives rather than voting for 

the candidate of their choice in many ridings, and the results of 

that fear are seen here today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And with sincere respect to the individuals, all individuals who 

were elected, we have a major imbalance in the proportions in 

this Assembly.  I want this House to know, Mr. Speaker, that if 

people had not been so afraid of re-electing another 

Conservative government, that there would have been at least 

10 times as many Liberals on this side of the House today. 

 

Perhaps justice will somehow be served by all of this.  Perhaps 

having to sit and listen to the facts about their administration 

unravelling before them over the next four years will be good 

therapy for the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- With time they will come to realize how 

severe is the damage that they have caused.  If that is the case, 

then many of our quality Liberal candidates who are denied the 

opportunity to sit in this House will feel that some purpose was 

indeed served by having lost to the members who now form the 

official opposition. 

 

In any case, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives had no interest in 

reform.  As Leader of the Liberal Party, I've been calling for 

reform for two and a half years.  In our platform document, as I 

mentioned, we called for set election dates every four years.  

We called for an independent, ongoing electoral review board 

to deal with boundary issues in view of our shifting population 

trends. 

 

Liberals have called for free-standing votes in the legislature to 

allow MLAs to speak for their constituents and not simply be 

mouthpieces for their party, a reform particularly critical to a 

government proportioned as this one is.  I have suggested and 

supported all-party committees to discuss crucial issues as a 

way of putting the opposition, and yes, back-benchers, and 

indeed independent members to work for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

As an aside, Mr. Speaker, it distressed me to learn that there are 

very few active government committees other than Public 

Accounts and Crown Corporations.  The legislative Committee 

on Agriculture has not met since 1923 in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I am told that this is because agriculture is such 

an important issue that it is discussed every day in the House. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I happen to believe that Public Accounts 

and Crown Corporations get their fair share in this House as 

well.  But I believe that given the problems that we face in 

agriculture there should be regular meetings of that all-party 

committee to which farm 

groups can submit proposals as well as consult with other 

provinces about agricultural solutions. 

 

I propose, Mr. Speaker, that the Agriculture Committee and the 

Education Committee which has also been dormant for 

decades, become active once again to contribute to the 

well-being of this province.  These are the actions people of the 

province of Saskatchewan are expecting this government to 

take, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And there are others.  In the past months and years I have 

travelled Saskatchewan talking with people and listening to 

farmers and city people, youth and seniors, ordinary men and 

women with similar concerns.  And, Mr. Speaker, these people 

do speak with a common voice.  They do not speak of rural or 

urban, north or south, white or native. 

 

They are speaking as parents and grandparents who want to 

know that they can trust their government to be caretakers of 

the future for their children.  They are speaking to us as our 

sons and daughters who want Saskatchewan to be their first 

choice for opportunity to work and study and invest in their 

own futures.  Presently I do not believe that these people have 

been served well. 

 

And I'm going to try to impart to you today what they want, 

Mr. Speaker, and then I am going to observe this government 

to see if it can deliver.  I will not be unrealistic.  I will demand 

a chance to participate fairly in the process, a chance to fairly 

contribute my ideas -- the ideas of the people of the 125,000 

and more people who voted Liberal in this province. 

 

And I will extend my hand in a co-operative spirit to this 

government because I believe that they deserve the chance to 

govern and manage this province of ours in Saskatchewan, as 

they convinced at least half of the people that they were able to 

do. 

 

And when they are not doing a good job, when I hear from 

people that they are not satisfied, when I am not satisfied, I will 

rise from my seat, from this seat, to express my concerns with 

the hope, Mr. Speaker, that you will not see me rise alone, that 

you will recognize that I do represent 25 per cent of the voting 

population for our province, and that you will afford me the 

opportunity to make their feelings known to this House. 

 

The people want the financial mess in this province cleaned up.  

They want the books opened.  And I applaud the Premier and 

the new Minister of Finance for getting on with the job so 

quickly.  I have confidence in the individuals named to the 

financial review committee, and although I would have 

preferred to have seen more private sector accountants 

included, I wish them Godspeed in their duties. 

 

I hope that the fiasco that was government in this province for 

the last nine years will never recur.   And I hope that this new 

government will take the initiative to respect proper procedures 

and to study legislation that will assure people that the breaches 

of the democratic process typical of the last administration will 

not happen again. 

  



50 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

I would like the opportunity to participate in that process, to 

bring forward ideas presented in the Liberal Party platform, 

such as the taxpayer protection Act and the deficit reduction 

Act.  Because, Mr. Speaker, it is not good enough to have 

20-20 hindsight where your opponents' performance is 

concerned.  It's not enough for us to sit in an ivory tower and 

pass judgement on the record of the Conservatives. 

 

It is crucial that this new government consult with people about 

the guarantees that must be built into the system so that the 

government will once again be trusted to police itself. 

 

To have legislation to dictate the terms and conditions of 

government deficit financing, the parameters of taxation is not 

to be feared.  It should be welcomed by this administration, 

because it would help them to do what is necessary without 

fear of reproach from the voters, because it would be the law.  

This government will have to face reality sooner or later, and I 

believe we're all facing it sooner. 

 

In the past two elections it was the Liberals who would have 

gained the most from making expensive campaign promises.  

But I would like to remind the people of this province that it 

has been the Liberals who showed restraint when both the 

Conservatives and the New Democrats were trying to outbid 

each other with campaign promises in the 1986 election. 

 

And again in the recent campaign we built our platform 

entitled, facing reality, because the people running as 

candidates for the Liberal Party were more concerned about the 

future of Saskatchewan than they were about political careers.  

We were honest and open and forthright with the people of this 

province. 

 

But the people in this province, Mr. Speaker, have spoken. And 

this new government indeed has to face the cold reality of 

governing a province with the largest per capita debt of any 

government in North America.  However, I do believe we all 

think there is hope.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that if the Premier 

truly wants to change the course of our future in a positive way, 

he has the power to do so. 

 

This is a time in our history when the Premier and the elected 

members of his government will have to resist the pressures to 

make patronage appointments.  The pressure is from special 

interest groups.  If the Premier really wants change, then he 

must demonstrate the leadership necessary to say no.  If he has 

a plan and if he is committed to that plan, he must lay out his 

plan before the province so that people understand where his 

government is taking us.  And then he must have the courage to 

stay with it until it works. 

 

There's been far too much ad hoc-ery, Mr. Speaker, in this 

province, and indeed in the nation.  It will take vision and 

courage to rise above the temptation to deliver more of the 

same. 

 

(1600) 

 

People are cynical.  They are viewing the government's 

actions with a wait-and-see attitude, and deservedly so.  If the 

only cause for publicly exposing the patronage and corruption 

of the Conservatives is to replace it with more of the same, then 

people in this province will never trust government again. 

 

Having the opportunity to replace favouritism with fairness, 

corruption with competence, intimidation with open process, is 

a second chance at a future for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  If 

this government does not recognize that and does not act 

responsively to restore the public trust, then they will have 

committed a breach far more serious than all of the 

Conservative travesties combined. 

 

This is a new government, but a government with many 

members with experience.  And along with that experience, no 

doubt comes some scores that may have to be settled from 

previous years.  Now having said that, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to urge the Premier to have his advisors tread carefully 

upon the lives of our people in our civil service. 

 

Truly we must send a message to the people of Saskatchewan 

that obscene salaries and severance packages paid to political 

pals will not be tolerated.  But this government must be careful 

to evaluate the individuals being painted with this brush to 

ensure that quality people are not being sacrificed in a purge. 

 

At the same time we must ensure that we send a message to the 

people outside of Saskatchewan as well -- potential investors, 

candidates for positions with the Government of Saskatchewan, 

and private industry here, financial institutions who back our 

debt.  We must send a message that this government will 

provide a sensible, level-headed administration which honours, 

honours, Mr. Speaker, its contracts with individuals and with 

corporations if they are struck in the best interests of both 

parties at the time they were signed. 

 

Our party recognized that this would be a sensitive issue 

following the election.  And to that end, Mr. Speaker, we 

proposed in our platform a system of efficiency and 

productivity audits, that these be conducted on all departments 

to determine not only where there is waste and 

mismanagement, but also where there is competence and good 

management.  And I strongly suggest that the government 

consider this evaluative process which would give the people 

of Saskatchewan, as well as members of our civil service, some 

comfort in knowing that decisions are being made on 

qualitative, not on political bases. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as financially desperate as our government may 

be, they must not use desperation as an excuse to -- and I quote 

myself -- expropriate without compensation legitimate 

contracts with legitimate firms and individuals.  Times are 

tough, and the government will have to implement measures 

which will be perceived as very tight-fisted after years of what 

I have called drunken sailor spending sprees by their 

predecessors. 

 

And although, Mr. Speaker, things are tough, they are not 

hopeless.  With interest rates at their lowest in years, there is 

truly an opportunity to get a handle on things in 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

Saskatchewan -- an opportunity to gain some ground on our 

deficit and accumulated debt.  With sensitive and sensible 

investment initiatives, we can still coax money from the high 

savings rate of Saskatchewan people in these difficult 

economic times. 

 

But time is of the essence, and this government must, Mr. 

Speaker, not only open the books, but ensure that it opens its 

process, opens its doors to the people of Saskatchewan.  The 

people must know that this government will listen not only to 

their problems, but to the solutions that they are proposing.  

And we must draw the people closer to government, Mr. 

Speaker, for they have been pushed away for many years.  And 

the distance between government and the people is causing 

bitterness and resentment.  We must work together to heal the 

pain that has been caused in the election.  We must close the 

gap between urban and rural, business and labour.  And we 

must move forward together as one Saskatchewan people.  We 

must make room in these great halls, Mr. Speaker, for the 

people to feel welcome with their concerns, because for too 

long since the people have been made to feel truly welcome in 

this, their institution. 

 

It's time that this institution truly became the government of the 

people, spending the people's money, not some bottomless pit 

of the spoils of power.  And it is time that we focused on 

setting a direction for the future, on looking, really looking, for 

solutions to the problems we talked about during the election -- 

problems of unemployment, and hunger, health care funding, 

and agriculture. 

 

And speaking of agriculture, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 

farmers, western Canadian farmers, have just taken a major 

step forward for agriculture in Canada by initiating the trek to 

Ottawa.  I would like to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to 

congratulate them. 

 

And I'd also like to commend the Premier of Saskatchewan and 

his staff for assisting the farmers with the organization of the 

trip and for facilitating many of the interprovincial government 

arrangements.  And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to personally 

thank the Premier for not only inviting me to join the lobby, but 

for attending the Liberal caucus meeting in Ottawa. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in spite of whatever criticism may 

arise about the cost, that this was definitely one of the best 

investments this government could make on behalf of 

agriculture in this province, and indeed Canada. 

 

To the Leader of the Opposition, a man who was introduced 

not long ago in Melville as the saviour of agriculture, let me 

say this, Mr. Speaker:  there is no one person who will save 

agriculture.  It was evident to all of us who travelled to Ottawa 

that there had been far too much behind-closed-door 

discussions.  It was obvious that too few members of our 

federal parliament really understand the problems faced by our 

western Canadian farmers, that too few understand the crisis 

proportions of the problems. 

 

And I must say to the Leader of the Opposition that I find it 

inexcusable, considering that the hon. member from Estevan 

has had the ear of the Conservative government and the Prime 

Minister for nine years, it is unforgivable 

that so many of his Conservative federal colleagues in Ottawa 

had no understanding whatsoever of what we were facing in 

Saskatchewan.  That, sir, is what happens when agriculture 

becomes a campaign weapon, when midnight flights to Ottawa 

and eleventh-hour phone calls to the Prime Minister are the 

tactics.  The result is that very few people are involved in the 

process, and the rest of the Conservatives in Ottawa have come 

to think that the biggest problem the former premier faced was 

getting re-elected. 

 

That has cost us credibility, Mr. Speaker, with the federal 

government.  And I think last week's show of solidarity and the 

conspicuous absence of some individuals sent a clear message 

that things have changed. 

 

I want the Leader of the Opposition to know as well, Mr. 

Speaker, that with or without his support in Ottawa, a great 

deal of progress was made, and the stage has been set for more 

progress in the future.  The farmers of this province are 

showing courage and strength, and we as their elected 

representatives must support that bold new direction. 

 

Therefore as the MLA for Saskatoon Greystone -- and I think it 

is significant that an initiative in agriculture be put forward by 

a member who represents the largest urban constituency in the 

province of Saskatchewan -- I wish to put before the Premier a 

suggestion that a national agriculture summit be convened in 

our province by March of 1992.  I had hoped the Premier 

would have included this in his Speech from the Throne, but 

none the less I am pleased to be the person to bring this 

forward. 

 

I suggest that a working committee be struck and instructed to 

bring together politicians east and west and north, agricultural 

economists, international market experts, specialists in 

agricultural research and development, lenders, and farmers.  

Let us convene here, Mr. Speaker, in the heartland of 

agriculture, and let us set politics aside to discuss the solutions 

of our farm debt crisis, our government program inadequacies, 

our transportation problems, the food subsidy war, and our 

future as food producers. 

 

And let's not be fearful, Mr. Speaker, of letting the rest of this 

nation know that if we are incapable in Canada of growing our 

own food, we will no longer be a sovereign nation. 

 

We must not be afraid to find out what is wrong with the Free 

Trade Agreement as it pertains to agriculture, GRIP, and NISA 

and the Crow rate.  The farmers know where the flaws are, Mr. 

Speaker, so let them tell us.  And let us use all of the power of 

this Assembly to correct them. 

 

We must not be afraid to ask lending institutions to write down 

part of farm debt in this province.  We must consult with 

people who have studied the issues, Mr. Speaker, and there are 

many experts.  We must let farmers ask the experts questions.  

And we must disagree on some things and agree on others, and 

we must emerge with a solid plan to take to the banks and to 

Ottawa and finally, perhaps, in Canada have a national 

agriculture policy.  We are all on the same side of this issue, 

Mr. Speaker, and we must quit acting like adversaries. 

  



52 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

If we can get cash moving through our economy again instead 

of through this convoluted government financial pipeline from 

Ottawa, through our farmers, directly into the lending 

institutions, Mr. Speaker, then things will begin to change.  

There will be jobs and sales tax revenue and housing starts and 

full restaurants and busy shopping malls, and many people will 

rethink their plans and decide to stay in this province.  The 

line-ups at food banks will diminish, and we can sit down and 

talk about repairing our shell-shocked social programs and 

education system.  And then the government will have the tools 

to eliminate a horrendous deficit and debt. 

 

Let us initiate this summit together as Saskatchewan politicians 

with our farmers, and let us make it successful in raising 

awareness, in posing long-term agricultural solutions before the 

next federal election, so that all parties will understand that 

farmers are a force with which to be reckoned. 

 

Let us give our people some hope, some sense of direction.  It 

is a long, cold, and depressing winter for many people on our 

farms, given the problems that they have to face.  So let's give 

them something to work towards before seeding time.  Let us 

create a vehicle to which we can offer suggestions, a forum in 

which they can be heard.  Let's be the leaders.  Let us open the 

doors of this institution to the people in a true sense and 

unleash the true power of government.  I submit, Mr. Speaker, 

that bringing the focus of the nation to the problems in 

agriculture here in Saskatchewan and indeed in Canada, that 

this is the most important undertaking before us in this 

province of ours today. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk now about other things which 

are also of great importance, things I listed when referring to 

the solutions to other problems which are contingent upon 

solving the agriculture crisis. 

 

There are many things, Mr. Speaker, which have been 

neglected by the Conservative administration.  And now I 

know that they had tremendous initiative to build and invest 

and privatize.  And I hope some of the investments that they 

made with our $12 billion pay off; we need every dime.  But 

this past administration neglected many crucial components of 

our society.  It is one thing for the past government to have said 

that it had no money to fund programs for child care and 

interval houses for battered women and drug and alcohol 

treatment centres -- and I'd like to say this to the Leader of the 

Opposition -- it is one thing for the previous administration to 

have cut money from the prescription drug plans and to have 

tightened up regulations on welfare and social assistance while 

claiming that funds are tight, but it is quite another when the 

money is being squandered on your friends in high places.  It is 

quite another to use this money, when you claim you do not 

have any, on advertising campaigns for Fair Share 

Saskatchewan and other feel-good campaigns designed to 

improve the government's image at election time. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what is more reprehensible is for the past 

administration to have shown a complete lack of concern for 

the people who have had the fewest options in life, the people 

who rely on the social conscience of the 

government to help them with their struggles.  The government 

of this province was without a heart for the last nine years, Mr. 

Speaker, and that has caused tremendous pain -- financial, 

emotional, and indeed physical -- for many of our citizens. 

 

(1615) 

 

During the election campaign I spent a great deal of time 

talking about the economy and taxation and agriculture and 

health care and government reform.  Some people wondered 

why I didn't talk more about seniors and child care and 

women's issues and poverty because they know how personally 

sensitive I feel about those issues.  And I want to tell you that it 

is not because Liberals did not care.  It was because, in my 

circumstances, we had to prove our ability in areas other than 

those in first order to gain the credibility necessary to elect 

representatives.  But we do care about these issues. 

 

One only has to look at the history of the Liberal Party, see 

what we in fact cherish as being defined as Canadian citizens 

that were put forward by the Liberal Party of Canada, to see the 

tremendous contributions that have been made.  And we did 

make many contributions, Mr. Speaker, in being 42 years as 

government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some people would have liked me to have focused more on 

education, on the environment, on native issues during this 

campaign, because they know that I have been an educator in 

this province and I have travelled throughout the province and 

the North and I've seen the third-world conditions. 

 

Some people with whom I have worked in theatre and in music 

wondered why I didn't spend more time talking about the arts 

and culture. 

 

People who know how strongly I feel about unintended 

pregnancy in this province and the lack of education and 

support for teen-age mothers, asked why I didn't spend more 

time talking about that issue as well.  And I intend to pressure 

government for action on this crisis too. 

 

But now that I am here -- and I did refer to myself as the moral 

opposition, not defined in the right wing sense of moral, to this 

government -- I do issue this fair warning.  I now have a 

platform in this Assembly from which I can draw attention to 

these issues, a voice in the legislature where I can rise to ensure 

that our government does demonstrate caring toward all of the 

people in our province. 

 

I told people that I would deliver government with heart.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, although the people of Saskatchewan did not elect 

a Liberal government, although they did not elect an official 

opposition that showed concern for these issues over the last 

nine years, they did elect some very fine individuals on the 

government side who are committed as well to solving these 

problems.  And, Mr. Speaker, the people did elect, I believe, a 

certain kind of opposition of one. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, one way or another, I intend to keep 

my promise to the best of my ability; and with all of 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

the resources at my disposal, I intend to deliver that 

government with heart. 

 

I want to say this also, Mr. Speaker, that I am here in this 

House as the result of an election, a contest which through the 

very hard work and dedicated commitment of hundreds of 

volunteers, and through the support of over 50 per cent of my 

constituents, I was able to win.  But there are two other fine 

individuals that were in that race, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to 

acknowledge their commitment to this province today.  The 

issues of which I just spoke, and particularly the issues of 

hunger and poverty and the environment in this province, were 

of extreme importance to the former MLA for Saskatoon 

University, Mr. Peter Prebble. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- And his voice on those issues will be I 

believe truly missed but not forgotten, as I know that he will 

continue to work to the best of his ability in every way for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And the youth of our province, 

particularly the troubled youth, must be a priority for this 

administration. 

 

And I want now to applaud the efforts of Mr. Gary Hellard, the 

Conservative candidate, who I hope will serve as an important 

conscience for the opposition on many issues in this area. 

 

I do not wish to spend the next four years in this House 

opposing everything that comes before us.  I do wish to gain a 

deeper understanding of the workings of the legislature and I 

will ask the indulgence of the hon. members as I learn. 

 

I have asked the government to consider, to give consideration 

to, my request for additional funding for my office in the 

legislature to enable me to respond to the many concerned 

Liberals and groups across the province who see me as their 

spokesperson.  I want to be able to convey the concerns of 

people who don't see eye to eye with the government in a calm 

and sensible way.  And I expect to have the opportunity to be 

heard.  I expect that opportunity because I expect this 

government to care about what the people think. 

 

And I expect the government to take criticism constructively 

and to rework legislation if it is faulty or if it can be improved.  

I expect it and so do the people who finance this exercise in 

democracy, the Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 

I will also be appealing to you, Mr. Speaker, for special 

consideration to waive the need for a seconder in my case 

which would greatly facilitate my being able to introduce 

motions and Bills.  And as you are fully aware, it is quite an 

antiquated regulation since it was brought about in the years 

when there were no political parties, and to merely set aside 

frivolous motions. 

 

The actions of the government in these initial days and weeks 

will be crucial in determining the character of this 

administration.  People are watching.  They're holding their 

breath to see if we have really voted for change or if we will 

have more of the same.  People are wondering if 

the New Democratic Party will have learned anything from 

past mistakes, if they have learned anything from the previous 

administration. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in the true spirit of Saskatchewan people, I 

think all of us in our province are willing to give them a 

chance.  I am certainly willing to give them the chance too.  

But, Mr. Speaker, I give this government fair warning: the 

people have lost patience.  They will soon judge the 

government's intentions.  So be careful.  Be careful to measure 

actions against the best interests of all of our people.  Be 

careful to keep politics out of government and not to replace 

high-priced friends of the Conservatives with your own friends.  

Be grateful for the support of the unions, but remember that the 

people will be watching negotiations and settlements to see if 

there appear to be unpaid debts.  And remember that I, too, will 

be here to watch and to listen and to voice concerns and 

comments of all Saskatchewan people who raise them with me. 

 

I look forward, Mr. Speaker, as do the people of this province, 

to seeing the NDP plan to revitalize this province and to get us 

back on our feet.  I will not allow the government to hide 

behind the mistakes of the Conservatives.  We want to know 

the truth, but we do not wish to be preoccupied with what the 

past administration failed to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan people wish to concentrate on 

what the present government is going to do, and we do not 

want to be kept waiting long to see results.  Therefore we shall 

begin today, Mr. Speaker, to keep a report card on the 

government -- a report card on its performance in each session. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, at the end of four years the people 

will measure those results against their expectations, against 

the promises made by the Premier, by his government.  And it 

will be the people again who will pass judgement.  For a few 

days following the campaign, four years seemed like a very 

long time between elections, but there are many challenges to 

be met by this government and many, many opportunities to be 

pursued. And for me there is much to learn, much to contribute 

I hope, to the future of this province. 

 

Suddenly, Mr. Speaker, four years does not seem like much of 

a long time.  I hope that every member of this Legislative 

Assembly will serve the people well.  I am proud and I'm 

excited to be a part of it.  So I say, let the business of 

government begin. And I thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: --Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

express my sincere congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on 

your democratic election as Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly which I know you will fulfil in a most capable and 

distinguished manner. 

 

As a new member of the legislature, I shall always do my best 

to abide by the rules of the House and to be guided by Your 

Honour's decisions.  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 

congratulate all of the members in the Assembly on their 

election to the legislature.  And I would like to thank 

  



54 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden for moving the Speech 

from the Throne with her perceptive comments, and to the 

member from Last Mountain-Touchwood for such an eloquent 

seconding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the constituents of 

Bengough-Milestone for the confidence that they placed in me 

on October 21, 1991.  I want to take a moment to thank these 

people for sharing their concerns with me, for their warmth and 

their friendliness and their support. 

 

I know I am representing a terrific group of constituents in the 

legislature, and it is with honour and awe that I make my first 

speech here today in the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan.  And I do represent a constituency of strong 

character and people with a great spirit of community and 

democracy. 

 

I was raised on agriculture and politics and, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to take a moment to honour my grandparents, Forrest and 

Nina Henrickson who were great pioneers in our community, 

our province, and our party.  They exemplified the spirit of 

hard work and co-operation in their lives.  They fought hard 

and dedicated themselves to the formation of the CCF.  In their 

home, Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd were household 

names.  With great passion they supported medicare and helped 

establish the first community-based medical clinic here in 

Regina. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- When I asked my grandmother on her 90th 

birthday if I should seek political office, she quickly replied, 

why of course -- you're not afraid of hard work are you?  She 

passed away two days later and I wish to honour her memory 

here today.  It is her courage and vision that exemplifies the 

great spirit of the people of Saskatchewan that we represent 

here in this Assembly. 

 

Bengough-Milestone constituency is an area which covers 

9,500 square miles with a wide-spread population.  It has a rich 

and an interesting history.  The area and the climate has 

produced a strong and hardy group of people.  Our 

constituency is made up of many towns, villages and farms.  

Agriculture and oil and gas are important industries in our 

constituency, along with many successful small businesses.  

Our farmers, small businesses, and communities have been hit 

hard by the agricultural and economic crisis.  The quality of 

life in rural Saskatchewan is a major concern of the 

constituents of Bengough-Milestone. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I campaigned over the last two years, I have 

never been as aware and close to the conditions of the people in 

Bengough-Milestone and our province.  People are suffering 

and there is so much uncertainty and insecurity.  As I've met 

with people in our constituency I have seen anger and despair.  

But I've also seen hope, a fighting spirit, people who are not 

giving up but are prepared to fight for the principles that this 

province was built on -- principles of compassion, common 

sense, community, co-operation, and integrity. 
 

I have met with people in the constituency working on 

municipal boards, town councils, hospital and school boards, 

people working on rural development 

committees, people establishing co-operatives to save local 

businesses and creative entrepreneurs.  Progressive ideas and 

creativeness are well evident in our people and our 

communities in Bengough-Milestone.  The people of 

Bengough-Milestone need to be listened to, and I am proud to 

represent their ideas and their concerns in the legislature. 

 

I campaigned on the principle that a politician must be more 

than just a good speaker, but also a good listener. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- I am committed to listening to the constituents 

of Bengough-Milestone and improving the two-way 

communication between constituents and their MLA.  One 

constituent of mine just recently told me how he had noticed 

such a positive change in attitude since October 21. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1630) 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- People are not expecting miracles overnight, 

but they are excited about a change -- that there is a 

government who wants to listen to their ideas and concerns.  

They want a government that is honest and takes leadership in 

what it says and does. 

 

I now, Mr. Speaker, would like to address how I feel our 

government has taken leadership to meet its objectives.  Mr. 

Speaker, as we have only been in government since October 

21, and now six weeks later, I am proud of our record and our 

throne speech.  We have already accomplished a great deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people in Bengough-Milestone over the last nine 

years had become sceptical and cynical of government.  They 

want a government which is honest and accountable.  They 

want a government which uses common sense financial 

management.  We are in a financial nightmare with a budget 

deficit of not $265 million, as we were led to believe, but $960 

million. 

 

But our Premier has decisively acted to save money by 

appointing a small cabinet of only 11 members, by cancelling 

Fair Share, by putting an end to ludicrous severance packages, 

and by cut-backs in advertising, travelling, consulting, and 

staffing.  That's millions of dollars in savings. 

 

We are determined to eliminate waste and mismanagement.  

We said we'd open up the books, and we are presently doing 

that.  The financial review panel is in place for a full public 

accounting.  The taxpayers of this province have a right to 

know where their hard-earned dollars are being and have been 

spent. 

 

As one wise constituent said to me, we don't want something 

for nothing but we want something for something. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, the 7 per cent expanded and 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

harmonized PST was an unfair tax.  As many of you know, the 

southern part of Bengough-Milestone constituency lies along 

the American border.  The expanded PST was driving people 

across the border and hurting small businesses in 

Bengough-Milestone as well as the ordinary taxpayer.  We said 

it would be repealed, and I'm proud to say we are now 

legislatively repealing the harmonization of the expanded PST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- On Saturday in Bengough a small-business 

man smiled at me and told me how his business had picked up 

since the PST had been repealed.  Repealing the 7 per cent 

expanded PST will stimulate the economy and provide much 

needed revenue in our businesses, our communities, and our 

province. 

 

Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, is the core of our rural character and 

it needs special and immediate attention.  The farmers and 

ranchers in the constituency of Bengough-Milestone have been 

hit hard by years of drought, grasshoppers, low commodity 

prices, high input costs, and debt load.  Being raised on a farm 

near Gray, presently a partner in our family farm at Milestone, 

and in meeting the people of Bengough-Milestone, I cannot 

help but be aware and affected by the agricultural crisis. 

 

I am proud to say, as a New Democratic government, we have 

already in our short term of office made agriculture, the 

protection of our family farm, and our rural way of life as a 

priority. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- I am proud to be named as a member of the 

caucus committee in agriculture.  Our commitment to 

agriculture has been shown in our Ottawa trip to lobby the 

federal government for increased federal cash assistance for 

prairie grain farmers as soon as possible.  Farmers need cash 

now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers want a long-term program that stabilizes 

their income.  The shortcomings of GRIP and NISA need to be 

addressed.  This was also expressed by the farm lobby to 

Ottawa.  We as a government are committed to working for 

improvements to GRIP and NISA and negotiating a better deal 

with Ottawa. 

 

Farm debt must be addressed immediately, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

was pleased to see it addressed in the throne speech.  Farmer 

after farmer has told me in Bengough-Milestone, we do not 

want our debt written off, but give us more time and a reduced 

interest rate.  I am proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that meetings 

with farmers, farm organizations, and financial institutions are 

now under way to resolve the debt crisis, and secondly, to 

examine concrete ways to make sure that young men and 

women have the opportunity to choose farming as a way of 

life. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, if we do not keep farmers on the 

land in Bengough-Milestone, we will not save rural 

communities and an important way of life in rural 

Saskatchewan will be destroyed.  I am dedicated to fighting for 

agriculture and a rural way of life over the next four years in 

the legislature. 

 

Constituents in Bengough-Milestone also see health and 

education as high priorities in their lives.  In 

Bengough-Milestone there are three hospitals, three nursing 

homes, and many excellent schools serving the communities.  

Because of a decline in population and budget cuts, these 

facilities are experiencing difficulty in maintaining the high 

quality service they strive for.  We may not have, as promised 

by the Conservatives, a factory in every town in our 

constituency, but we do need schools and quality health care 

facilities in our communities.  These are small industries in our 

communities, and they're vital for a quality of life. 

 

Nursing homes and programs such as Meals on Wheels and 

home care are vital services meeting the needs of many seniors 

in our constituency.  The public school-based dental program 

was an excellent program serving our children.  I feel confident 

that with new direction and priorities in health care and with a 

community based model focusing on prevention and wellness, 

health care in rural Saskatchewan will improve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- I am impressed at the quality of care that I see 

in the hospitals and nursing homes I have visited in 

Bengough-Milestone.  Health care is a priority and a right for 

all our citizens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I previously alluded to the fact that education 

is also a priority to the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan, 

every student has a right to the best education possible.  Being 

a teacher, I feel strongly about education.  It must be the very 

best that we can afford.  I am impressed with the constituents 

of Bengough-Milestone as they do not want to see education 

suffer because of tough economic times.  They see education as 

a priority and do not want to jeopardize the future of our rural 

students.  They know the effect of the agriculture crisis and the 

imperativeness of keeping the family farm in rural 

Saskatchewan.  School boards, teachers, parents, and taxpayers 

are willing to work together to help solve the problems they are 

facing. 

 

If we are going to keep our young people in Saskatchewan, we 

must offer them an affordable, quality education.  We must 

stop the exodus from Saskatchewan of one of our most 

valuable resources, our youth. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- There are many more priorities which must be 

set right in this province: protection of our environment, 

affordable housing, decent highways and roads, opportunities 

to work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must manage our province wisely.  In the last 

nine years we witnessed an unprecedented record of 

privatization, a form of privatization seeming to run on the 

principle: if it makes money, sell it -- or should I say give it -- 

to a friend.  Our mandate of a mixed economy of private, 

co-operatives, and public sectors working  



56 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

together is for the benefit of all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very pleased with the announcement of a 

six-month by-election time limit being set.  Many constituents 

of Bengough-Milestone will be very pleased with this 

legislation as they feel representation is an important principle 

of democracy.  The principles of democratic reform are vital to 

our commitment to a more honest, open, and accountable 

government in the 1990s.  I know the constituents of 

Bengough-Milestone want a government that follows 

democratic principles and listens to the people it represents. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I look 

forward to the next four years in serving the people of 

Bengough-Milestone and Saskatchewan.  To me, politics and 

government are people working together to achieve what 

cannot be accomplished working alone.  That's why public 

office is one of the greatest privileges that a community can 

bestow. 

 

In Saskatchewan, our community is our whole province -- rural 

and urban.  And Bengough-Milestone is an important part of 

the total picture of our province.  By working together we can 

turn the province around and make Saskatchewan a better place 

to live.  I feel confident in the direction taken by the throne 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will support the Speech from the Throne and I 

urge all members to do so.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

am pleased to have the opportunity to enter the debate for this 

the first throne speech of a New Democratic government under 

the leadership of Premier Roy Romanow.  I'd also like to thank 

the voters of Shaunavon constituency for electing me on 

October 21.  It is my hope that I will be able to provide them 

with quality representation while I remain a member of the 

legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to tell the people of 

Saskatchewan about the constituency I represent.  Shaunavon is 

located in the south-west part of the province and covers 

approximately 10,000 square miles in an area known as the 

Palliser Triangle.  Highway 13 passes through my constituency 

and is aptly named the Red Coat Trail because of the historic 

march of the North West Mounted Police west to Fort Walsh in 

the Cypress Hills. 

 

Shaunavon has little in the way of industry, but has many grain 

farms and cattle ranches and an active small-business sector.  

The oil industry is present in Shaunavon and Frontier areas. 

 

A new national park that includes some of the last vestiges of 

the original open prairie can be found in the Grasslands Park at 

Val Marie.  At Ponteix and Eastend important archaeological 

work is being done and significant fossil finds have been made. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the basic survival and well-being of my 

constituency remains in agriculture, and that is what our new 

government will be addressing in this throne speech and in our 

future actions. 

 

Shaunavon constituency has had a storied political history.  

Our voters have elected representatives of all political stripes.  

In 1934 my constituency was one of five in Saskatchewan that 

elected a CCF member to the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- In 1971 we elected our first New 

Democrat.  When I look back at all the quality people that have 

served the people of Shaunavon so well, it is a humbling 

experience.  All that I can promise to my constituents is that I'll 

serve you to the best of my abilities, that I'll make every effort 

to consult and inform you on all the pressing issues that we are 

facing today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- And, Mr. Speaker, our new government 

indeed faces a formidable agenda.  The previous government 

has left us with a legacy of debt, high taxes, squandered 

provincial assets, and reduced services. 

 

Under the previous government's fiscal mismanagement, our 

province has had the highest inflation rate in Canada; the 

fewest housing starts in the last decade; the second highest 

incidence of low income families, second only to 

Newfoundland; the slowest growing labour force in Canada; 

the second highest personal income tax in Canada; a record of 

10 straight budget deficits that leave us with an accumulated 

deficit of $5.8 billion; and tens of thousands of people leaving 

our province each and every year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, nothing would sum up the philosophy of the 

previous government better than to contrast how it treated 

big-business friends and the many hungry children who 

presently live in Saskatchewan.  Last year the Devine 

administration budgeted $800,000 to feed hungry children in 

this province.  It is estimated that this would be about $12 per 

child.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, $12 per child. 

 

Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with the severance package that 

was arranged for the past president of the Progressive 

Conservative Party, Mr. George Hill.  Children who have only 

known hunger for all their young lives were to receive $12  

_- 3 cents a day.  Mr. Hill, on the other hand, for his few years 

of service to SaskPower was to receive $1.3 million.  Mr. 

Speaker, there is only one word that can describe this -- 

obscene. 

 

(1645) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, the Devine government left 

the people of Saskatchewan with a legacy of crushing debt, 

shattered hopes, broken dreams.  The people of Saskatchewan 

weighed that government in the balance and found it wanting.  

That is why, Mr. Speaker, I and 

  



December 4, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

many other New Democrats now stand in this place as a new 

chapter and our political history opens. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all across this province there's a new climate of 

optimism.  Once more decisions that involve Saskatchewan 

people will be made here in Saskatchewan.  Once again we'll 

be masters of our own agenda and destiny.  This throne speech, 

Mr. Speaker, is the first of many steps forward to a new era of 

prosperity and progress for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, in the short period of time 

that this government has been in office, we have already begun 

to restore the faith of Saskatchewan's people in their 

institutions of government. 

 

In this throne speech we have introduced legislation that will 

reduce the obscene severance packages created for the friends 

of the Devine government to a level that is both equitable and 

comparable with standards in private industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this throne speech we'll introduce legislation 

that will remove the expanded provincial sales tax.  That's 

saving Saskatchewan consumers millions of dollars. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- This will not completely solve the 

problems facing our people, but it is the first of many steps that 

will be introduced by the government that will once again 

create optimism and opportunity for our Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture remains in a continuing crisis.  We are 

all aware of the cause of our problems.  They are not 

Saskatchewan made but rather the actions of the Europeans and 

Americans. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, one of the first actions of this government 

was to assist the farm lobby in its objective of obtaining 

increased federal cash assistance for prairie grain and oilseed 

producers and to obtain early payment of this assistance. 

 

As part of the farm lobby we sought a commitment from the 

federal government to feature discussion to achieve solutions 

on issues including a call for Canada to convene an 

international summit on the grain price war; improvements to 

GRIP and NISA; development of a long-term national 

agriculture policy to deal with farm debt and to provide 

stability on farm income in the grains and oilseed sector; and 

the need for a direct Canadian lobby effort to Washington to 

end the international grain price war. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this on-to-Ottawa trek, as it was called, recalling 

past efforts of the Great Depression was supported by 

politicians representing every party in Manitoba, the 

Saskatchewan Liberals, and ourselves, as well as the NDP and 

Liberal representatives from Alberta.  Noticeable by their 

absence, Mr. Speaker, were the Conservatives from both 

Saskatchewan and Alberta. 

Mr. Speaker, at a time when virtually every farm organization 

in western Canada was participating in this effort to make 

Ottawa aware of how desperate the situation is here in 

Saskatchewan and western Canada, it was regrettable that the 

Conservatives in Saskatchewan and Alberta chose not to 

participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of the efforts of the farm lobby, the 

Prime Minister has indicated, and I'd like to quote him here.  

These are his words, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 I indicated to the Premier that when the Minister of Finance 

returned I would meet with him and the Minister of 

Agriculture to see if perhaps some programs could not be 

structured in a way that would be of greater benefits to the 

farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that as a result of the farm lobby the 

Prime Minister is prepared to act.  And I'd like to point out that 

our Premier has also indicated that our government would be 

happy to offer the Prime Minister any support that we can in 

his efforts to increase farm financial aid. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe this farm lobby we 

saw develop over the past year represents all of the best 

Saskatchewan traditions.  There was people working together, 

setting aside old conflicts and antagonisms in order to create a 

sense of urgency and a sense of awareness in other parts of 

Canada, of the desperate state of agriculture here in the West. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to place on record the names of all 

the organizations who participated in the lobby presentations in 

Ottawa on November 26 and 27, 1991:  Concerned Farmers 

Movement of Saskatchewan, Concerned Farmers of Alberta, 

Concerned Farmers of Manitoba, the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, National Farmers Union, Saskatchewan Women's 

Agricultural Network, Western Canadian Wheat Growers 

Association, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, 

Credit Union Central, Saskatchewan Flax Growers 

Association, Saskatchewan Pulse Crop Development Board, 

Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association, Saskatchewan Sheep 

Development Board, Saskatchewan Milk Producers 

Association, Christian Farm Crisis Action Committee, the 

Family Farm Foundation, Saskatchewan members of the Wheat 

Board Advisory Committee, Saskatchewan members of the 

Senior Grain Transportation Committee, chairmen of regional 

ADD (agriculture development and diversification district) 

councils, Western (Canadian) Barley Growers Association, 

Saskatchewan Canola Growers Association, Saskatchewan 

Women's Institute, Saskatchewan Pork Producers Marketing 

Board, United Grain Growers, Inner-Church Committee on 

Rural Life. 

 

And they were accompanied by the Premier of Saskatchewan; 

Minister of Agriculture and Food for Saskatchewan; Deputy 

Premier of Manitoba; Minister of Agriculture, Manitoba; 

Leader of the Liberal Party, Saskatchewan; Leader of the NDP, 

Manitoba; Leader of the Liberal Party, Manitoba; Leader of the 

NDP, Alberta; 

  



58 Saskatchewan Hansard December 4, 1991 

Liberal agriculture critic, Alberta. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us here should thank the hundreds, -- no, 

thousands -- of farmers and concerned people who make up the 

membership of these organizations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I believe that only by all of us working 

together can we solve the enormous agricultural problems 

facing our province.  But, Mr. Speaker, where there is a will 

there is a way.  And working together we will not only solve 

the agricultural crisis facing us today but any and all other 

problems that will arise in the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is the hope of this government that the 

co-operative efforts demonstrated by the farm lobby will be the 

operative philosophy of this government, replacing the politics 

of confrontation symbolized by the actions of the previous 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- It is our intention, Mr. Speaker, to work 

with people and for people.  And in this throne speech I am 

pleased to see that local municipalities will once more be given 

the right to decide what kind of municipal electoral system they 

want.  This is how it should be, Mr. Speaker -- local people 

deciding the kind of electoral system that meets their needs.  

That's democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, the government will not allow 

constituencies to be without representation for years as was the 

practice of the members opposite. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Only people that were openly 

contemptuous of the ideal of democracy could condone that 

practice.  And that practice will not occur again, Mr. Speaker, 

as long as we are the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- In October, the people listened.  The 

people learned.  They knew they had been betrayed by the 

members opposite.  They went to the polls in record numbers, 

and when they voted, they said never again will the members 

opposite have the opportunity to betray, to deceive, and to hurt. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just want to draw the member's 

attention to . . . He's getting very close to using language which 

is not acceptable.  The word deceive would be better if another 

word were used in that stead.  Continue. 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, in this throne speech we have returned to 

our Saskatchewan tradition of people working 

together not just for themselves, not for a few but for us all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Saskatchewan people working together not 

just for their future but for their children's future; Saskatchewan 

people working together not just for ourselves but for a better 

province and a better country; Saskatchewan people working 

together bound again by common ideals, common objectives; 

working together in common purpose and common dedication 

to one great cause -- the betterment of our province and our 

country. 

 

Saskatchewan people working together once more in the 

tradition of J.S. Woodsworth, Tommy Douglas, Woodrow 

Lloyd, Allan Blakeney and all those pioneers who worked to 

build a co-operative commonwealth here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this throne speech we build on the work of our 

pioneers here in Saskatchewan.  They were people with a 

vision, people with a dream, people who dreamt of how 

political party, power, could be used for the benefit of ordinary 

people, for the good of all.  People who dreamt of building a 

better world by building a better province, they gave us much 

to be proud of. 

 

In this throne speech, Mr. Speaker, we dedicate ourselves once 

more to the ideal that the real measure of individual and 

national worth is the quality of life we provide for all; that what 

we do for the least fortunate of our fellow citizens is what is 

truly valuable, and that the real measure of political worth is 

how to provide for people so that they can live useful and 

meaningful lives. 

 

This throne speech is the first step to a new era of prosperity 

and progress for the people of Saskatchewan.  I am pleased to 

cast my first vote in this legislature for a throne speech that will 

serve my constituents of Shaunavon well.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


