




















































Hansard: December 13, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 255 

 December 13, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Tuesday, 

December 17 ask the government the following question: 

 

 Regarding Marge Haddad: (1) Was she fired?  If so, was she 

fired with cause or without cause?  (2) Was the position she 

held filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement.  

(3) What were the details of Marge Haddad's employment 

including compensation, job description, and qualifications?  

And what are the details of employment including 

compensation, job description, and qualifications of her 

replacement? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday, December 17 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding Myles Morin: (1) Was he fired?  If so, was he 

fired with cause or without cause? (2) Was the position he 

held filled by a replacement? If so, name the replacement.  

(3) What were the details of Myles Morin's employment 

including compensation, job description, and qualifications?  

And what are the details for employment including 

compensation, job description, and qualifications for his 

replacement? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday, December 17, 1991 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding Diane Leib: (1) Was she fired?  If so, was she 

fired with or without cause?  (2) Was the position she held 

filled by a replacement?  If so, name the replacement.  (3) 

What were the details of Diane Leib's employment including 

compensation, job description, and qualifications?  And what 

are the details of employment including compensation, job 

description, and qualifications for her replacement? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday, December 17, 1991 ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding Elaine Kivisto:  Was she fired?  If so, was she 

fired with cause or without cause?  Was the position she held 

filled by a replacement?  If so, name the replacement.  What 

were the details of Elaine Kivisto's employment including 

compensation, job description, and qualifications?  And what 

are the details of employment, including compensation, job 

description, and qualifications for her 

replacement? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday, December 17, move that an order of the Assembly do 

issue for return showing: 

 

 Regarding Marg Benson:  Did she consult regarding any 

departments, boards, or commissions other than those 

directly under the responsibility of the Minister of 

Agriculture?  If the answer to number 1 is yes, name the 

departments, boards, or commissions which were the subject 

of her consultation, and the proportion of the costs of her 

contract paid for by each department, board, or commission.  

What was the total amount of money paid to Marg Benson?  

And provide a breakdown of the total to show what part for 

expenses and identify the exact nature of the expense.  Was 

the contract awarded to her advertised or tendered, and if not, 

why not?  What specific employment history does she have 

that qualified her for this contract?  And what was the exact 

duration of her employment on this contract, including the 

date she started receiving pay? 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am very pleased 

today to introduce to the Assembly, through yourself, in your 

gallery a group of women who are in a program to help women 

return to the paid work force.  It's a program sponsored by 

Canada Employment and Immigration through Atira 

Consulting.  They're here with their instructors, Arlene Franko 

and Phyllis Chuly. 

 

And I want to mention that during the election campaign, 

myself, Shirley Schneider and Louise Holloway, representing 

their respective parties that were running in the election, went 

to a question and answer period with the class.  And I was very 

impressed with how prepared they were to ask us questions and 

how interested they were in the answers.  So I'd like you to 

help me welcome them today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Mr. Speaker, through you, to you and to this 

Assembly, I would like to introduce three very special people 

to me.  In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are my wife Sylvia and 

my twin daughters, Jacky and Josy.  I'd ask that you please 

welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce to you and to all members of this Assembly a very 

special person in my life.  My wife Carol is observing today 

and she is in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  I would like all 

members to welcome her to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to recognize and 

welcome to the Assembly, in your gallery, Don Kelsey, 

  



256 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

regional co-ordinator of the National Farmers Union, and Jim 

Robbins, also with the National Farmers Union.  Welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Financial Management Review Commission 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Premier.  Yesterday, Mr. Premier, we asked you to apologize 

for the Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade 

because he misled the House and misled the public with respect 

to individual like Arden Knoll, which has been misrepresented 

by the minister. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have before me a newspaper article that 

says, again, the Minister of Economic Diversification has 

misled the House.  And he owes an apology to not only the 

Assembly, but to Mr. Dutchak, to Roland Crowe, to the FSIN 

(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations).  And I ask the 

Premier today if he is prepared to demand an apology from the 

minister and if in fact he would ask the minister to apologize to 

Mr. Sid Dutchak and to Mr. Roland Crowe, chief of the FSIN. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The answer 

to the member from Estevan is that I do not see any grounds for 

the request made by the hon. member from Estevan.  Members 

in this House are free to interpret documents which are tabled 

or to interpret events and statements as they see fit, and you 

people of course take full advantage of that.  In the case of the 

minister, his interpretation is stated as there.  The documents 

speak for themselves, and I don't see any basis for the 

member's question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, obviously this is connected to your special inquiry 

set up called the Gass Commission with its political agenda and 

ministers like your Minister of Economic Diversification who 

do the interpretation, the political interpretation.  Today in the 

newspaper we find out that it was fine for the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) administration to hire Mr. Dutchak as a 

lawyer.  The FSIN and the Indian community thought it was 

fine.  But if another administration does, then it's totally 

unacceptable and it's that kind of interpretation, plus picking on 

an innocent third party, that we're worried about and the 

public's worried about. 

 

Now I asked you, Mr. Premier, wouldn't you think it's fair if 

you want the media to endorse this process of yours, your own 

Executive Council commission, to have the member either 

muzzled or apologize or put some guide-lines in place.  Or in 

fact, Mr. Premier, let the auditor, the Provincial Auditor, head 

up this commission, so we can avoid the political mud slinging 

and the witch-hunt that your political ministers are on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I mentioned to the 

hon. member before as I will again this morning -- I don't know 

how many times I've given this answer to them -- the 

open-the-books exercise stems from the fact that when he was 

the premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the Provincial 

Auditor complained, and rightfully so, that 50 cents out of 

every dollar spent -- raised and spent -- he could not account 

for.  That said that that was closed government.  That said to 

us, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that needed to be done was to 

open up the books. 

 

And we've established what we think is an independent, 

credible commission with its own terms of reference, free to 

interpret those terms of reference as it sees fit to do its job.  

This commission, I'm sure, will know whether or not it's going 

to be bound by any comments made by any member of this 

Legislative Assembly, including your comments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, don't you see that by having your 

cabinet colleagues go on these political witch-hunts -- picking 

on Arden Knoll when your previous administration hired 

athletes, picking on Sid Dutchak or picking on the native 

community for having him hired, when in fact you did the 

same -- and then setting up, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, on a 

commission of inquiry that is going to be in secret, that is 

partisan, and set up for the very reason to pick on people, 

according to the Minister of Economic Diversification, when 

you put those all together, your hand-picked commission, 

tainted by politics and now picking on innocent people, is 

beginning to have concerns, Mr. Speaker, not only among 

Wheat Pool . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  The member has a question . . . I want the member 

to ask his question.  All right? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary.  Mr. Speaker, supplementary to 

the Premier.  The members opposite, Mr. Speaker, can laugh 

and make a joke of picking on innocent people.  They don't 

mind the witch-hunt. 

 

My question to the Premier is simply this:  don't you think as 

the result of the embarrassing witch-hunt comments made by 

your minister, which he is being asked to apologize for in this 

House and to the public, that it's time to put the Provincial 

Auditor in charge of this commission so it's open to the public 

--  no secret meetings -- and everybody in Saskatchewan will 

know exactly what's going on, so that we can protect innocent 

people from the witch-hunt that we've seen in the past? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I repeat again to the hon. 

member from Estevan that the Provincial Auditor is fully 

co-operating and fully being apprised and informed of the 

circumstances pertaining to the Gass Commission.  And the 

fundamental question which is being driven over and over 

again, erroneously but I think quite transparently -- I think we 

know the reasons why -- is wrong. 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 257 

The Provincial Auditor's involvement from the very beginning 

is there, and as I say he's a participant.  The report will be 

tabled.  The Public Accounts Committee will meet in the 

ordinary course of events.  The report will be debated.  And I 

think that the report will lead to future suggestions which will 

strengthen not only the Provincial Auditor but Public Accounts.  

I think it will improve accountability.  It will continue to make 

government more efficient.  And that's basically what's behind 

this. 

 

I would say before taking my place finally, Mr. Speaker, that if 

the hon. member is saying that in the interim the government 

should stop its obligations of governance, that, I tell the hon. 

member, we will not do, we cannot do, constitutionally. 

 

If we see an expenditure which we think is not proper, such as 

your expenditure of $20,000 a month of corporate strategy 

advice on your media, we have to make a decision.  And the 

decision we made was to cancel it and to make the contract 

public.  That'll take place.  It won't affect Gass.  He can decide 

one way or the other what he wishes to do with any of those 

things. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, this commission is a creature of 

Executive Council. And your minister says, after he picked on 

Arden Knoll said . . . the government revealed the contract 

Tuesday, calling it the kind of thing the Gass Financial Review 

Commission has been hired to find. 

 

Mr. Premier, if that's the kind of thing that it's hired to do, to 

pick on athletes when in fact we find that you hired athletes 

and you promoted them; if it's in fact to pick on Sid Dutchak 

when in fact you hired him and used him; if it's to pick on 

innocent people, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, don't you agree 

that you could have the public auditor, the Provincial Auditor 

head this commission up, so that in fact the partisan comments 

and the excuse to make those partisan comments wouldn't be 

an avenue for people to be picked on that are innocent victims 

of the witch-hunt that you're on today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member 

from Estevan again this is not the objective of the Gass 

Commission.  The terms of reference are very clear.  This is the 

hon. member's deliberate misinterpretation of the terms of 

reference of Gass.  I think the hon. member really, with the 

greatest of respect, is losing a great deal of credibility in this 

line of questioning. 

 

He knows Mr. Gass well and he knows all the other members 

of the commission very well too, and he knows the terms of 

reference. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You bet we do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Yes the member, the member says 

they bet they do.  The credibility of the opposition here is being 

very seriously undermined by refusing to participate in the 

Gass Commission and by categorizing 

all of this on a false assumption, on the false assumption of a 

witch-hunt.  This is not a witch-hunt. 

 

This is a process to enhance and improve the efficiencies of 

government which if I may say so, and I say so with some 

trepidation lest you will seize on this, which if I may say so is 

badly, badly in need in the province of Saskatchewan after nine 

and one-half years of the way you managed the finances of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier.  

Mr. Premier, I just ask this question.  Do you agree with your 

minister when he said, and I quote: he didn't know what work 

Dutchak had done, but he was outraged by the amount of the 

contract which was $125 per hour.  Do you agree with that 

comment, Mr. Premier, when in fact you under your 

administration hired Mr. Dutchak to do similar kind of work at 

similar kind of expenditures?  Do you agree with the comment 

from your minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I think that there are 

many aspects of the particular contract which, by the way, you 

are raising now, but I'll have to refer to it, the Dutchak contract.  

I find interesting when my colleague, the House Leader raised 

this issue, that this was entered into by something called the 

Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation, something which 

no one even knew existed until about two weeks before the 

election campaign took place. 

 

The issue which is as important as the hourly rate to us, I think, 

is what it is and how it was legally and how it was in terms of 

open government that a company called Saskatchewan 

Diversification Corporation, SDC for short, not to be mistaken 

for STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company), was 

allowed to function without this kind of scrutiny. 

 

That's the whole point.  We want to open up the books -- SDC 

closed the books and the contract was made in secret and only 

revealed after we got into power -- to determine whether or not 

this is the kind of thing a government should be doing.  That's 

exactly the issue partly that Gass is talking about.  How is it 

and what is it and under what authority does the Saskatchewan 

Diversification Corporation get set up?  I ask you, sir, why did 

you keep it secret for all of these months . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the Premier.  Mr. Dutchak has said that he was asked by the 

aboriginal community to do consulting and Dutchak's claims 

and I quote: are backed by Chief Roland Crowe, head of 

Saskatchewan federation of Indian nations who says Dutchak 

was instrumental in getting a bilateral agreement on Indian land 

entitlements signed just before a provincial election. 

 

Now, Mr. Premier, do you agree with your minister that 

economic diversification and land entitlement, very 

  



258 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

important to the aboriginal people, is a complete waste of time 

for Mr. Dutchak to be working on and being paid $125 an 

hour?  Is that what you're saying? That it's a complete waste of 

time?  And you are disagreeing with Chief Roland Crowe and 

disagreeing with a man that you hired to do the same just 

because you're on this political witch-hunt.  Is that what you're 

saying, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. 

member from Estevan, I'm saying exactly the opposite.  I'm 

saying that we very much support the question of treaty land 

entitlements.  We very much support the need to move these 

along.  We have no objections of counsel and other advisors 

being hired. 

 

I'm not sure whether the $125 an hour is or is not the issue.  

But the issue for me is this, that this contract was entered into 

by the Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation.  This 

contract was entered into by secret.  This contract involved an 

expenditure of public funds around whom nobody in the public 

absolutely knew anything about.  In fact we didn't even know 

about the contractor until 10 days before the election.  That is 

secret government.  That's closed-door government.  That is 

wrong and that is what this government is going to eliminate.  

We're going to have open and honest government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, if you don't want this to be secret, then, 

Mr. Premier, why don't you open it up to the public? 

 

I repeat, Mr. Premier, if you don't want government to be 

secret, then why don't you open up your commission to the 

public and to the media and to everybody else and come clean?  

Why don't you do that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, it is exactly that kind of 

a question and premise which this government objects.  The 

premise behind that question is why don't "you," Mr. Premier, 

open up "your" commission.  That is the way you operated it, 

sir; that's not the way we operated it.  We have set up an 

independent commission which will make the decision of 

openness by itself because we want it to operate independently, 

impartially, and fairly because . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before I recognize the next 

member I just want to ask members to please not interfere 

either when the Premier is speaking or when the Leader of the 

Opposition or a member in the opposition is asking a question.  

It serves no purpose.  If we can't hear the question, then we 

can't hear the answers.  So I ask members to please co-operate, 

let the member ask his question, and let the minister or the 

Premier answer the question. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, I'll ask members, please, to 

distinguish between a new question and a supplementary 

question.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  New question for 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your tribunal is paying one Donald 

Gass $10,000 per month.  This tribunal has said that it meets 

each Tuesday.  If there are five Tuesdays in a month, Mr. 

Premier, that works out to $2,000 a day.  Your minister of 

Economic Development and Trade has said that paying Mr. 

Dutchak a thousand dollars a day, a sum that you yourself paid 

Mr. Dutchak when you were deputy premier of this province, 

to work on one of the most fundamental agreements ever 

achieved in this province with our native people, is too much.  

And yet you will pay Mr. Gass $2,000 a day to do his dirty 

work behind closed doors. 

 

Mr. Premier, in light of what your minister has said, do you 

think that's right? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I must say that this is a 

sorrowful and somewhat pathetic question by the hon. member 

from Thunder Creek.  Because the hon. member from Thunder 

Creek either knows -- I say he does know or should know -- 

that with the exception of Mr. Gass, none of the other 

commissioners have taken a per diem. 

 

Gass's payment has been revealed publicly.  It's either $300 a 

day or $400 a day, not 2,000 or some wild figure which has 

been dragged out of the air. 

 

And you know, the thing that is most discouraging about this, 

they do this purposefully, hoping that somehow there will be a 

press headline out of the operation.  Three of the 

commissioners are in effect being public spirited by no per 

diems, only actual expenses.  And that figure -- I don't have it 

in front of me but I can provide it very quickly to the hon. 

member, and you have it -- is nowhere near what he says. 

 

Now why do you raise that figure?  You know why you raise 

that figure in that term and that context?  Why is it that you 

refuse to even deal with Gass?  You do so because you do not 

have at heart the best interests of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan in improving the books and the guide-lines.  

What your real agenda is is to protect nine and one-half years 

of waste and mismanagement.  You're not going to get away 

with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I hate to interrupt question period again, but 

that excessive clapping simply takes up question period time 

and I think it's unwarranted.  Let's be reasonable in our actions 

in this Assembly. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary 

to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, you do not seem to see the 

contradiction here today.  Your minister can stand in this 

House, mislead this House in the regard of Mr. Dutchak and his 

salary, and make a big thing out of what Mr. Dutchak was 

being paid.  Things that were very similar to what you paid 

him.  We raised the question of Mr. Gass's salary.  We've 

raised the questions of what is  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 259 

happening behind closed doors with this particular tribunal 

which you created.  I do give you credit for one thing, Mr. 

Premier.  You at least have not paid your political partisans on 

that tribunal. 

 

Mr. Premier, given the evidence laid before you today, the 

contradictions of your minister in this House, will you now do 

the right thing, appoint the Provincial Auditor as the head of 

this tribunal?  Let him pick who he thinks is proper to review 

the books of Saskatchewan and open it up to the public.  Will 

you do that, sir, today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the hon. 

members opposite the books will be opened, notwithstanding 

their best attempts at obstruction.  They will be open.  I 

guarantee you that, sir. 

 

I just simply say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of 

this Legislative Assembly and the public, how it is that the 

member is off after one answer --the wild and irresponsible 

accusation designed to malign Mr. Gass and the commission on 

the pay -- he's off that, but this is symptomatic of exactly what 

they are doing, in an attempt to try to destroy the credibility of 

people, which they will not succeed in doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And the question is, that has to be 

answered over and over again, Mr. Speaker, is why are they 

doing this?  I say to the hon. member, why is not you and your 

leader, why are you not meeting with the Gass Commission?  

Why are you not giving your submissions to them?  Why are 

you not making the suggestions to them?  Why are you making 

these wild and irresponsible accusations? 

 

And I tell you why you're doing it.  You do not have at heart 

the interests of the province, I repeat again.  You think you're 

still in government and the old ways.  And by golly, you were 

defeated precisely because of that attitude.  There's a new 

government, it's going to be open and honest and accountable, 

and those books will be open, sir.  They will be open.  I 

guarantee you that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Justice or the minister 

responsible, and pertains to the present government's 

announcement that they had fully ratified the United Nations 

Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

 

It is our understanding, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 

government in its consultations with each province allowed 

that provinces could ratify the convention with reservations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, did the government consult with any interest 

groups outside of the government departments in an attempt to 

reach a consensus before committing the province to this 

document, as his government has so 

consistently told the public it would in its new and open style 

of public policy making? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I cannot answer that 

question specifically and directly, and I will ask the Minister of 

Justice on his return on Monday -- he's out of the legislature on 

government business today -- to give the answer.  I'll decide 

when and if I want to take notice, with all due respect to the 

member from Rosthern.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that once we 

get the information in this regard, we'll provide it. 

 

What I'm saying however is this, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think we do need a clarification here 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, we don't need a clarification. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, we do need a clarification here.  Either 

the Premier's answering for the government . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Order.  Either the Premier's answering for the 

government today or . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right.  If you're answering for the 

government today, fine.  But then the minister can't come back 

and make a further clarification. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- My answer, Mr. Speaker, is that I do 

not know what consultations the Minister of Finance has or has 

not taken, and that the Minister of Justice has taken. 

 

But I also say, as part of my answer, is that the convention 

which we were asked to sign is the convention which was 

signed by all of the other governments in Canada, every one of 

them -- every one of them -- which would have left the 

province of Saskatchewan in a position of refusing to sign and 

being the only province in doing so.  And I don't even think the 

member from Moosomin would be in favour of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, a supplementary, and maybe that 

could be passed on to the Minister of Justice.  And considering 

the fact of the signing, the reason for the fact that the 

convention wasn't signed as yet was because of the fact that the 

government wanted to allow time for people to voice their 

concerns . . . And certainly many of us have had letters raising 

a number of concerns regarding the convention. 

 

And so again as I want to indicate to the minister, was the 

minister aware that he could have had reservations?  And if he 

was, why did he feel it was not necessary to consult with 

service clubs, day-care associations, community organizations, 

or church groups on an issue in which they feel so strongly 

about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I simply repeat again the 

earlier parts of my answer to the first question. 

  



260 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

But I simply say this to the member opposite.  The federal 

government on this issue urgently required a consent or a 

rejection by the province of Saskatchewan.  We all know that 

the Prime Minister wanted to announce the international 

convention with respect to the rights of children and did so 

yesterday or the day before yesterday.  In fact as the member 

will know, this subsequently led to other difficulties which the 

Prime Minister may or may not have had. 

 

The government was in that position on the 41 or 42 days in 

which we were in power.  We had to make a choice.  We took 

the choice.  I don't know what consultations took place.  The 

minister can provide that to the member opposite privately or 

publicly later. 

 

But that was also a very important consideration, namely the 

urgency of the decision.  I guess the question that must be 

answered by you, sir, is whether you oppose the signing of that 

convention.  We support it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 7 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 7 -- An Act to amend The 

Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out, as I did 

yesterday, that we . . . I pointed it out to the Minister of Justice 

in the Assembly yesterday that we are in the process of 

reviewing the documents, and we have asked the Legislative 

Clerk to draft a . . . the Law Clerk to draft an amendment that 

would deal with the last few months of a government's 

mandate.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we are waiting for the 

Law Clerk to give us.  And, Mr. Speaker, based on that time 

line, we have not received it yet, and I therefore ask the 

Assembly to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have to inform the Assembly that the 

member for Morse adjourned the debate on this Bill the other 

day.  Therefore under the rules he's not allowed to adjourn 

debate again.  Now another member certainly can adjourn 

debate. 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to speak in 

support of Bill 7 which would ensure that by-elections are held 

within six months of a vacancy occurring in this Legislative 

Assembly. 
 

The deplorable practice to leave some taxpayers and voters in 

Saskatchewan and this Legislative Assembly for nearly two 

years cannot be allowed to happen again in this province. 

 

The feeling of frustration, anger, and helplessness was 

prevalent in people throughout my constituency as they went 

unrepresented month after month in this legislature.  The 

anxiety created by the on again and off again rumours of a 

pending by-election was cruel to say the least. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ with the comments yesterday from 

the hon. member opposite who expressed concern about winter 

weather.  We have people commuting over a hundred miles a 

day to work all winter in Saskatchewan. School buses run daily 

throughout the winter in our province.  And our children are 

shuttled around the province throughout the winter in pursuit of 

recreational sports.  Surely if given a chance, people would 

welcome the opportunity to travel a few miles to exercise their 

democratic right to vote even if it is cold and snowy. 

 

We are known to have long winters in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, but no one can remember a winter lasting two years, 

the length of time . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- The length of time people have recently gone 

without by-elections in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I strongly endorse Bill 7 which will 

amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act to 

ensure that by-elections are held within six months of a 

vacancy.  And I urge all members to show their support for this 

Bill. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Johnson: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the amendment 

to The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former premier spoke about this issue in the 

Assembly, April of this year.  And at that time he was asked by 

my colleague from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain if he would 

support the private members' Bill to restrict the amount of time 

a constituency could go unrepresented in this House. 

 

His response was essentially that he was the premier and had 

the power to set the dates of elections, and he would not 

support the passage of a Bill that would curtail that power. 

 

At that time, Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Turtleford had 

been vacant for 10 months; the constituency of 

Souris-Cannington had been vacant for nine; the Indian 

Head-Wolseley constituency had been vacant for 15 months; 

the Kindersley constituency had been vacant for 16 months -- a 

total of 50 months of vacancies in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

However the former premier's response was that he had the 

power to call elections to fill vacancies and he would not do so 

in these cases because he was going to call an election in six 

months.  He did not call an election in six months; it took him 

seven.  He stated clearly at that time that he thought it was 

acceptable to let constituencies of Kindersley, Indian 

Head-Wolseley, go unrepresented for 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 261 

nearly two years.  He also showed that he did not want the 

constituency of Turtleford or Souris-Cannington to be 

represented for nearly a year and a half. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was the record of arrogance followed by the 

previous government.  I do not make any argument that 

vacancies can be avoided or that they are the fault of the 

government.  However, I do argue that when seats become 

vacant, the constituencies have a right to be represented as 

quickly as possible after the resignations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the Blakeney administration there were 13 

vacancies and these seats were vacant for a combined total of 

50 months.  That is less than an average of four months 

vacancy for each seat.  Under the previous administration, Mr. 

Speaker, there was also 13 vacancies.  However these seats 

remained vacant for a combined total of 124 months.  That's 

nearly a year for each constituency on average. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not a record to be proud of, and it is this 

blatant foot-dragging by the previous administration and a 

misuse of power that has brought about the introduction of this 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite may argue that the British 

parliamentary democracy provides for traditions allowing for 

the Premier to call by-elections.  And that is true. 

 

However, the tradition of the British system of government is 

one of democracy, and that is what this Bill intends to promote.  

It will prevent the abuse of privilege by the Executive Council 

and will ensure that the people of Saskatchewan are afforded 

their right to be represented. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a 

pleasure for me to speak on this Bill because it is such an 

important Bill to the people of Saskatchewan. It is very 

important in the overall scheme of democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, short months ago I was . . . spent a fair amount of 

time travelling around the province.  And the thing that struck 

me as I was spending a huge amount of time outside of my own 

constituency -- which at the time was called Regina North, now 

renamed and with a little different geography; it's now Regina 

Albert North -- but, Mr. Speaker, I and my colleagues in the 

then opposition, now government, spent an inordinate amount 

of time travelling around the province and dealing with issues 

that should have been dealt with by the duly elected MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) in those constituencies. 

 

I don't pretend that I, certainly, I was any substitute MLA in 

any way, shape, or form.  I tried to help the good people in 

Indian Head-Wolseley, and I guess I'm grateful for the 

opportunity to have met a huge number of very fine people 

there.  That's a part of my history, if you like, that I will always 

cherish. 

(1045) 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Bill intended to set . . . to allow for and 

indeed insist upon timely by-elections is very important to the 

democratic process, a process that I suppose is typified by a 

couple of things. 

 

In 1215, King John was forced to sign the Magna Carta at 

Runnymede.  That has become a popular symbol of liberty, and 

it's become a symbol of people's resistance to tyrannical rule 

starting in 1215. 

 

And there have been many subsequent happenings respecting 

democracy.  As you will know, Mr. Speaker, the Speaker is 

traditionally pulled to the Speaker's chair because early 

Speakers -- early in the history of parliament -- tended to be 

beheaded when the king or queen decided that the Speaker was 

not doing what the king or queen wanted. 

 

So our democratic rights to representation have been hard 

earned over the centuries.  And any time we try to pull back 

from it, any time we try to govern without duly elected 

representation, I think we are not only not holding our own, 

we're regressing into a more dangerous era. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a second symbol, if you like, of representation 

needed occurred in Boston, December 16, 1773 when there was 

a dispute between the colonial administration and the 

parliament of Britain.  The parliament of Britain was saying 

that they had the right to collect duties and to taxation on tea 

and the colonists were claiming that they in fact had the right to 

set taxes and collect duties and that sort of thing.  And that 

wound up with I think it was 342 cases of tea being thrown 

overboard.  And the Boston harbour became the world's biggest 

teapot for a night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and of course many more, I am 

rising in support of this Bill that puts a definitive time line on 

how long a seat can be vacant in the province of Saskatchewan.  

I'm certainly going to support the Bill and I urge all hon. 

members to support the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  In lieu 

of the fact that the member from Morse has all ready indicated 

that we have concerns with the Bill the way it is, in view of the 

fact that we are intending to put forth amendments, and in view 

of the fact that those amendments had not until this moment 

been drafted by the Assembly Law Clerk . . . and I was just 

informed by one of my assistants that the amendments were 

delivered to our office just as I speak, or five minutes ago.  So 

certainly this does mean now that if we have the weekend in 

order to address those amendments that we will prepare to 

pursue this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Point of order.  Clearly, Mr. 

Speaker, the member's indicating that they have amendments 

they want to move next Monday, and they'll have the weekend 

to look at them.  I want to clearly indicate that in order to move 

this Bill into committee stage next Monday, it has to get second 

reading today.  So I think the proper thing to do here would be 

to let it go  



262 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

today, if that's the only reason that you're holding it up, because 

you still have the weekend to look at the amendments.  The 

amendments will not be made in second reading.  Therefore if 

that's the reason, I would not then give leave to adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, speaking to the point of order.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think that we as an opposition 

are in a position that we are going to allow ourselves to be 

stampeded into any kind of a situation.  When the amendments 

are ready, by leave on Monday we can go into the committee 

even though we are going into the . . . I think the Government 

House Leader is aware of the rule that on Monday, if we feel 

that we want to go into committee, we would give leave to go 

into committee immediately thereafter. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, giving . . . in view of the fact that 

we are being rushed in making decisions because the legislative 

agenda from the government is slow in coming forth . . . we 

still don't know what the agenda is until 9:30 of the day.  Like 

today at 9:30, I was informed by the Government House 

Leader exactly what the agenda for the day would be.  Given 

those kinds of considerations, I think it is important that we 

protect the right of the opposition to be effective.  And in order 

to be effective we must move now that this debate and second 

reading be adjourned. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd like to draw to the attention of the hon. 

member that on December 11 he adjourned debate also on this 

Bill and therefore he cannot adjourn debate again. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe the points have been well 

raised and well taken and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on the point of order I 

wonder, are you going to make a ruling today or are you . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . well on whether or not the rationale 

for adjourning the debate is legitimate when they say that the 

amendments . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Sorry, that's not a point of order.  Any 

member can adjourn debate at any time.  The House makes the 

decision on that. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 8 -- An Act 

respecting the Tabling of Documents and Certain 

Consequential and Other amendments to Other Acts resulting 

from the enactment of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, this Bill, we've indicated the same 

process has taken place and then bringing forward amendments 

and some discussion.  We've been waiting for the Legislative 

Law Clerk.  And on that basis, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative 

Law Clerk has needed time as well to put the process in 

motion.  We beg leave to adjourn debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon Ms. Carson that Bill No. 9 -- An Act to 

amend The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I again ask to adjourn debate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, if we could, we have 

several speakers who want to speak on this Bill.  If we could 

have our speakers speak and then go through the similar 

process we did in the first Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I see no problem with that.  That 

would be fine. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased that 

this Bill respecting The Urban Municipality Act has been 

introduced and is now before us for a second reading.  And I do 

thank the members opposite for allowing me to speak to it in 

second reading because, Mr. Speaker, over the past nine and a 

half years our urban governments have suffered from neglect.  

They've been subordinated.  They've suffered budget cuts, 

off-loading of program costs, and a shift of the provincial tax 

burden to the local municipalities. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the previous government has also made 

the civic governments of our major cities less representative, 

less democratic, and less accountable, by repealing the ward 

system of representation.  And this is wrong, Mr. Speaker, very 

wrong, because it is a fundamental principle of Canadian 

democracy that we have direct representation in our 

governments, not proportional representation, as some 

members in this House would argue, but direct representation. 

 

Canadians have the right to be represented by a member who is 

accountable to them, accessible to them, and who represents 

their concerns to government.  This is the system that we use at 

the federal level.  We elect MPs (Member of Parliament) from 

single member constituencies.  Provincially, we elect MLAs 

from single member constituencies.  However, civically we're 

forced to elect them from the city at large as a result of the 

former government's repeal of the ward system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the fault of our civic governments; this 

is the fault of the previous administration.  It is the provincial 

government that is constitutionally responsible for the 

maintenance of municipal government, and it was the former 

provincial government that neglected that responsibility. 

 

The abolition of the ward system by the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) government showed the total lack of respect that 

they have for local government and for the principles of 

democracy that our province and our country is founded upon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there must be a change in attitude regarding local 

government.  People want involvement, they want 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 263 

accountability, they want accessible government, and they want 

open government.  They want it provincially and, Mr. Speaker, 

they want it at the local, municipal level as well. 

 

It was wrong of the PCs to do away with the ward system in 

1988.  No one had requested that abolition of the ward system.  

Citizen groups didn't request it.  The cities didn't request it.  

And, Mr. Speaker, the voters themselves did not request it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- It was a little scheme cooked up, I don't know 

where, for dubious reasons, and the voters did not like it one 

bit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Bill 9 will provide for much-needed democratic 

reform in our local government system.  This is a reform that 

city governments and citizens have requested time and time 

and time again.  It's a reform that must be implemented before 

the next civic election.  We cannot ignore the public will.  That 

is why I support this Bill.  It will provide for a mandatory 

return to the democratic principles that voters demand. 

 

I have served on the city council of Saskatoon since 1979.  And 

I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, the mandatory return to the 

ward system is supported by the voters and by the city 

councillors of Saskatoon.  It's the only means by which the 

ward system can be implemented without further undue costs 

or time wasting to the cities of this province.  If we don't 

require the return to the ward system for Saskatoon and Regina, 

it will be nine years before the wards will be back. 

 

The previous government abolished the ward system in the 

spring of 1988.  They argued at that time that the ward system 

would mean increased spending, that it would mean councillors 

would look only at their constituency needs and not as the 

needs of the city as a whole. 

 

That's a view, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that is more 

indicative of the way Tories see government than the way the 

ward system functions.  It's the Tories who have shown 

disregard for democratic principles, who have spent out of 

control, and who have ignored the interests of the 

Saskatchewan electorate while they pursue their politics of 

divide and conquer. 

 

That's the Tory vision for this province.  It's not the New 

Democratic vision for this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my personal experience with the ward system is 

that city councillors do not simply act in the narrow interests of 

their own ward.  When we would discuss pot-holes on a 

particular street, it would inevitably lead to a discussion of 

what kind of a program can be put in for the whole of the city.  

When we would discuss swimming pools in a particular 

neighbourhood, inevitably we would discuss the impact on city 

budget and the forward planning that we needed to have.  

When we discussed zoning issues in a particular area of the 

city, again the city councillors would look at the implications 

for the whole of the city. 

(1100) 

 

The Tory arguments, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, 

demonstrate a total lack of understanding of the process of 

civic government.  That's not surprising since we see here 

today that they seem to have a total lack of understanding of 

the process of provincial government. 

 

I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from comments made by former 

members of the Progressive Conservative government in the 

Leader-Post in March of 1988, quote: 

 

 Councillors act mostly on behalf of their particular wards.  

The resulting system puts political pressure on councillors to 

do things for their wards, but in the process no one speaks for 

the City as a whole. 

 

That is blatantly untrue.  That is a statement that demonstrates 

a total lack of understanding of the process of civic 

government. 

 

Again, Mr. Embury said: 

 

 In the ten years prior to the ward system, City spending 

increased by 80% -- discounting inflation.  During a similar 

ten year period after the ward system was introduced -- again 

discounting inflation -- spending by the City increased by 

380%. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all that is is yet another indication of the big lie, 

the flim-flam that ignores the plundering of the 

revenue-sharing system . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just want to caution the member that 

we do not . . . That's unparliamentary language and I would 

caution her not to use it. 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I apologize and I withdraw the word.  Thank you.  

But flim-flam is all right is it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All 

right, I'm going to re-emphasize the flim-flam part of my 

remarks. 

 

Again, another quote, again from Mr. Embury. 

 

 With no government or opposition in civic government the 

ward system lessens the influence of voters.  The reason is 

that voters can only cast their ballots for the candidates in 

their wards, and as such cannot vote for or against the entire 

council. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, what we've seen is that we get the same 

council returning over and over again.  There is no 

rejuvenation.  There is no new faces elected to city councils 

because it seems only the familiar faces are the ones that the 

voters will know when they go into the ballot booth and look at 

the shopping list ballot that they have to choose from. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the arguments placed by the opposition are 

wrong, betray a lack of understanding of the nature of civic 

government.  Coincidentally, Mr. Speaker, the arguments 

placed by the PCs about the ward system are very similar to 

those argued by the Liberals the last time we introduced this 

legislation under the Blakeney  



264 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

administration. 

 

And coincidentally, Mr. Speaker, the arguments are just as 

arrogant and just as colonial now as they were when they were 

put by the Liberals.  Not only are the arguments the same, Mr. 

Speaker, but so are the results.  The arguments by the PCs are 

arguments for elitist politics -- elitist politics in our local 

governments -- in which power is concentrated with the rich, in 

which community organizations and leaders are locked out of 

the process. 

 

The cost of campaigns in a constituency the size of all of 

Saskatoon, 180,000-plus people, the largest city in this 

province, the cost of campaigns for an at-large system is very, 

very expensive.  Campaigns cost money because media costs 

money.  Many individuals simply cannot afford to run for civic 

office as a result. 

 

The former government argued that the ward system that didn't 

include party politics was irresponsible.  I disagree with that 

whole-heartedly.  We do not want party politics in our civic 

government.  For that reason we must return to the ward 

system.  It's the only reasonable means to provide for 

effectively sized constituencies, a base for accountability, and a 

base for an individual to run for civic government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the result of the abolition of the ward system was 

chaos.  In 1988 there were 70 candidates on the ballot in 

Saskatoon.  In 1991 there were 54.  Mr. Speaker, how is any 

voter supposed to choose reasonably and responsibly amongst 

54 people?  How are they to know who stands for what? 

 

The abolition of the ward system has also shown a decline in 

voter turn-out.  We want in a democracy to have as many 

people as possible exercising their democratic right to vote.  In 

1985 when we had the ward system, 50.6 per cent of the city of 

Saskatoon turned out to vote.  In 1991 without the ward 

system, there was only a 42 per cent voter turn-out. 

 

This legislation, Mr. Speaker, Bill 9, has been introduced 

because Saskatchewan cities want it, voters want it and city 

councils want it.  We know this because 74 per cent of Regina 

voters supported the plebiscite on a return to the ward system 

in 1988.  We also know this because Saskatoon City Council 

itself voted on June 20, 1988 that an urgent letter be sent to the 

former premier and his minister of Urban Affairs and all 

members of this Assembly stating that the city council of 

Saskatoon reaffirms its support for the ward system. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the ward system 

is the most feasible means of providing more responsible, 

effective local government.  It's the best means available for 

empowering local citizens to become involved in their civic 

governments.  It restores the principles of direct representation 

that are fundamental to our system of democratic government.  

And, Mr. Speaker, it is a major step to ensuring that 

Saskatchewan people have accessible, accountable, honest, and 

open government.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

support bringing forward proposed legislation concerning the 

ward system for urban municipalities.  The return to the ward 

system is an important part of our government's democratic 

reforms.  For some who would suggest that democratic reforms 

are only necessary in the legislature, as had been pointed out 

from the parties opposite, and both parties, I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that the ability to return to the ward system is perhaps 

one of the most significant democratic reforms that will be 

introduced by ourselves. 

 

The ways and means by which people elect their individual 

representatives is of vital importance to ensuring that we have a 

system that is truly representative of our communities and our 

province.  It is also essential to ensuring a system that is open, 

accessible, and accountable to the people of the communities 

they serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our large urban centres are home to many vibrant 

and distinct communities, communities that have distinct 

socio-economic, cultural, linguistic, and demographic profiles.  

These communities make up the cosmopolitan or metropolitan 

flavour of our major cities. 

 

They are communities and areas of different interests, ideas, 

and needs.  They want a chance to be able to know the 

candidates, and which of those candidates will reflect those 

individual needs and reflect their direction. 

 

Our large cities, namely Regina and Saskatoon, are growing 

and becoming increasingly complex in their composition.  

More and more, local community associations are becoming 

the focal point for local activities. 

 

The idea of trying to Americanize our cities is wrong.  The idea 

of town hall meetings where cities have to bring people out and 

bring them in one large centre is wrong.  People cannot get to 

those types of meetings and cannot understand and reflect the 

views of sometimes up to 70 candidates that would put their 

ideas forward. 

 

We need a system that preserves the principle of responsible 

representative democracy.  It's the principle that this province 

is founded upon.  We would never consider an at-large system 

for our provincial legislature. 

 

In the most recent provincial election, there were about 207 

candidates.  We wouldn't think of allowing the provincial 

electors to be faced with a list of 207 candidates to choose 

from, and select only 66 members to represent their views.  Nor 

would we tolerate constituencies that have as many as 200,000 

people in them.  However, the current legislation has meant 

that voters in Regina faced a ballot of 48 of which 10 would be 

elected to represent a constituency of nearly 180,000 people. 

 

In Saskatoon 54 people sought the 10 seats that again would 

represent nearly 180,000 people.  Voters don't want to shine 

their shoes at the same time as they cast their ballot. 

 

As MLAs we recognize that there must be reasonably sized 

seats with relatively uniform populations.  We 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 265 

recognize this must also be the case for our federal MPs.  Why 

then, Mr. Speaker, would we suggest that some members of the 

government Assembly . . . and some members of the 

government Assembly would suggest that other forms of 

representation should be present in our urban government. 

 

Is local government less important?  Is it that the principle 

cannot be applied?  I should say not.  The constitution of this 

country provides this Assembly with the responsibility to 

ensure accessible and accountable local government.  If we 

recognize and accept that our single member constituencies are 

the most effective way to elect representatives provincially and 

federally, then I say, Mr. Speaker, that the principle must also 

apply to our local governments. 

 

I take some exception to anyone who would say that we must 

keep an at-large system of representation.  This system is a 

system of exclusion.  The at-large electoral system also 

provides for the exclusion of those currently underrepresented 

in groups in our local communities. 

 

If I may say, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to explain some of my 

feelings as a woman and a former councillor in the city of 

Regina.  There are many areas of The Urban Municipality Act 

that reinforce sexist ideas and ideals.  The terminology, for 

example, of the representative as an alderman rather than a 

councillor is one of these. 

 

I was elected under both the ward system and the at-large 

system in Regina.  Had I not had the opportunity to run first 

under the ward system, I would be facing many difficulties in 

trying to mount a campaign under the at-large system.  It was 

the opportunity to walk door-to-door and meet with people and 

let them know my beliefs and ideals for our community that 

would allow them to know their representative and place a vote 

forward. 

 

In a ward system you could mount a campaign where you 

would be able to afford to get a piece of information and a 

good piece of literature out to each individual and let them 

know what your views were on the important issues of the day.  

I doubt I would have chosen to run, let alone I would have the 

ability to be elected, under an at-large system where it takes 

20,000 to $30,000 to mount a campaign. 

 

Electoral politics can be unfamiliar and intimidating to many 

people -- not to mention women -- to our poor people, our 

aboriginal peoples, and many, many others.  Our electoral 

systems are only now becoming more accessible to all of us. 

 

I understand the importance of having a clearly defined 

constituency.  It provides any person with a base to stand upon.  

It also provides for a natural constituency from which a 

community can elect someone who understands the issues and 

aspirations of that community. 

 

It does not tear cities apart where people take only 

consideration of their ward and bring it forward to the table.  

As had been mentioned, when issues of importance come 

forward, when issues of concerns are raised, everyone brings 

their point of view to the table, and what 

is best for the city as a whole is considered in the total picture. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Speaker, an at-large system of election isolates the power 

in the hands of those with money and with profile.  It costs a 

great deal of money to run a civic campaign in a city the size of 

Regina.  Many people of average or lower income cannot 

afford such a campaign.  It also takes someone with high 

profile. 

 

It's interesting to note, as had been mentioned, that in 

Saskatoon only members who had been elected to serve before 

to the city council or members who had previously been 

serving in the past, were now elected to that council again.  

Name recognition becomes paramount -- dollars become 

paramount to get the name recognition. 

 

The at-large system also favours those areas of the city in 

which voter turn-out is relatively high, in which people can get 

to the polls and feel comfortable that they have the knowledge 

to vote for the person on the ballot when it's 1 of 54 or 1 of 48.  

And that is becoming more and more . . . or less and less 

people who are turning out to vote.  So in general this also 

favours those middle and upper income areas and middle and 

upper income class candidates who can run and mount a 

campaign. 

 

The cities of Saskatoon and Regina favour the return to the 

ward system.  In Regina the plebiscite on the ward system 

showed that the vast majority of the population wanted the 

ward system returned.  The cities of Regina and Saskatoon, 

their councils are on record as favouring a return to the ward 

systems and asking of the previous government that they would 

reflect the democratic wishes of their communities.  The 

answer was no.  We would not even have the ability to have the 

choice of our elected reflected in our choice of a ward system. 

 

We know that recently the members opposite also said well, we 

don't really care what type of a system is in place, as the cities 

are saying.  So we're looking at now someone who had 

imposed a system of the at-large system and now who really 

doesn't care in democratic reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are concerns about the mandatory 

provisions for Regina and Saskatoon to return to the ward 

system.  There are always problems.  There are always 

problems related to intergovernmental affairs; however, there's 

no argument against the ward system. 

 

Other cities such as Prince Albert have often requested a return 

to the ward system and have been denied it.  They had the ward 

system, lost the ward system, and now under the proposed 

legislation may have to wait and to reflect a vote to return to it.  

And they may be one of the communities that would like to 

speak to us about the Bill on the ward system. 

 

People who have concerns about local autonomy would also 

like to speak to us and give us ideas, and we'd be glad to hear 

those and listen to them.  Through the Standing Committee of 

Municipal Law of the legislature, of which I'm chairing, we can 

hear those concerns about the need 

  



266 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

to retain a choice for the maintenance of local autonomy.  We 

can provide a forum to hear the concerns of areas and people of 

Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, Melfort and others.  They will all 

have an opportunity. 

 

The Bill that's before us provides for the democratic wishes of 

the people of Regina as expressed in a plebiscite and the return 

to single-member constituencies for their governments.  To 

insist that they would again express their will in a vote in the 

bureaucratic system would be wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support the Bill because it will strengthen the 

democratic institutions of our urban governments.  Through 

meaningful public consultation on the legislation, people will 

have input and people will have the ability to reflect changes to 

the Bill, to address the concerns that have been mentioned 

already. 

 

But in the end the important issue is that finally in the spring 

we will have a Bill to allow those who want a ward system in 

their communities, will have a ward system in place for the 

next municipal election; they will have the ability to do so.  It's 

with that in mind, I am pleased to be able to support bringing 

forward for discussion and have in place a ward system Bill for 

urban municipalities. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- We have no objections to letting this one pass. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 3 -- An Act 

to amend The Education and Health Tax Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I rise today 

to speak on Bill No. 3, the Bill dealing with the repeal of 

certain sections of the E&H (education and health) tax in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is an issue that has been before Canadians for 

some time.  Ever since the federal government embarked upon 

the process of bringing in a value added tax, the GST, on a 

nation-wide basis, Canadians have been struggling -- and I 

must say, with a great deal of disdain in certain quarters of our 

society -- against a broad-based sales tax system. 

 

Traditionally in this country, Mr. Speaker, we have used an 

income tax system, a graduated income tax system which was 

on the basis of the ability to pay.  Certainly that income tax 

system which many Canadians, I think, feel today is overly 

complicated, that it's very onerous on particularly the middle 

class people in this province . . . or in this province and 

country, and that that particular system needs further overhaul 

before this country is ready for a general sales tax type of tax as 

we have with the GST. 
 

It is a fact of life, however, Mr. Speaker, in many parts of the 

world that this particular type of tax has been adopted 

as a way of supporting the social infrastructure in particular 

countries.  And we have the example in the European 

Community where the VAT, the value added tax over there, 

can go anywhere up, I understand, to the 30 per cent figure.  

And this is applied to all goods, services, in those particular 

countries. 

 

Certainly I think the federal government was looking at some 

of their competition around the world when they talked about 

coming in with a tax such as the GST (goods and services tax).  

And certainly we in the province of Saskatchewan, as we move 

into the '90s and the 21st century, must look at responsible 

ways of generating tax dollars so that things like education, 

health care, the support that agriculture needs in very difficult 

times, can be maintained. 

 

The choices that were before the former Government of 

Saskatchewan to in a fair way assess how government would 

take enough tax from people to support the various social 

structures that we have in this province was indeed a tough 

one.  On one hand . . . and I must say, Mr. Speaker, that 

consumers, the service industry, many people in the middle 

class in Saskatchewan have not liked this particular approach 

because it takes away buying power which is already under a 

tremendous amount of pressure because of the downturn in our 

provincial economy which we've seen through the 1980s. 

 

We have a Saskatchewan economy, Mr. Speaker, that is based 

primarily on agriculture and the export of raw materials.  There 

have been great strides made, Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years 

in bringing in value added things to our economy, where we 

take our raw products, we process them a step further, and we 

then export the finished goods rather than the raw product. 

 

Given that our economy is based on products which primarily 

trade in an economy outside our province and indeed outside 

our country, it makes it very difficult when one is faced with 

the choices on how to tax the public and how to do it fairly. 

 

Clearly in the last election campaign, the consumer spoke very 

clearly, and I don't pretend to stand here today to say that I am 

second-guessing that consumer in the province of 

Saskatchewan nor am I second-guessing, indeed, consumers 

around Canada.  There is a great deal of resistance to this style 

of taxation but I think that resistance, Mr. Speaker, goes to 

many other factors in our economy.  Canadians as a whole feel 

that the middle class is losing any incentive to be productive. 

 

Entrepreneurship in this country depends on the ability of the 

person to go into the market-place and get a fair return on 

investment.  And whether that is farming or primary production 

or whether it's the people on the main streets of our towns and 

cities, the same quest is there: that entrepreneurs wish to have 

that return on investment for the time and labour that their 

family puts into that particular business, the confidence that 

they get from their shareholders and people that they convince 

to invest along with them. 

 

And without that confidence, without those shareholders, 

without people that are still willing to put risk capital in 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 267 

our society today, a province like Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 

is in a great deal of trouble because much of what we do here 

will not function without that.  We do not have a large enough 

population or enough truly wealthy people in this province to 

sustain ourselves without outside investment coming in here.  

So when government is faced with the choice, as this new 

government, newly elected in Saskatchewan will face these 

choices, it is going to have to look at what builds your 

economy and what tears down your economy. 

 

The NDP Party made a very conscious decision, I must say 

somewhat late in the day, that the best thing for the economy in 

Saskatchewan was to de-synchronize the E&H tax with the 

federal GST.  I must say from what I have seen over debate in 

this legislature over a number of years and some of the 

pronouncements that I saw made in the media throughout our 

province, Mr. Speaker, that I think the quest for political 

dominance in this province perhaps outweighed the good 

economic sense that is needed in this province.  And I think of 

the former Finance critic from . . . used to represent Regina 

Centre.  I'm not sure what the new seat is now. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Churchill Downs. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Churchill Downs.  Thank you.  In his role as 

Finance critic for the NDP Party, going to the media . . .  I have 

an example here, Mr. Speaker, of CHAB in my home town of 

Moose Jaw on May 9, 1991, where the NDP Finance critic at 

the time was quoted as saying that he agreed with the concept 

of harmonization but felt that it needed to be rolled back from 

its current level of 7 per cent, and that if that wasn't 

satisfactory, that probably the NDP would revert to the old 

system in this province and that they would raise personal 

income tax to make up the difference in funds. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is only a few short months, a few short 

months before the provincial election.  As a matter of fact this 

was, if I remember correctly, Mr. Speaker, this was right in the 

middle of the campaign which the former opposition, the NDP 

members, were conducting in this province with petitions and 

reading many petitions in this legislature, petitions infinitum, 

with name after name after name of people that were against 

the PST (provincial sales tax) as they called it, the old E&H 

tax. 

 

(1130) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, obviously some people in the NDP Party at 

the time were thinking about the finances of this province and 

they were looking at ways that they would make choices.  A 

little later in the summer, Mr. Speaker, we have the same 

member of the legislature, now member for Churchill Downs -- 

we're now at July 5, '91 -- as the NDP Party assess the political 

climate of the province a little more, definitely coming out and 

saying that their party would now roll back the tax; definitely 

in favour of higher income taxes. 

 

And of course by the time we got to October 5, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP Party had definitely assessed the political mood in the 

province and were now 100 per cent on board with our now 

Premier of the province, the member from Riversdale, saying a 

New Democratic Party 

government would take the newly expanded 7 per cent PST 

and it would be gone at midnight on October 21.  And to small 

business we say, don't collect it; to consumers we say, don't 

pay it.  On October 21 it is gone. 

 

It was, as I've outlined, Mr. Speaker, a very interesting 

progression as the NDP Party assessed its political fortunes in 

the province.  And I will say to members of this New 

Democratic government, I'm not sure, given the mood for 

change out there, that you truly needed to have this one 

because you have now made a conscious decision to forgo 

about $200 million in revenue.  Your Finance minister has 

come in with a somewhat wildly inflated budget deficit. 

 

And you're wondering as a government, I'm sure, with all the 

pressures that are in our society today, how are we going to 

maintain our hospital system.  And I watched with interest, Mr. 

Speaker, a news report from your home city of Saskatoon last 

night where there is definitely pressures upon that hospital 

system.  And I must say that even in the toughest of times the 

former government, the Progressive Conservative government 

of Saskatchewan always, always maintained increases in the 

Health and Education expenditures.  Somewhat reduced some 

years, but always an increase. 

 

And I'm looking forward, Mr. Speaker, now that choices are 

starting to be made, if the health system in Saskatchewan is 

going to receive an increase.  If it is, how is that increase going 

to be funded?  If the synchronization of our E&H tax with the 

federal GST was not appropriate to raise funds, if it was not the 

appropriate way to stimulate our economy, then what is? 

 

Is it, as the member from Churchill Downs said, to be higher 

personal income taxes?  And if those higher personal income 

taxes are going to happen, who are they going to happen to? 

 

As I said a little earlier in my comments, Mr. Speaker, most of 

the folks in this province that earn a living are what you would 

call, I would call the broad middle class people. 

 

This province has never been blessed with too many 

millionaires.  This province has never been blessed with a large 

industrial base.  The former government did its utmost to try 

and build one so that those taxes could accrue in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

So it's going to be very interesting, Mr. Speaker, as to what 

type of plan comes forward from this new government.  

Certainly the Speech from the Throne that we just debated in 

this legislature gave us very few clues as to what was going to 

happen; very few clues as to how this government was going to 

replace $200 million in income; how this government was 

going to make our industrial sector competitive with provinces 

and countries around us. 

 

Certainly I haven't seen any decrease in cross-border shopping 

because of what happened on October 21.  In fact, merchants in 

my home town of Moose Jaw tell me that they haven't seen any 

change whatsoever as far as the amount of money being spent 

by consumers in their 

  



268 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

stores. 

 

As a matter of fact, one individual who I saw on civic election 

night as we were watching the results come in told me, he says, 

you know I just did my first goose egg in the history of my 

store on October 22.  He said, I quite frankly expected many 

people to be coming in because this tax was gone.  And in fact, 

Mr. Speaker, that has not happened.  It has not happened 

anywhere in our commercial sector in Saskatchewan in the two 

months since then. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I don't second guess the 

anger that consumers and that certain parts of our business 

sector felt with this particular process. 

 

I as a minister of the Crown in the last government had to go 

before many of those groups and talk about synchronization of 

our E&H tax with the GST.  And it's a very difficult concept, 

Mr. Speaker, to explain to people, but one must always weigh 

the alternatives. 

 

How will our agricultural sector remain competitive?  How will 

our mining and primary resource sectors remain competitive?  

How will people on our borders with Alberta and Manitoba and 

North Dakota and Montana -- how will those people remain 

competitive when they are faced with tax regimes in those 

jurisdictions which give their merchants, which give their 

business people, which give their primary industries 

competitive advantages against ours? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the E&H tax has always been with us in this 

province.  I think many people in the last election campaign 

were under the erroneous conclusion that after October 21, 

with the election of a New Democratic government, that 

somehow that E&H tax would disappear, that it wouldn't be on 

all of those goods and services that existed before. 

 

This former PC government, Mr. Speaker, was the government 

that took the tax off of clothing under $300.  Prior to that time, 

prior to that time under New Democratic governments, and 

indeed the first term of the old Devine administration there was 

a tax, an E&H tax on clothing.  It was the decision of the 

government in 1986 that that tax under $300 shouldn't be on 

Saskatchewan people for the very fact that a lot of our citizens 

were looking at Manitoba, were looking at Alberta, and were 

looking at North Dakota and Montana. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a very serious problem in this province 

because the E&H tax is back there on almost everything except 

food, pet food, reading material, and clothing.  A fairly narrow 

part if you will, Mr. Speaker, of our society at large.  E&H tax 

is there on the rest of it. 

 

So this new government has some choices.  They've said that 

the choices the previous government made were wrong.  Even 

though in debate in this legislature in 1990 many times I heard 

various members of the New Democratic Party say that if the 

business community in this province is to be treated fairly, then 

one tax is preferable to two taxes.  That one tax is preferable to 

the administration of government than two taxes. 

And indeed, Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out yesterday, the very 

fact of synchronizing those processes could save the 

Government of Saskatchewan $5 million.  We were able to 

have employees, provincial employees go to work for the 

federal government, and we had the federal government then 

doing tax collection in our province, allowing business people 

to have one tax collector instead of two. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that $5 million is almost double the amount of 

money that this new administration would need to put $200 

million into our economy right now.  Right now this 

government with two and a half to $3 million could put $200 

million in circulation in our economy.  Now they have made a 

very conscious decision not to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the New Democratic Party had simply brought 

in synchronization at the seven and five level, which would 

have meant no new funds to the government, they still would 

have had that $5 million which today could have 200 million 

circulating in our economy, going through our stores as our 

farm families shop in every town and village and city in this 

province. 

 

But they've made a very conscious decision not to do that.  If 

you aren't going to have that synchronization, then you have to 

find that $5 million somewhere else.  And you have to find that 

nearly $200 million that was absolutely necessary in order that, 

number one, the farm safety nets be properly funded; number 

two, that our health system that we all cherish so highly in this 

province could be adequately funded; our educational system 

could be properly funded; that we would have a chance in a 

very difficult agricultural economy, Mr. Speaker, of having the 

possibility of balancing budgets and attacking our deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this new government in their throne speech did 

not outline how those things were going to be done.  They have 

not told us how they are going to replace those moneys.  They 

have not told us how they are going to attack the deficit.  They 

have not told us what the plan will be in the absence of 

synchronization of those two taxes. 

 

What happens to the competitiveness of Saskatchewan 

business?  Will our primary resources be hurt?  The Minister of 

Finance has not put a number on what is going to happen now 

that the potash industry is not flowing through with investment 

tax credits.  Will it mean lay-offs in the potash industry?  

Would that synchronization process have helped our potash 

industry, because if their end user price on the Pacific Rim 

would have been cheaper made more sales? 

 

The Minister of Finance has not told us about these things and 

what those costs are to our society.  We look forward, Mr. 

Speaker, to seeing what these choices will be.  Will these 

choices entail things from the '70s?  Will we get back into 

succession duties and death taxes -- two things that were 

absolutely abhorrent to the farming community and the 

business community of this province -- measures that directly 

interfere with families who plan on passing on from generation 

to generation, the family farm. 

 

I know of circumstances, Mr. Speaker, in my home community 

where the ability to pass on that family farm because of a death 

in the family was abrogated because of a   



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 269 

government decision on death taxes.  Is that going to be one of 

the choices that the Minister of Finance is going to make, if we 

are not going to have synchronization of our E&H tax with 

federal sales taxes? 

 

And I don't believe for a moment, Mr. Speaker -- for one 

moment -- that this provincial Minister of Finance or any other 

in Canada is going to affect the collection of the GST at least 

before 1993.  We have some provinces in Canada who have 

harmonized their sales tax with the federal sales tax.  We have 

some who are looking at it.  And we have some, like the case 

of Alberta, one of our major competitors in many areas, who 

have never had a provincial sales tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have heard in this Assembly almost since the 

inception of the province of Saskatchewan about the problems 

that have existed on our western border with the province of 

Alberta.  I can remember the city of Lloydminster issue arising 

during the 1970s in a large way when Mr. Speaker was a 

member of the treasury benches in the former NDP government 

of the day.  It arose many times during the 1980s during our 

administration, because of the border problems that have 

always existed without Alberta having a sales tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that problem is not limited to the city of 

Lloydminster.  The question of fairness along our western 

boundary has always been a big problem.  Fairness in the 

taxation system is something that I believe government must 

always address. 

 

Today in our society people are far more mobile than they ever 

were before.  We have the situation where on most long 

weekends every hotel in Minot and Bismarck and Williston is 

booked up full of Canadian residents, mostly people from the 

province of Saskatchewan doing their shopping in a 

jurisdiction that has a smaller tax load than what we have here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We have the case today, Mr. Speaker, and you know it well, 

that people in rural Saskatchewan think nothing of driving 50 

and 60 miles to take their children to hockey or to dancing or to 

music lessons.  I have one constituent, Mr. Speaker, who drives 

her children from Eyebrow, Saskatchewan to Saskatoon, 

Saskatchewan twice a week for specialized music lessons. 

 

People are mobile today, Mr. Speaker.  People that mobile will 

look at their options and their choices.  They will look at the 

province of Alberta with no sales tax; they will look at the state 

of North Dakota; they will look at the province of Manitoba.  

That is why those choices are so absolutely fundamental, Mr. 

Speaker, to fairness in our province. 

 

(1145) 

 

When we look at the wealth creation systems that we have 

available to us and how those wealth creation systems are 

going to compete, then the choices started to narrow.  The 

choice wasn't a higher income tax rate, I'll tell you that, Mr. 

Speaker.  In a tough agricultural economy like we have here 

today, the last thing that agriculture, that small business, the 

farm machinery sector -- of which my family and my wife's 

family was involved in for 28 years before that tough 

agricultural 

economy forced them out of business -- those are the last 

people in the world, Mr. Speaker, that need more of their 

disposable income taxed away with higher taxes as has been 

advocated by some members of this new government. 

 

They need those precious dollars to reinvest back into their 

businesses in order to see them through these times.  People 

need those scarce dollars, those people that invest in our 

resources and our economy, to invest back in.  The last thing 

that we need is higher personal income taxes to drive that 

middle class away from investing in the engines of growth in 

our economy. 

 

And yet clearly, Mr. Speaker, the choices that are before this 

new government . . . As they have said, we don't want to take 

this 200 million, means that they must find that 200 million 

somewhere else.  So if it's not to be personal income tax, if it is 

not to be taxes like succession duties and death taxes, what 

kind of tax will it be?  Does it mean that the E&H, which we 

currently have in the province, must go to 10 or 12 per cent?  

Perhaps. Mr. Speaker, that alone probably will not make up the 

shortfall.  What other taxes must be looked at? 

 

The previous government attempted to get more taxes out of 

people like the railroads and the airlines and, Mr. Speaker, the 

reality was that when you tax too much they simply fill up their 

tank and travel through our province until they get to another 

jurisdiction. 

 

Is it to be more gasoline taxes?  Mr. Speaker, we are in an 

economy in Saskatchewan . . . because of large distances, the 

transportation of a lot of raw products is very onerous on our 

transportation infrastructure if the price of fuel becomes too 

high in comparison to the people that we compete with.  What 

will happen to the trucking industry, Mr. Speaker, if they have 

significant new fuel taxes added to them? 

 

What will happen to the hauling of grain and potash and 

uranium?  What will happen to those things, Mr. Speaker, with 

those new taxes?  What will happen in the energy industry 

where most companies have large fleets of trucks in order to 

service their well infrastructure?  What will happen at the 

compressor stations where our natural gas is moved to other 

jurisdictions?  What will happen, and what will be the effect on 

royalties, Mr. Speaker, as those choices are made? 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that many members in this House realize 

that when you make those choices you are going to hurt some 

segment of our economy and some area of our tax-paying 

public.  And you can hurt them deeply.  You can bring certain 

sectors of this economy to an absolute standstill, Mr. Speaker, 

if you do not tax wisely. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that people in our province are going to 

demand that as part of the plan that the new government brings 

forward, that they see a plan that is going to show government 

with being very cost effective.  They voiced their concerns very 

loudly in the plebiscite on election day as to what they expect 

in the way of balanced budgets.  And, Mr. Speaker, they are 

going to expect a government that makes choices that are the 

most fair for the most people. 

  



270 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

It was not easy, Mr. Speaker, to be a member of a government 

faced with those choices, going into an election and saying that 

economically this is the right thing to do.  This is the thing that 

will probably preserve the most and most effective engines of 

growth in our economy.  It will allow farmers, it will allow 

primary producers, it will allow business people, to pass 

through the costs of doing business in an investment tax credit, 

which then will allow them to have a business that is more 

competitive.  It looked like the way that would preserve the 

most jobs and employment in our provincial economy;  and 

that given, Mr. Speaker, the known resistance to the national 

sales tax scheme employed by the federal government, but a 

scheme that no provincial government has any option but to 

deal with in the best way possible. 

 

And I'm saying, Mr. Speaker, today in this Assembly, that 

perhaps the New Democratic Party did not analyse the situation 

maybe as carefully as they should have.  The quest for political 

power in this province, knowing that there was a definite 

consumer backlash to sales taxes, perhaps overwhelmed the 

need for a sound, fiscal plan in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Because I believe at the time, with most members of the New 

Democratic Party in the old legislature coming from our larger, 

urban areas, that perhaps the voices that they were hearing 

were not the same ones that were heard in other parts of our 

province. 

 

And I know people, Mr. Speaker, in the mining industry -- for 

instance in my constituency because I have a very large potash 

mine -- who thought that harmonization, synchronization of the 

E&H with the federal GST was probably the best way to ensure 

that their jobs would be secure in the future because they knew 

that the potash industry was a very high user of input costs, a 

high user of services and goods in our local communities; 

would then have the opportunity to pass those costs through 

and achieve a cheaper price on a tonne of potash for export 

market. 

 

The potash mine, Mr. Speaker, in my constituency exports 

nearly 100 per cent of its product.  It is a fine grade product 

done through the solution mining process.  It is primarily 

exported to the United States and the Pacific Rim -- 3 or $4 a 

tonne on that grade of potash means that that mine indeed 

could expand production and employ more people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can take that to every mine -- whether potash, 

gold, uranium, all the way through our resource sectors -- and 

apply those same principles and know that the synchronization 

probably would ensure that people with jobs in those 

particulars areas would stay employed even in a very tough 

economy. 

 

Given the choices in front of us today, Mr. Speaker, where 

those operations are now back eating that E&H expenditure, 

what is the long-term job prospect in those areas? 

 

How will those industries remain competitive?  How will they 

keep paying the royalties that are absolutely fundamental to 

maintaining our social infrastructure? 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, in most of those areas our resource 

companies paid the highest royalties in North America. 

 

Now some members in this legislature, I know, say that there is 

room for more.  Well I just hope, and I say this to the new 

Minister of Energy and Mines, that he do his homework very 

carefully when the Minister of Finance is presenting those 

choices to this Assembly.  That he do his homework very, very 

carefully to not drive certain sectors of our economy out of our 

province because of the types of choices that he is going to 

make. 

 

And those choices, Mr. Speaker, will be difficult -- no one 

denies that -- as they were difficult for the previous 

administration in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that somewhere in debate on this Bill I 

will hear members of the New Democratic Party government 

stand in this legislature and speak in favour of this Bill.  As 

they stand and speak in favour of this Bill, I would ask each 

and every one of them to inform this Assembly and this 

province about how they think the choices should be made, 

how they think that people in this province should be taxed.  

Because each and every one of them must have ideas and ideals 

that they feel would more appropriately garner that $200 

million to replace the synchronization. 

 

I want them to tell members of this Assembly and tell the 

public if they are in favour of higher personal income tax.  I 

want them to tell members of this Assembly if they are in 

favour of increasing the royalties on the oil and gas sector.  I 

want them to tell this Assembly if they are in favour of 

increasing the royalties garnered from potash production in this 

province.  I want them to tell this Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- 

and obviously it's bothering the member from Moose Jaw -- if 

he is in favour of succession duties and death taxes; if he is in 

favour, and the people in his home community of Moose Jaw 

are in favour, of increasing gas taxes; if he is in favour, and the 

business people in his community are in favour, of increasing 

the E&H tax beyond the 7 per cent that it's at now. 

 

I want each and every member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 

who is voting in favour of this Bill to stand in this Assembly 

and tell us what types of personal choices they are making, 

what types of choices they are going to take into the caucus of 

the government and influence their Finance minister to make.  

Because I don't believe for a minute, Mr. Speaker, on this issue 

that it's simply going to be up to the Premier and the Finance 

minister and the minister of Economic Development and Trade 

to make the decision. 

 

They make most other decisions, Mr. Speaker, for this 

government.  But on this one I think that members on the New 

Democratic Party benches, the back-benchers, the guys 

representing the men and women, representing these new 

constituencies, these rural constituencies, are going to want to 

make the Minister of Finance make those choices as fairly as 

possible, given how they know that people in their 

constituencies make a living and how those people are going to 

be competitive in the world that we know today. 

 

And I invite each and every one of them, Mr. Speaker, as 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 271 

they stand in favour of voting on this Bill, and tell this 

Assembly what those choices will be, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1200) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to speak 

in favour of this Bill amending The Education and Health Tax 

Act.  And as I enter this debate, I want to compliment the new 

Minister of Finance for making his taxation changes here in the 

Legislative Chamber . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- . . . which is the only place -- which is the only 

place where tax legislation can become tax law.  When this Bill 

is through three readings and Royal Assent and proclaimed into 

law, the people of Saskatchewan will know where they stand.  

The business people will know that they are charging a tax that 

is legal; consumers will know that they are not paying an 

illegal tax. 

 

Now the Tories may find this highly unusual to actually come 

to this Assembly where laws are supposed to be made and pass 

a new tax law, but I support the process of openly and honestly 

establishing tax levels.  And I believe most Saskatchewan 

people agree. 

 

We as members, and those listening to this debate, will recall 

when the minister of Finance in the previous administration 

made what he called a pre-budget statement on February 20 of 

this year.  That statement included the announcement that the 

Conservative government would impose a provincial goods and 

sales tax in two stages.  Beginning April 1 a long list of goods 

that had never had sales tax applied to them before would fall 

under the new PST.  On January 1, 1992 a long list of services 

would be taxed for the first time in our province history. 

 

The goods which fell under the provincial sales tax on April 1 

included . . . and now you might think I'm wasting time, but I'm 

only going to take 10 minutes to give this speech, not 45 

minutes, and I want to include the list of services because they 

clearly show the kind of thinking from the members opposite. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Or lack of it. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Yes, or lack of it, some member says. 

 

Here are the list of the goods: all children's clothing and shoes, 

all adults' clothing and shoes costing less than $300, restaurant 

meals, certain food items, toothpaste, diapers, and babies' 

snowsuits, cough syrup, pet food, books, magazines, 

newspapers, natural gas, and electricity.  The list of other goods 

is longer than I have time today to read, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But that's not the end of it.  The previous PC government was 

set to impose their PST on extensive lists of services such as 

haircuts, car repairs, legal services such as drawing up a will, 

funerals -- tax on funerals -- home repairs, the purchase of 

postage stamps, appliance repairs.  And the list goes on and on 

and on. 

Mr. Speaker, all of these items and services had the new Tory 

PST levied on them.  And thanks to the 40 per cent increase in 

the sales tax rate in 1987, from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, the cost 

to the Saskatchewan consumers was estimated at over $70 

million annually.  And of course a similar amount of money is 

gouged out of this province by the 7 per cent GST imposed by 

the federal government. 

 

The combined GST and PST would have amounted to an 

incredible 14 per cent increase in taxes on a wide range of 

basic necessities for average consumers.  This is particularly 

difficult for business people in my constituency of Cut Knife 

_Lloydminster because the Lloydminster side, the Alberta side, 

does not have an E&H tax.  And contrary to what the member 

from Thunder Creek was saying, a local business man told me 

last weekend that he has had the biggest November in sales in 

seven years since he's been in business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- But I'm going to tell the whole story.  In true 

blue Tory fashion, there were exemptions to these new taxes.  

Now this again tells you the character of the members opposite.  

You didn't have to pay the new . . . you didn't have to pay the 

new PC taxes on international airline tickets.  Something that 

most of my constituents don't even use.  You didn't have to pay 

PST on trading on foreign currency or paying fees to your local 

stockbroker. 

 

I could tell you that there was no doubt in my mind that most 

of the debt-ridden families in my constituency and single 

parents living on social assistance and unemployed workers did 

not find these exemptions particularly exhilarating or joyous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- In fact, most Saskatchewan residents were not 

well served by the tax policies of the previous government.  In 

1982 the Conservatives promised to cut income tax by 10 per 

cent.  Instead they introduced the flat tax on income and then 

doubled it. 

 

They promised to eliminate the sales tax.  Instead they put it up 

from 5 per cent to 7 per cent.  They imposed a tax on used cars 

and on lotteries. 

 

During the Conservative years in office a typical Saskatchewan 

family had its total provincial tax bill jump by $2,660.  So 

when the member from Thunder Creek is talking to me about 

over-taxing ordinary people in the province, what is he talking 

about?  We are the highest taxed, for a family of four, in the 

whole country of Canada.  And he's talking to me and asking 

me what I'm going to do about it, or we are going to do about 

it.  What did they do about it? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that PC tax 

policies damaged the provincial economy.  The combined GST 

and PST caused consumer spending to slump.  It increased 

cross-border shopping.  Talking about motels in Minot, why 

were they full?  I mean putting 

  



272 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

another 7 per cent, that was going to deter people from going to 

Minot?  It harmed Saskatchewan businesses with ill-designed 

tax measures.  The previous government hurt the whole 

provincial economy. 

 

Over the past nine years the province had the worst 

job-creation record in Canada.  This forced over 80,000 people 

to leave Saskatchewan in recent years, including my three 

children -- graduates from the University of Saskatchewan that 

could not find jobs because of this government.  Not only 

likely they couldn't find jobs because of this government; they 

were likely blacklisted because they were NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expanded PST was such an obvious mistake 

that even the old Tory regime should have recognized it.  The 7 

per cent PST levied on book sales meant that Saskatchewan 

had the only provincial tax on reading in Canada. 

 

Being a teacher, I found this particularly offensive.  This 

amounts to a tax on learning and does nothing to reduce the 

illiteracy rate or help students finance their education.  In fact 

the tax on reading material would have cost a full-time 

university student $200, something that they could ill afford 

because of . . . You know what's happened to the bursary 

programs and the student loan programs since you fellows have 

been in . . . when you fellows were in government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the expanded PST was particularly unfair to low 

income people.  It was in no way based on people's ability to 

pay -- regressive taxation.  Students, the unemployed, senior 

citizens, and the working poor were victimized by the PST.  

They did not deserve the severe gouging the tax inflicted on 

them.  They in particular will join with other consumers and 

taxpayers in praising the new government repeal of the 

expanded PST. 

 

I just want to say a few words in answer to the member from 

Thunder Creek.  He wants to know what our policies and our 

plans will be in taxation.  Why doesn't he just watch and see 

the next four years? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- We are certainly not in this House to consult 

with the member from Thunder Creek on how we're going to 

raise or lower our tax policies -- this from members who raise 

the taxation level by $2,600 to an average family of four in 

nine and a half years.  You talk to me about raising taxes? 

 

Okay.  This Bill will do exactly that.  It will get the approval of 

the people of Saskatchewan and will apply retroactively to 

October 22, exactly as our party promised to do. 

 

This is the first of many measures this government will 

undertake to the advantage of Saskatchewan people.  I will be 

voting for this Bill and proudly supporting the resulting tax cut 

in my constituency and across the province.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I believe we were 

almost in a tie there on our feet. 

 

I want to talk today about the bottom line, because I know how 

important the bottom line is to the members of the opposition.  

And the bottom line couldn't be more bottom than it is to many 

of the people that I've worked with and that I know, so I'm 

going to direct my comments to the impact of the PST on low 

income people and people in poverty -- people who, in order to 

survive, typically spend 100 per cent of their income and still 

come up short. 

 

When an additional consumer-based tax is added to this already 

stressful financial situation, it cuts primarily into the food 

budget and other immediate necessities such as 

non-prescription drugs and clothing. 

 

I often think of it when I'm sick and I realize all the people I 

know who don't have the option to go to the drugstore and buy 

those things they need, and in addition to . . . it's not part of this 

debate -- but the increased costs on prescription drugs overall. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Are you off the topic? 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- It's all related, isn't it? 

 

A rebate program is of little use in this process, because people 

don't have the financial surplus to carry this expenditure on 

behalf of the government until the government returns it to 

them in the form of a rebate. 

 

There has been considerable research done around the world on 

this question of consumer-based taxes.  I want to refer to a 

recent study of the Australian tax system from the University 

of New South Wales. 

 

They've been doing this study on people who have had this tax 

since 1985.  All proponents of the broad-based consumption 

tax, or GST as it was first called in Canada, identified the need 

for a package of compensation, like the rebate program that 

you instituted or income security measures, to protect those on 

low incomes.  But after many experts looked at variations on 

how to do this, their conclusion was that any attempt to 

introduce consumer-based fairness was almost impossible 

because of the large number of people who aren't registered in 

the tax system for various reasons, due to either dislocation, 

literacy levels, ability, or unfamiliarity with the tax system, 

period.  And a lot of them are just plain too poor to pay taxes. 

 

(1215) 

 

I'm going to introduce a little bit of a discussion I had with a 

Regina business man who's always been a Conservative 

supporter all of his life.  He used to have eight staff; he now 

has four staff. 

 

When two of his good rural customers used to come shop at his 

store regularly and buy their shoes for the entire year . . . came 

in to see him, they started out buying eight pairs of shoes 

because they buy for the whole year for their family.  And 

when they saw the taxes added on by both the federal 

government and provincial government they 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 273 

said, we're not going to buy these shoes.  We just aren't 

prepared to pay these taxes.  And the wife convinced him to go 

away and discuss it for awhile and come back.  And they 

finally came back and bought two less pair of shoes than they 

had planned to buy. 

 

So those were your rural people and your business people -- 

they're all kind of tied up in a package . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . me?  Rolls-Royce?  Come on over to my 

apartment and have some coffee . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  Order, please.  

Order.  I just want to ask members please do not get into debate 

with other members when you're addressing the Assembly.  

You are to address your words through the Speaker, not to 

other members.  Simply ignore other members. 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Your comments are 

heard. 

 

The average increase in prices under the study that was done 

after implementation of consumer-based taxes ranged from 3 

per cent in some countries to 19 per cent in other countries.  

There's no instance in which the cost of prices of goods or of 

taxes went down under these systems.  Once established, in 

every case it increased the earning of the taxation which earned 

it the name of "cash cow" by which it meant that the public 

could be milked on a regular basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Crofford: -- Many low income people in poverty are 

really suffering by this.  And there wasn't a person I spoke . . . I 

spoke to one person in a large corporation who thought that it 

was a good idea to keep the harmonized tax.  That's the only 

person I spoke to in two years of campaigning who felt this 

was a good tax . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the issue of 

taxation . . . I apologize for that inconsistency. 

 

On a different note, it seems inconsistent for governments who 

are trying to get our economics out of recession to attack small 

business by reducing spending power to that portion of the 

community who are most inclined to return their entire income 

to the economy.  It removes money from the direct production 

and consumption of wealth, and redirects it to creating a 

complex tax system that runs us into a nation of tax collectors.  

We have 3,000 more tax collectors in Ottawa now.  Is this 

where productivity will come from in our society? 

 

It makes businesses less competitive because it increases the 

cost of goods.  And as a final comment, the biggest complaint I 

have about harmonization is it allows the federal government to 

set the tax agenda for Saskatchewan.  I see no reason why I 

should allow the priorities of Ottawa to set our tax agenda in 

this province. 

 

I support Bill No. 3 on the PST repeal, favouring instead a 

system of fair taxation that rejects the cash grab on the backs of 

the poor, and instead bases taxation on the ability to pay.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to lend 

support to the Bill to enact An Act to amend The Income Tax 

Act, with some added comments, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The Saskatchewan Liberal Party has been 

on record for some time, in fact preceded the present 

government, with stating that it was fundamentally opposed to 

the introduction of the harmonization of the PST with the GST. 

 

This was announced in a very unprecedented way in what we 

termed a media budget, Mr. Speaker.  We found that to be 

unacceptable.  This resulted of course, because of the 

harmonization, in the destruction of many businesses who are 

already suffering because of minimal profit margin.  To take 7 

per cent off of a dollar where there's a small profit margin, Mr. 

Speaker, and then to take another 7 per cent which is 14 cents 

out of the small profit margin, did indeed really create some 

major difficulties for businesses. 

 

This in turn, Mr. Speaker, created a situation in which it 

threatened people who were on minimum wage in their jobs.  

People who were in the service industry in fact found such a 

diminishing number of customers that they could not afford to 

keep people as employees any longer.  And of course people 

were even more hurt who were on fixed incomes. 

 

It also, Mr. Speaker, made Saskatchewan uncompetitive and it 

drove thousands upon thousands of people from our stores, 

from their local businesses, to Alberta, and in particular the 

United States. 

 

The manner in which this was introduced, Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to reiterate, is completely unacceptable and should 

be to the people of Saskatchewan.  To have tax reform 

introduced in the media is unacceptable.  The timing as well 

was very, very harmful. 

 

What I objected to as well was that the previous government 

did not choose to do as some other provinces did, who selected 

harmonization.  They simply took word from Ottawa and did 

what they were told. 

 

Quebec, I would like to remind the people in this House, chose 

to harmonize but they did so at their own timing, their own 

amount.  And they in fact chose to not have it in such things as 

books.  In fact Quebec, because of the way in which they chose 

to harmonize, have the cheapest books in all of Canada. 

 

Now it is known and I am on record for saying this as well, 

there are benefits to harmonization.  Harmonization is a 

concept and when implemented in the proper manner I think 

could be of benefit to particularly small businesses who would 

find it much more simplistic to collect and less expensive as 

well.  The Canadian Federation of Independent Business is on 

record for supporting the concept of harmonization.  They did 

not support the timing.  They did not support the tactics used 

by the previous government.  The Regina Chamber of 

Commerce as well is on record for stating that they would 

  



274 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

benefit from harmonization, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In my view the new government should search for ways to 

harmonize at a lower rate and in terms that are in the best 

interests of the people of Saskatchewan.  In other words 

consider specific exemptions.  The previous government, as I 

stated, brought in GST-PST harmonization by announcing it in 

the media. 

 

I've spent a great deal of my time talking about proper process.  

I believe that proper process should be followed not only in the 

way that taxation is implemented in the province, but also the 

way in which, sir, that it is removed. 

 

And I do not agree with the manner in which the present 

government chose to try to rectify this situation.  They too 

made these announcements and then they did this in an 

arbitrary manner by going back.  I believe that there is a forum 

in which taxation should be introduced.  There's a way in 

which it should be amended. 

 

Our province requires overall tax reform, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

pledge to the people of this province that I will assist in 

whatever way I can to bring about fairer taxes, by working with 

the government at every turn.  We cannot have a repeat of what 

happened in the 1970s when each and every year the taxes of 

this province went up by more than $200 million a year, nor 

can we have happen a repeat of what we have seen with the 

GST-PST harmonization. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to reiterate my 

support for this Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are many 

aspects of the expanded PST that are reprehensible, but I'm 

going to deal with one, and a very important one.  Mr. Speaker, 

the effect of the PST on the Saskatchewan restaurant industry 

has been devastating.  The tax that the former government 

introduced on April 1 of this year, combined with the federal 

Tory GST, has directly killed businesses and jobs in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are more than 20,000 people employed in 

750 licensed restaurants and 3,500 food service operations in 

our province.  Mr. Speaker, business there has dropped by 30 

per cent across the board, and in some cases by up to 60 per 

cent, when the expanded PST was arbitrarily shoved onto 

restaurant meals. 

 

One Regina restaurateur has had to cut staff by 30 per cent 

because the business just simply isn't there.  Net sales in this 

particular restaurant were down by 40 per cent this September 

and October compared to the previous year.  Although 

November now has shown a definite improvement, the 

restaurant industry still has a long road ahead to recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 100 fewer restaurants in Regina and 

Saskatoon alone than there were a year ago, according to the 

Saskatchewan restaurant and food association.  Two more 

closed in Regina last week, and four more will close during the 

year . . . before the end of 

the year.  They attribute that to the loss in business that they 

suffered for the six months that the expanded PST was on.  In 

Saskatoon at least 10 restaurants closed during the time of this 

odious tax.  The tax on meals was the final straw for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan food and restaurant association 

Estimates that in excess of 1,000 people -- 1,000 people -- have 

lost their jobs.  And we're not just talking statistics here; we're 

talking about people -- students, parents, working people -- 

working people with groceries to buy and rent to pay.  We're 

talking about minimum wage-earners, 70 per cent of whom are 

women. 

 

The restaurant business is labour intensive.  Students and 

people who might otherwise find it difficult to find jobs, work 

in the restaurant business.  Four times as many employees work 

in the restaurant sector as compared to the retail clothing sector 

for the same dollar volume of business.  So when a restaurant is 

forced to close its doors, many, many jobs are lost. 

 

More to the point, many of these employees are people who 

can't find other jobs.  They are immediately forced onto the 

public assistance rolls, leading of course to a greater cost to the 

public purse and to a possible loss of dignity to formerly 

productive people. 

 

It's doubtful that the former government took in enough money 

off the 7 per cent food tax to make up for the human and dollar 

cost caused by this vicious, negative effect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the human hurt that this tax cost, it 

doesn't even make sound economic sense.  What good is it to 

increase government revenue if the net effect is to close 

businesses and increase unemployment?  But that's exactly 

what they did. 

 

Earlier today I spoke with three or four restaurateurs in 

Saskatoon.  As you may know, Saskatoon has more restaurants 

per capita than any other city in Canada.  This is due in no 

small part, I'm sure, to the fine, gourmet, culinary taste of 

Saskatoonians. 

 

Now despite the fact that Saskatoon has a tradition and a record 

of supporting their restaurants, the expanded PST had a very 

definite, negative effect on the restaurant business in 

Saskatoon.  When I spoke today with the owner of one of the 

busiest restaurants in Saskatoon, he told me his business 

dropped 20 per cent from April 1, 1991, to October 21, 1991.  

As soon as the tax was repealed he saw an upsurge in business 

-- almost 10 per cent improved.  They haven't yet totally 

recovered from the effects of the tax, but they're trying. 

 

The sad thing, Mr. Speaker, is that this was all totally 

unnecessary.  This same person I talked to, this same person I 

listened to actually had met with the former premier of this 

province to warn him about the impact the 7 per cent PST 

would have on restaurants, their employees, and their 

customers. 

 

Yes he met with the member from Estevan, and what was the 

response?  I was told that the former premier simply 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 275 

shrugged his shoulders, became silly, and put on the tax 

anyway.  So this restaurateur and all others across 

Saskatchewan were ignored.  The 7 per cent expanded PST was 

put on restaurant meals, a tax on food -- an unnecessary, 

hurtful, shameful tax. 

 

But on October 22, Mr. Speaker, the tax was removed.  Again I 

quote from the phone conversation I had with one of the most 

prominent restaurateurs in Saskatoon.  He said, quote: Thank 

God the tax wasn't there for another six months; there would 

have been many, many more bankruptcies. 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have many friends and acquaintances in the 

restaurant business.  They are unanimous in joining with me in 

soundly endorsing an end to the expanded PST.  They want to 

work.  They want business opportunities.  They want to 

stimulate the economy, and that, Mr. Speaker, is precisely what 

they will do when we pass this Bill. 

 

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to have an opportunity to speak on this important piece 

of legislation.  Repealing the PST was one of the commitments 

that I and my party made during the election campaign.  The 

removal of the PST has now become in many ways a symbol of 

hope and a symbol of change for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

To me, and I know to others, it also symbolizes the return of a 

government that will keep its word and respect the people of 

this province. 

 

We promised to repeal the PST and save Saskatchewan 

families an average of $740 per year.  We told people during 

the election campaign that we understand how much this tax 

was hurting our businesses and families.  We promised to do 

away with this damaging and unfair tax once elected. 

 

Well please take note.  This government keeps its promises.  

We have proof right here, right now in this legislature.  One of 

the very first Bills to be introduced this session, the first 

session of the new government, is the Bill to repeal the 

expanded harmonized PST.  This government keeps its word. 

 

Gone and hopefully for ever for the people of Saskatchewan 

are the days of government saying one thing publicly and then 

a few weeks or months later in fact doing the opposite. 

 

Who could forget the 1986 election campaign.  We all 

remember being told, oh don't worry about the debt; it's all 

under control.  But it wasn't.  The Conservatives racked up a 

huge deficit that year.  Maybe you remember something like 

this: Of course we're going to maintain health care programs 

and universal coverage; we wouldn't change that.  But they did. 

The children's dental plan, the prescription drug plan, 

introduction of user fees to name a few. 

 

And here is another:  No, we're not going to privatize the public 

utilities. I know my colleagues remember hearing that from the 

Conservatives in 1986.  And I know some of the members 

opposite remember even saying those or similar lines. 

 

Is it really any wonder that the people of Saskatchewan have 

become so cynical about politics. 

 

But you know, if the previous government had been paying 

attention during the SaskPower walk-out in 1989, they could 

have learned something.  They should have realized at that 

point that the people of Saskatchewan refuse to be walked on.  

We are a pretty tolerant and easy going group for the most part.  

But to our credit, we will not be abused.  That is why in 1989 

there was such a huge outcry of opposition to privatizing 

SaskPower.  And that is why there has been such a huge outcry 

in 1991 against the PST. 

 

Fortunately, on the PST issue, people had an opportunity to 

speak out twice against this unfair tax.  We spoke out strongly 

with our petitions last spring when the PST was first 

implemented, and we spoke out again on October 21.  So in 

that sense, the PST is also a symbol of how this province 

demands that its government listens and responds to what 

people are telling them. 

 

Certainly the people in Bengough-Milestone were making their 

views very clearly but the previous government deliberately 

ignored what they were saying.  The petitions that were signed 

opposing the PST came from people in all walks of life.  The 

PST was hurting families and in many cases killing small 

business.  Why was that so difficult for the previous 

government to understand?  People were needing help 

desperately.  So when we began our petitions it was an easy job 

to get them signed. 

 

In my area, people are not prone to public demonstration of any 

kind.  Many of them had never signed petitions before, but they 

felt so strongly that they did not hesitate to sign their 

opposition to the PST.  In fact we had members from all 

political parties signing against the PST.  The previous 

government didn't have to take our word that the PST was 

unpopular.  They could have listened to their own supporters 

and heard the same thing. 

 

We are all aware of how the PST hurt small businesses.  In my 

constituency, because we are on the U.S. border, businesses 

were devastated.  There was a tax revolt.  People refused to pay 

the PST by going across the line to shop.  Hundreds of cars per 

day crossed at Regway and Oungre, the two ports in my 

constituency. 

 

While Saskatchewan people were taking their business out of 

the country, our neighbours to the south were keeping theirs at 

home.  The business from tourism this past summer dropped 

sharply.  The businesses affected blamed the PST.  Many, 

many hotels and restaurants were pushed to the brink of 

bankruptcy as they watched their business disappear to the U.S. 

  



276 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

The PST was a cruel and an unfair tax for both families and 

small business but the previous government didn't seem to care.  

The removal of the PST is a hallmark for the people of this 

province in that we now have a government that is going to 

represent the concerns and views of average people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- When people are hurting, they will be heard.  

When this government makes a commitment, it will be 

honoured.  Gone are the days of government double-talk and 

hidden agendas.  By removing the PST through this piece of 

legislation, I know that we now have a government that is 

determined to fairly represent all Saskatchewan people.  I 

heartily endorse this legislation.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'm pleased to 

have this opportunity to speak in support of the Bill to abrogate 

the provincial sales tax and return to the status quo ante of the 

health and education tax. 

 

There can be no doubt, sir, that we shall lose money as a result 

of repealing this tax.  However, this government is opposed on 

principle to sales taxes.  Sales taxes are regressive in that those 

with low income pay as much for a specific item as the 

wealthy.  But this amount is a higher proportion of a low wage 

than it is of a high wage, obviously.  Indeed the extra 7 per cent 

is enough to tip some wage earners over the edge into poverty. 

 

When the health and education tax was introduced, sir, it was 

targeted specifically at hospitals and schools, which meant that 

what was paid at the cash register came back to them 

immediately when they were sick in hospital or to their 

children in school.  I understand that the money now goes into 

general revenues, but the amount collected every year is known 

and we can ensure that an equivalent amount is applied to 

hospitals and schools. 

 

I believe it is important to retain the name health and education 

tax.  It keeps in mind why the tax was instituted.  The simple 

name change of the tax to the provincial sales tax is dangerous.  

A rose, sir, by any other name may not smell as sweet. 

 

We know of course where the previous administration got their 

idea of a provincial sales tax from.  They got it from good old 

Brian in the good old spirit of "me too."   Anything you say is 

good enough for me, Brian.  It seems to uphold the adage that 

bad news travels fast, and apparently bad policies travel just as 

fast. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- However, it is not just a coincidence.  It is 

concurrence in policy which is to reduce taxes on the 

well-heeled by increasing those on lower income earners.  

Progressive income tax is heavy on high income earners, and 

sales taxes on low income earners, hence the move away from 

high income taxes and towards high sales taxes, sir. 

The introduction of a flat tax on income has been a means of 

gouging income tax from those so badly paid that even the 

federal government in all its mercy does not tax them. 

 

Had it not been for the policy of welfare for the wealthy, 

whereby the previous administration slashed oil royalties, paid 

$6 million to GigaText, lost $3 million on Canapharm, and 

subsidized Cargill to the extent of $64 million, sir, we would 

not be in the mess we are in now.  In addition to this, Mr. 

Speaker, they sold off our profitable Crown corporations.  

These were deliberate and disastrous policies, Mr. Speaker, and 

are some of the reasons why there's no money left in the pot 

now. 

 

I would also like to point out that in 1982 the Leader of the 

Opposition promised to get rid of the health and education tax 

altogether.  At that time, it was at 5 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, the original sales tax was the education tax, 

and it was introduced in 1937 at 2 per cent.  It became the 

health and education tax in 1950 at 3 per cent after the 

introduction of free hospitalization.  In 50 years, sir, it rose 3 

per cent -- 50 years, sir.  It took the PCs only five years to raise 

it 2 per cent, which confirms Tory times are taxing times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- The only tax that did go down, sir, was the 

gasoline tax, and what a fiasco that was.  It meant that the town 

kids could tear around all night disturbing the peace, ageing 

their father's car, and ripping up the roads, and they got a tax 

rebate.  However, sir, when I drove to the hospital to set a 

fracture or to deliver a baby, I couldn't get a rebate.  Frankly, 

sir, I cannot think of a more imbecile tax, where a working man 

is penalized and cruisers get a discount for getting in the way. 

 

The expanded PST is another example of unthink, to 

paraphrase George Orwell, where the ministry of love wages 

war. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- My constituents don't like the PST, sir, and 

Canadians as a whole don't like its big daddy, the GST.  Their 

existence makes no sense whatever where most of our 

population lives within easy driving distance of a more 

diversified and already cheaper market in the U.S.A. 

 

We in Saskatchewan have had the opportunity to demonstrate 

our displeasure of the PST and other matters.  In a year or so, 

we will all have the opportunity to show our anger at the GST 

and free trade.  Then, sir, the boot will be on the other foot and 

the great B.M. will be saying, me too, to you know who. 

 

Our border stores in Coronach and Rockglen in my 

constituency alone were badly hit with cross-border shopping 

when the GST was introduced, and the PST has made it a 

double whammy, sir.  Sales are not back to normal, but there 

has been some relief, at least in the hospitality industry.  I only 

hope that they can keep going long enough for us to elect an 

NDP government in Ottawa that will repeal the GST and . . . 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 277 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- And this, sir, is the real answer to the problem 

-- not harmonization, but getting rid of the GST.  In Europe, 

every country has a VAT.  You cannot nip over the border and 

avoid it.  Half the time you nip over the border and get hit with 

more.  But here we are in Canada with no GST or VAT in the 

United States and we can dodge it.  We lose the revenue, we 

sink our small businesses, and we end up in more and more 

financial distress. 

 

At this time of year, sir, we think amongst other things of wise 

men coming from the East.  I suspect that probably that myth is 

true because it's obvious when you look there that there are no 

wise men left in the East today. 

 

A combination of bad economics and bad management have 

brought this province to its knees.  The 6 billion deficit is proof 

of this.  The trickle-down theory of Reaganism just doesn't 

work, sir, as has been amply demonstrated in the U.S.A. and in 

Canada.  It has not been bad luck; it has been bad management. 

 

We do not need to collect money to pay a golfer to wear 

SaskPower's logo in Florida or Arizona.  We don't have a 

power line down to Florida or Arizona.  We don't need a golfer 

to wear SaskPower's logo in Saskatchewan.  SaskPower has got 

the monopoly.  There's no choice.  Another example of 

unthink.  Someone I think, sir, had delusions of grandeur. 

 

It would be easy for us just to shrug our shoulders, keep the 

tax, blame it on the PCs, and say we need the money, even 

though it was only introduced by press conference.  

Nevertheless we have decided against the easy way out in 

favour of what is just and fair for the people of Saskatchewan.  

It will be difficult to make up the shortfall and it may bring 

unexpected hardship to professional golfers. 

 

But we are in the process of doing it.  Already sales have 

increased in the past month, simply on the word of our Premier 

alone.  Let us not stop that momentum, sir. 

 

The former premier of the province is quoted in yesterday's 

Leader-Post as saying: 

 

 If you can take a Crown corporation that's run by the 

taxpayer and (the) government and put it in the private sector 

and it becomes very profitable . . . that's very helpful. 

 

But helpful to whom, sir?  I can give my medical practice away 

to another doctor who could perhaps earn twice what I earn.  

But what good will that do to me?  If we give our Crown 

corporations away, it won't do the province any good.  Such 

thinking is nonsensical, particularly when you consider that 

North Canadian Oils alone has deferred taxes of $83 million. 

 

And where is the money from those sales, sir?  I'd like to see 

that money. 

And he paid $6 million, for advice of that kind?  Really, it is 

incredible. 

 

I would also like to quote another article from yesterday's 

Leader-Post which says: 

 

 In 1982, Saskatchewan was a 'have' province and its 

renewable and non-renewable resources were drawing a good 

dollar on the market.  There was a slight surplus in the 

government's operating account. 

 

 Now heavily reliant on equalization payments, Saskatchewan 

is coming to Ottawa with its hand out. 

 

Oh what a difference. 

 

And I will leave you with one final quote:  Saskatchewan is so 

rich that even if we mismanage, we shall break even.  If 

breaking even is defined as mismanagement, then what is a $6 

billion deficit, sir?  I want to ask you to tell me who the quote 

came from. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I call upon this House to pass this Bill 

and eliminate this invidious tax.  Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too am pleased to rise 

in this Assembly to make a few comments regarding the Bill 

that is before this Assembly.  And I certainly welcome the 

opportunity to share a few thoughts and certainly to maybe 

even comment on some of the remarks that have been made 

prior to my speaking this morning.  I guess it's already 

afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, repealing the synchronization of the GST with the 

expanded E&H tax I believe is a grave mistake.  Now we've 

heard many members in this Assembly already indicate that 

certainly taxes are something that we don't . . . no one likes to 

pay.  And as you may recall, Mr. Speaker, last spring when we 

got into the debate on the synchronization of the E&H with the 

GST, my comments in this Assembly were, as has been made 

by a few of my colleagues this morning, the fact that no one 

likes taxes and to bring taxes in or increase taxation in an 

election year is not an easy thing to do. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, we are all aware of the fact that the 

services we demand, the services we expect, the services we 

receive, must be paid for.  And over the past number of years, I 

don't know of too many people who have said cut back in 

services, cut back on my . . . I mean, don't increase my power 

rates, don't increase my telephone rates.  We'd like individual 

line service.  We'd certainly like to have access to natural gas.  

We'd certainly like to be able to continue to enjoy the benefits 

of a low educational cost and access to health. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when you think about all these things you 

realize that the revenue in this province, because of the 

downturn in our economy, because of the problems we face in 

agriculture -- which happens to be our number 1 resource 

sector and has always been and will 

  



278 Saskatchewan Hansard December 13, 1991 

continue to be -- when you look at the downturn in the 

revenues derived from resources such as the energy sector, 

such as oil and gas, and certainly uranium, and many other 

sectors, Mr. Speaker, we realize that there's only one way to 

derive the finances that are needed to provide the services that 

we're looking for. 

 

And as was indicated earlier, did the new Premier of the 

province, the leader of the then opposition, really give serious 

thought or the new Finance minister give serious thought to the 

problems they would face by not synchronizing and expanding 

the E&H and synchronizing with the GST?  Did they also give 

serious thought to the fact that possibly they didn't need to 

synchronize the tax? 

 

Mr. Speaker, by not synchronizing this and by repealing the 

synchronization of the tax, this will hurt many people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  It certainly hurts Saskatchewan 

farm families; it certainly hurts business men and women 

across this province.  And, Mr. Speaker, it hurts tradespeople in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the repealing of this tax will also hurt shop 

owners in every constituency especially mine, the constituency 

of Moosomin, that is not that far from the border of the U.S.A.; 

especially those who battle with cross-border shopping which 

is fought on a daily basis.  And we're seeing, Mr. Speaker, that 

cross-border shopping is not only becoming a phenomenon that 

was familiar to the constituencies of Estevan, 

Souris-Cannington and then up into Moosomin, but it's 

expanding beyond into the Saltcoats area and certainly into 

Yorkton and as well right up into the northern part of our 

province. 

 

We have seen businesses from across the United States, 

especially North Dakota and Montana, who have been 

aggressively advertising in our large centres like Saskatoon, 

like Prince Albert, like the Yorktons, like the Melforts, Mr. 

Speaker.  And what are they doing?  They realize that 

Canadians have a tendency to want to shop in different 

locations, certainly across the border, because they feel maybe 

they're getting a better buy on goods and services. 

 

And maybe at times, Mr. Speaker, the services they are 

receiving are indeed even better across the line than they are 

here.  And we may have a thing to learn about how we market 

our product and how we provide a service.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

in my constituency many people do make, if you will, an 

annual monthly trip across the line to buy goods.  It's because 

of the feeling that they are indeed saving themselves some 

money. 

 

Due to that fact, Mr. Speaker, many businesses are having a 

problem.  Many businesses are facing the reality of maybe 

closing their business because of a lack of the business they are 

receiving.  And I believe the NDP government, through this 

Bill we are discussing today, is going to take away the 

competitive advantage my constituents desperately needed -- 

constituents involved in the farming and business sector, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the repealing of the synchronized tax is 

irresponsible and I believe it's unacceptable. 

Repealing the synchronization of our tax will take money 

directly out of the pockets of farmers and tradespeople as well, 

since they are no longer tax free on input costs. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there are many . . . many of my colleagues 

can reiterate the tax advantages they did have by being 

allowed, as in the farm community or the business community, 

to receive a refund on their input costs. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one thing I must clarify, I think one of the 

problems and one of the paradoxes we face in Canada, and 

even in Saskatchewan, is the fact that when we talk of farmer 

and talking about receiving an input tax credit, well, it's a 

money . . . that's a cash hand-out from the government and that 

farmers never pay taxes. 

 

Well, I just want the consumers of Saskatchewan to realize that 

farmers pay taxes on every good, just as the other consumers.  

But on the products, the inputs into producing a crop to put on 

the market, which we know today is much less than its cost of 

production, farmers, tradespeople, and business men would 

have been able to get a tax free input and would have indeed 

received their funding back. 

 

And even in the small operation I run, and certainly as I talk to 

my brother and father, the amount of dollars that they would 

have been saving that would have been coming back from their 

pockets which they could have put into the local business and 

to the local community to provide services and buy the 

products they needed, Mr. Speaker, will not be there. 

 

And you just have to look at the refunds that have been 

received under the GST or through the GST program and 

multiply that by two, and it is significant dollars to farmers and 

business men across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this synchronization, or failure to synchronize, 

certainly affects our farmers.  It also takes away from lower 

income people the $200 per child per year out of their hands.  

And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at a $200 per child tax credit 

and you take a 7 per cent tax, that's a significant dollar loss.  

That's actually . . . They have the spending equivalent of 

something like $2,700 in order to bring themselves to the point 

of what the $200 is going to give them. 

 

So it means that any family in this province receiving the $200 

tax credit had the ability to go out and spend $2,700.  And how 

many people spend $2,700 per child each year?  So I believe 

most families, when they sit down and really give some 

thought, will find that it is a significant loss and, Mr. Speaker, 

it's a loss to the lower income families -- the families we 

wanted to help, families we were reaching out to.  And I 

believe we all believe in helping those on lower incomes. 

 

The NDP claim to have done studies on the impact of the 

expanded E&H tax but fail to be able to back up their figures.  

In fact, Mr. Speaker, Bruce Johnstone, in an article that I have 

with me today, had this to say about the NDP impact study.  

The article is dated May 25, 1991.  This article is taken from 

the Leader-Post shortly after the NDP released their study, and 

this is what Mr. Johnstone says: 

  



December 13, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 279 

 How did they, the NDP, arrive at these conclusions?  (Did 

they arrive by) The usual way, by making assumptions and 

some judicious guesswork. Unfortunately, many of the 

study's assumptions and guesses either ignore the facts or 

stand them on their head. 

 

Mr. Johnstone goes on to point out many misnomers in the 

study, such as the down-playing of the $260 million being 

rebated to Saskatchewan business owners through 

synchronization.  And, Mr. Speaker, in light of the business tax 

credit, I talked to one business man who certainly was not 

happy with me as his MLA back in the spring regarding the 

harmonization with the GST and the dollar value that would be 

returned to him.  It wasn't till after the election that he realized 

the significant dollar loss that he was going to incur because we 

didn't harmonize.  And one of the things he said, I'm not happy 

with harmonization earlier on.  But he said yes, it will simplify 

the taxation system. 

 

But now, Mr. Speaker, he not only realizes that it would have 

simplified the taxation system, but it would have given him an 

advantage as a business man in my community by harmonizing 

the tax. 

 

And as well, Mr. Speaker, the collection at the border by 

federal customs officials reducing, not increasing, cross-border 

shopping.  Mr. Speaker, by harmonizing or by synchronizing 

our E&H with the GST, what would it do?  The federal 

employees would have collected not just the 7 per cent GST.  

They would have collected the 7 per cent harmonized tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that that added tax along with all 

the taxes you pay on goods and services you receive when you 

go across the line would have given people a second thought as 

to why they would go across say monthly or weekly rather than 

maybe once or twice a year just to have a holiday.  Perhaps the 

biggest . . . (inaudible) . . . pointed out by Johnstone is that the 

study fails to consider the effect of the new farm safety net 

programs on the provincial economy.  The whole rationale, Mr. 

Speaker, for paying an extra $180 million a year in taxes is to 

trigger the $1.3 billion in program payments from GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) and NISA (net income 

stabilization account). 

 

Mr. Speaker, $1.3 billion in the Saskatchewan economy means 

significant tax dollars not only to the government of the 

province of Saskatchewan but to the residents, to the 

consumers, and to the users of all the services that we provide, 

that are provided to people. 

 

The NDP government would have the people of Saskatchewan 

believe, as Bruce is saying, that 180 million would just 

disappear into thin air.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, without GRIP and 

NISA, realized net farm income would be negative -- 156 

million in '90-91 alone, but with the programs it will be mildly 

positive, an estimated $330 million.  Mr. Speaker, again we see 

smoke and mirrors. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I believe the . . . Being Friday the 13th and 

being close to 1 o'clock, I have more things to say; I'll ask to 

adjourn debate. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


