





























































Hansard: June 18, 1991


 

 

June 18/91 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Deputy Clerk: -- Mr. Van Mulligen of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts presents the seventh report as follows: 
 

 Your committee considered the following Bill and agreed to report the same 
without amendment -- Bill 53, An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
make a few remarks prior to moving the motion of concurrence, and just to 
say that there's four main elements to this Bill, The Act to amend The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
One was to, instead of having a lifetime term for the auditor, that it be 
done for a period of six years which might be renewable one time.  
Secondly, it expands the professional groups to which a Provincial Auditor 
might belong as a qualification for the job.  Thirdly, that the funding for 
his office should come through the Board of Internal Economy, as is the 
case for other officers of the Assembly, as distinct from government 
departments.  And fourthly, that the auditor's mandate, that is the things 
that he looks at, be expanded to examine questions such as efficiency, to 
see whether or not the taxpayers are getting value for their money. 
 
There is some disagreement on one of the clauses, that is with the question 
of a term versus a lifetime appointment, but I'm sure that those comments 
will come forth in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, your committee appreciated the opportunity 
to have reviewed the Bill, and I would now move, seconded by the member for 
The Battlefords: 
 

 That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts be 
concurred in. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to draw to your 
attention a group of students here from Henry Braun School in the 
constituency of Regina North East in Regina.  They're seated in the 
Speaker's gallery, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They're here to tour the 



 

 

buildings and to watch the question period which is about to take place in 
a very few moments. 
 
They're accompanied by teacher Mrs. Dorgan, and a chaperon, Mrs. Pauliuk.  
I want to welcome them to the legislature and wish them an enjoyable and 
educational visit here and a good summer holiday as school is very quickly 
coming to a close, and ask the members and you, Mr. Speaker, to join me in 
welcoming these students here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise this afternoon to introduce 
to you and through you to the members of this Assembly, 23 students, grade 
4 students from my constituency from the community of Walsh Acres, the 
George Lee School, seated in your gallery.  I'd like to ask members to join 
with me in welcoming them today. 
 
I'll be meeting with them after question period to have our pictures taken 
and to discuss issues of the day with them.  I'd also like to welcome the 
teachers, Mrs. Ryan, Mrs. Wilson, Mrs. Bzdel, Mr. Clifton; and some 
chaperons, Mrs. Senft and Mrs. Chalupiak.  Members, I ask you to join with 
me in welcoming these guests here today.  Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, I would draw your attention and that of 
the members to a former member who is sitting behind the rail, Mr. Walter 
Smishek.  Mr. Smishek is not only well-known to the members of this House, 
but also to the people of Saskatchewan as one who was part of the group of 
people in Saskatchewan who brought us medicare; was a former minister of 
Health and in that capacity brought us the prescription drug program and 
the children's dental program; was a minister of Finance for four years and 
brought us, I believe, four balanced budgets. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- And I might add, was also a minister of Urban Affairs 
and brought us the urban revenue-sharing program. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- I trust that the introduction is complete, but if you 
haven't quite finished, I would just like to say, not to include debate and 
simply introduce your guests.  I trust you will. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, let me just say, I hope that a person's 
achievements never become the subject of debate, and I'm pleased to 
introduce him. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 



 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, if I might, while I'm on my feet, I just 
want to introduce to you and through you to the members of the Assembly, a 
constituent of mine, Rheta Lang, who's up in the east gallery.  And would 
you please welcome her. 
 
Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Costs of Decentralization 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my question 
today is to the Premier.  Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House the member 
from Melfort, the former Government House Leader, declared -- and I have a 
copy of his statement here -- that the province is "on the verge of 
bankruptcy . . ."  Something which, Mr. Speaker, I might add, many of us 
have been saying for quite some time. 
 
And the member from Melfort also went on to say that the so-called Fair 
Share program will cost much more than the government lets on; that it 
cannot be justified for among other reasons, the costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this:  Mr. Premier, will you 
table today finally your studies on the costs of Fair Share?  And if not, 
will you finally admit that this program is too costly and put together, as 
we and the member from Melfort have been saying, without adequate planning 
and consultation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
we've had considerable experience, as the members opposite have, in moving 
people when they were in government.  We move about 200 people a year. 
 
We've certainly looked at the experience in the last few years in terms of 
Fair Share to various communities.  And our costs range from 8 to $12,000 
per person that is moved, Mr. Speaker.  Now it will vary depending on how 
many people move, and it'll vary depending on the kinds of technology you 
use.  But, Mr. Speaker, I'm quite prepared to stand by that information. 
 
We'll be providing more analysis when we wrap it up, Mr. Speaker, and the 
minister in charge will have more to say on that.  But I'd certainly say, 
Mr. Speaker, that all of the experience that our national consultants have, 
we have, banks have, the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) have, and 
many, many others, are in the ballpark of the figures that we've presented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  Mr. 
Premier, and Mr. Speaker, on the weekend the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix ran an 
advertisement placed by the Government of Saskatchewan called "THE FACTS ON 
FAIR SHARE SASKATCHEWAN."  Unfortunately there were no facts in there 



 

 

except for one little interesting fact, and I quote.  The ad says, quote: 
 

 The process has involved the expertise of a team of national consulting 
firms -- including Price Waterhouse, Ernst and Young, and Peat Marwick 
Stevenson and Kellogg (is what the ad said). 

 
Mr. Premier, surely these consulting firms have done these cost studies for 
you.  Surely they must have done so.  And if so, why is it that you 
steadfastly refuse to produce them?  Or putting it bluntly, why do you 
steadfastly continue to hide these reports, especially in the light of the 
allegations made by your former colleague sitting around the cabinet table, 
the member for Melfort? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, in this House, Mr. Speaker, 
obviously there's a very significant difference in philosophy.  We have 
looked at share offerings in the Potash Corporation so the public could be 
involved, and they don't want to believe any of the numbers. 
 
We've looked at Weyerhaeuser and PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp Company), Mr. 
Speaker.  The hon. member knows that it was losing $91,000 a day, and we 
put together a deal.  We have a brand-new paper mill. And all he can talk 
about are the numbers, Mr. Speaker, and he's still against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It's the same with respect to moving Crop Insurance to Melville.  We've 
gone through all that, Mr. Speaker. And all they could say in the last 
election is that they'll review Melville and whether Crop Insurance would 
go there.  Well that's all it took for Melville, Mr. Speaker.  They voted 
for the Conservatives because they knew we would deliver Crop Insurance to 
Melville. 
 
After all the pressure, Mr. Speaker, on us, and then all of the pressure on 
that member, you'd think that he could stand up today and say he's either 
for it or against it.  But he still can, Mr. Speaker.  He still can. 
 
All over the province of Saskatchewan people are saying, in principle this 
is the right thing to do. But still that member can't say whether he's for 
it or against it, Mr. Speaker.  Make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, we are for 
it.  We defend rural Saskatchewan towns and villages and cities.  It is the 
right thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier. And I 
note, Mr. Speaker, as is obvious to the entire legislature and the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan, this Premier refuses or is unable to 
answer the previous two questions about costs, which substantiate the 
allegations we've been making, and the member from Melfort, that the costs 
simply don't justify what's been taking place here. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is this.  In today's Regina Leader-Post, 
Statistics Canada shows us -- sadly I say this -- as being number one in 



 

 

Canada when it comes to the number of children living in poor income 
families, a full 7 per cent above the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to this, the Premier: how can the government 
justify perhaps up to a hundred million dollars extra cost on Fair Share, 
so-called, when the poverty rate for children in this province shows 
exactly how unfair this government really has been to the poor and the 
families.  How do you justify that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, he's put his foot in it now.  Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Excuse me.  Order.  Member for Regina 
Elphinstone, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I don't like to interrupt, but I don't think 
it's courteous that as soon as I call the House to order, immediately 
there's a member interrupting again.  We should have some co-operation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I want you and the members of the public 
and the members of the media to note exactly what the hon. member just 
said. 
 
He's noticed poverty in Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, the real poverty in 
Saskatchewan is in rural Saskatchewan because they've suffered the collapse 
of farm income.  We've seen towns and villages all over this province lose 
population, Mr. Speaker.  Listen to them holler.  Listen to the holler, Mr. 
Speaker.  Let me finish.  Do you think they'd let me finish. 
 
People all over Saskatchewan have suffered because of $2 wheat, 21 per cent 
interest rates.  They've suffered, Mr. Speaker, because of commodity wars, 
and no other jurisdiction in Canada has suffered.  And that member won't 
speak up for them.  He won't stand in his place and say, I'll provide you 
some jobs.  I'll stick in there for GRIP (gross revenue insurance plan) and 
NISA (net income stabilization account).  I'll provide community 
development bonds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there's poverty in this province, this government knows 
that it's in rural Saskatchewan.  Those people have lost their farms, lost 
their incomes.  They've had to move, Mr. Speaker.  They've been in real, 
real difficulty and that member, Mr. Speaker, as in 1982, wouldn't lift a 
finger.  And today he abandons them again, Mr. Speaker.  He abandons them.  
Well I haven't, Mr. Speaker, and we'll stick up for them.  You can count on 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier.  And I 
say to the Premier that it's correct.  That thanks to your policies and 



 

 

those of your friend the Prime Minister, Mr. Mulroney, with the closure of 
VIA Rail and the closure of the post offices and the closure of the dental 
technicians' programs and the various other privatizations of highways and 
the absence of an agricultural policy, you're right.  The people of rural 
Saskatchewan are suffering thanks to Tory policies.  That's . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Your policies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- For nine years this person has been the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order.  Order. 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is this to the Premier.  In view 
of the fact for the last nine years you, sir, have been the government and 
the Premier in charge of the administration of the province of 
Saskatchewan, resulting in this now, which you admit, how in the world is 
it that you can justify up to a hundred million dollars for Fair Share when 
poverty is rampant in rural Saskatchewan as you say.  How do you justify 
that? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member, the hon. member doesn't 
understand agriculture in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  Order, order.  Order.  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, if Fair Share Saskatchewan, if Fair Share 
Saskatchewan would cost $25 million, Mr. Speaker, if it did, that's 50 
cents an acre to the farmers and the people of rural Saskatchewan, 50 cents 
an acre.  I've stood in this legislature, offered 3 or 4 or $500 million, 
and he's jumped up and down and said it isn't enough and it isn't enough. 
 
If we go out, Mr. Speaker, and we provide jobs for folks all over rural 
Saskatchewan, it would be there, Mr. Speaker.  As a result . . . Listen to 
them.  They don't understand, Mr. Speaker.  They wouldn't even listen, and 
as much as 50 cents an acre in rural Saskatchewan, to provide opportunities 
when we've had $2 wheat, we've had drought, we've had grasshoppers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've had 21 per cent interest rates and the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) Leader, the only thing that he did, Mr. Speaker, is 
foreclose on farmers or buy their land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well we'll do more than that.  We'll do more than that.  
We know what drove them off the farms.  We know what caused them the 
problem in the first place, Mr. Speaker.  We're going to be there to defend 
them. And, Mr. Speaker, 25 or 30 or 40 or 50 cents an acre is not too much 
to put into rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



 

 

Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I've a new question to the Premier.  Mr. 
Speaker, the record of this government is painfully clear to each and every 
one of us in the province of Saskatchewan -- today the highest rate of 
out-migration, the highest rate of bankruptcies in the farm and businesses, 
today the highest rate of joblessness. Today, according to the Premier's 
own admission, the highest rates of poverty in rural Saskatchewan -- after 
nine years of this government's administration -- that's their record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Romanow: -- They're the government.  Mr. Speaker, it's clear that the 
Premier opposite has lost faith of the people and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan.  He's lost the confidence of the members of his 
cabinet and his caucus, as the member from Melfort chose.  Your priorities 
are a hundred million dollars for Fair Share and not for the poverty and 
the children in poverty. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to you, Mr. Premier:  for once, will you get 
up and do the right thing and call an election right now so that we can 
start things on the right way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I have put $12 billion into rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker -- $12 billion.  And the hon. members won't 
listen and they won't respond because they don't understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we put $2 billion into rural Saskatchewan for farmers in rural 
communities.  We got the federal government to put 9 billion, Mr. Speaker 
-- 9 billion.  If you look at all the years prior to that, Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP never come close to helping farmers.  Thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, 
there was a Progressive Conservative government in the 1980s in the 
province of Saskatchewan to stick up for farmers, Mr. Speaker, and rural 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- We spent $300 million providing natural gas to farmers 
and towns and villages and ranchers -- way overdue.  Our neighbours in 
Alberta had it for years, Mr. Speaker, and finally people have access to 
natural gas.  We provided water projects, diversification, community bonds, 
and now, Mr. Speaker, just a little bit Fair Share of government offices. 
 
And do you know what the hon. member says?  He can't even stand in his 
place today and say whether he's for it or against it.  And he wants me to 
call an election. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member, why doesn't he come clean and 
stand up and say he's either on one side of the fence or the other, Mr. 
Speaker.  He hasn't fooled anybody in rural Saskatchewan.  They will deny 
him again, Mr. Speaker; you can count on it. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Child Hunger in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 
Minister of the Family.  The Premier is obviously not prepared to answer 
the questions.  The Minister of the Family is coaching the Premier from his 
seat so I'll give him an opportunity to stand up. 
 
Mr. Minister, 23 per cent of Saskatchewan children are growing up in 
poverty, as my colleague has said.  Instead of offering any support for 
these families, you would rather spend $100 million on your government's 
political agenda, Mr. Minister of the Family. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you, sir, have the courage to stand up today and to admit 
that the political fortunes of the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party are 
more important to you, sir, than to the fate of thousands of hungry 
Saskatchewan children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, last year about this time we embarked on a 
program to respond to the needs of hunger in the province.  We visited 
schools and directors of education and community associations and mayors 
and municipalities all over this province and asked them how serious they 
thought the problem was and how could we respond. 
 
It came down, Mr. Speaker, to rather a simple answer.  The answer seemed to 
be for the most part in community schools -- community schools in Regina, 
in Moose Jaw and Saskatoon and Prince Albert and North Battleford.  We 
asked them what they needed to help to solve the problem.  You don't solve 
the problem for a long time because the basic solution, Mr. Speaker, is 
education. 
 
But we needed to respond to it, so we did respond.  We responded by 
providing hot meals to all these kids attending these community schools in 
Regina, Saskatoon and Prince Albert, and North Battleford.  And so far . . 
. and going back over to the schools and talking to them in the last little 
while, they seem to be very happy with that system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They seem to feel that maybe there are places where we could top up the 
programs.  Maybe there's a few wrinkles here and there we could fix.  But, 
Mr. Speaker, they're not . . . they're saying it's been a good thing so far 
and we need to keep it up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Pringle: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, since this member 
was appointed Minister of the Family, poverty in Saskatchewan has gone up 
dramatically, not down.  Mr. Minister, child poverty in Saskatchewan is a 
disgrace.  A year ago you said it didn't even exist.  It's a disgrace; it's 
an embarrassment. 



 

 

 
Families in Regina are now being ripped apart, and your choice to many of 
them is to either separate or become unemployed.  That's a choice you're 
giving them.  Families in rural Saskatchewan are being victimized by your 
government's cruel hoax that this program will actually happen and that 
their problems will be solved. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you had any decency left, if you had any decency as 
Minister of the Family, you would follow the lead of the member from 
Melfort.  You would stand up and you would resign as well in protest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm really not sure what the question was, 
but let me try to figure out what the question was.  It was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: -- Will you resign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- Well of course I won't resign.  First of all, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Martin: -- The mayor of the city, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, 
the mayor of the city of Regina suggested that I should resign.  My answer 
to the mayor of the city -- as it would be to any of those other members 
over there because he certainly represents the interests of the people 
opposite -- but, Mr. Speaker, my answer would be this: that I am a member 
from the city of Regina.  I can do more for the city of Regina, more for 
the hunger in this province, more for the families of this province, by 
being in cabinet.  That's where the decisions are made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as long as I am here, as long as I have an opportunity to 
strengthen rural Saskatchewan, because it strengthens the city of Regina . 
. . Mr. Speaker, if we do not have a strong rural Saskatchewan, we have a 
weak Regina.  And the sooner these people figure that out, the easier it 
will be to get on with the job. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

Future of Fair Share Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Premier, if 
I can get his attention.  Mr. Premier, yesterday in this House we heard a 
searing indictment of your government to an extent that has seldom been 
heard in this province, if any, Mr. Premier.  Your House Leader, a valued 
member of the treasury benches and a very important member of your 
government, stood up and quit your party because he believes you have 
embarked on a program that is hurting people in this province. 



 

 

 
So my question to you today is: are you going to take the advice of the 
member from Melfort who did what he did because he believed you wrong?  
Will you reconsider and will you abandon this harmful Fair Shares program 
which is going to do so much harm to public services in the province of 
Saskatchewan and cost millions of dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member should have been 
with the cabinet members in Melfort today.  And he would have seen, Mr. 
Speaker, the community endorse Fair Share Saskatchewan.  People all over 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have said that the province of 
Saskatchewan can have a little bit better share of public employees.  
Melfort said that today in spades, Mr. Speaker.  They are coming out, Mr. 
Speaker, and they're saying that's the right thing to do. 
 
They say it in Watrous.  They say it in Lanigan.  They say it in Humboldt 
and Rosetown.  And the NDP still can't make up their mind whether they're 
for it or against it.  And they're asking, Mr. Speaker . . . well come on 
let's see . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order, order.  Order, order.  While hon. 
members may get emotional, surely hollering at the top of your voice 
shouldn't be part of your expression, surely.  And perhaps if the member 
for Wascana and the member for Saskatoon Nutana would refrain from carrying 
on their private debate, we could continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I just make the point that the hon. 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, knows as a politician, Mr. Speaker, 
that eventually it'll catch up to him.  He says one thing in the country in 
Tisdale.  He says, it's absolutely not true that I would cancel this 
program.  Now he comes back here in Regina and his colleagues are on him 
saying, oh we're against this.  Barb Byers told him to say he's against it.  
Then he goes out into the country again -- he'll be in Rosetown tomorrow, 
Mr. Speaker -- he'd say: no, it's okay, I'd just do it a little different.  
Then he comes back into Regina and Rosenau says: no, you've got to be 
against it. 
 
Yesterday one of the union members said: you know, I think Romanow's a 
chicken blank.  He should make up his mind.  Well what's a chicken blank?  
That's a politician, Mr. Speaker, who says one thing in the country, 
another thing in the city; one thing to the seniors, another to the youth.  
Mr. Speaker, that chicken blank isn't going to make it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- A new question to the Premier. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  Order.  Order, order.  The 
member for Regina North East wishes to put a question, but he can't if 
members on both sides of the House don't allow him to. 
 



 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a new question to the 
Premier, and let me say at the outset that the definition for a chicken in 
Saskatchewan is a Premier who's afraid to call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me tell the Premier, Mr. Speaker, let me tell the 
Premier what his former House Leader, the member from Melfort, said 
yesterday, and I quote: 
 

 I do believe that people expect stable, responsible, caring, and fair 
leadership from their politicians. 

 
 Mr. Speaker, I have applied these principles to our program, Fair Share . 

. . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Excuse me, excuse me.  There are still 
members from both sides of the House who are not allowing you to put your 
question.  And once again, interruptions and hollering is really not 
acceptable and I'm going to have to interrupt, even though I don't like  
 Dto interrupt hon. members, to bring that to their attention. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Let me continue, Mr. Premier.  
Your former House Leader, the member for Melfort, said: 
 

 Mr. Speaker, I have applied these principles to our program, Fair Share, 
and I'm sorry, but I don't think they pass that test. 

 
Well, Mr. Premier, if in the view of one of your former cabinet colleagues 
the program wasn't fair, it wasn't stable, it wasn't caring or responsible, 
how can you justify continuing it?  Will you today halt your madness and 
leave it to the people of the province.  Will you call an election?  Let 
them decide.  Because in the end they are going to have to foot the bill, 
Mr. Premier.  Call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, isn't it . . . It must be fascinating to 
the media at least, and to the public, to see the fact that one of my 
colleagues has stepped down over this issue, Mr. Speaker, and still they 
can't come clean and say whether they're for it or against it. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, we will continue it.  The NDP are all over the map.  
The NDP leader can't make up his mind, Mr. Speaker.  He doesn't want to get 
caught in the country.  He doesn't want to say one thing there and one 
thing here because he knows he's been caught over and over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say, the old NDP trick, Mr. Speaker, of not . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order. 
 
Unfortunately I must once more interrupt.  And I once more ask hon. members 
to co-operate -- to co-operate, our hon. members, and allow question period 



 

 

to proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, let me put it another way.  If the hon. 
members think that is doing them so much good, then they might as well 
encourage us to continue it and make their point.  But, Mr. Speaker, they 
can't make up their mind because they say one thing in the country and one 
thing in the city. 
 
In Tisdale, I will challenge the hon. member to come to Tisdale and debate 
Fair Share Saskatchewan.  He won't do that.  I'll take him Rosetown, 
Rosetown.  I'll challenge him to come to Yorkton.  I'll challenge him to 
come to Melfort.  I'll challenge him to come to Moose Jaw.  He can come all 
over the province, Mr. Speaker, but he has to make up his mind.  Is he for 
it or against it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Petersen: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend 
The Highway Traffic Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

Bill No. 89 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Martens: -- I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Agri-Food 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Fair Share Saskatchewan (continued) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for 
me to rise today, and I will be moving a motion on the rule 16 "in 
recognizing the extreme hardship faced by rural communities of Saskatchewan 
as a result of the downturn in our agricultural sector, and the importance 
to our urban centres of strengthening and stabilizing these rural 
communities." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess probably question period here today has taken up a 
little bit of what we are going to be talking about here this afternoon . . 
. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 



 

 

 
The Speaker: -- The hon. member has begun his remarks, and we will take 
note of the time so he doesn't lose any time.  But I would like to ask 
leave of the House to table the report, the Saskatchewan Electoral 
Boundaries Commission, 1991.  I now table the report that reads as follows: 
 

 Dear Mr. Speaker:  I have the honour to submit herewith pursuant to The 
Electoral Boundaries Commission Act, 1991, section 12(1), a report 
containing the commission's recommendations respecting constituency 
boundaries and names in order to provide for the division of Saskatchewan 
into constituencies for the election of the members of the Legislative 
Assembly.  Yours sincerely, Dr. John Archer, Commission Chairman. 

 
I now table the report. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Fair Share Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- As I indicated earlier, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving at 
the end of my remarks: 
 

 That this Assembly recognize the extreme hardship faced by rural 
communities of Saskatchewan as a result of the downturn in our 
agricultural sector, and the importance of our urban centres of 
strengthening and stabilizing these rural communities, commend the 
government for its record of successful decentralization efforts, and for 
implementing further decentralization through Fair Share Saskatchewan, for 
its fair and equitable treatment of employees affected by these moves, and 
in particular extend its congratulation and appreciation to the 
Saskatchewan towns and villages that have promoted their communities and 
shown determination to build their communities, and Saskatchewan, through 
this effort. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the motion in itself says a lot for what decentralization 
means in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I can only really speak 
strongly on behalf of my riding, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to draw a sort of 
a scenario in regards to my riding and what had taken place out in my 
particular riding over the last nine years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last nine years there has been a definite hardship in 
the agricultural community in the Cut Knife-Lloydminster constituency.  We 
have seen a lot through the closing of businesses in our constituency due 
to the downturn of the economy and the lack of dollars that the farming 
community had in their pockets to keep these businesses viable.  I know 
that it is fairly awkward in some cases for some individuals to recognize 
that particular element because they have been an arm's length from the 
agricultural community. 
 
I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that decentralization in my communities 
such as Lloydminster and Maidstone and Cut Knife, have been warmly 
accepted.  I guess probably if the world could have seen the communities in 
regards to the reaction that had taken place with the announcements, Mr. 



 

 

Speaker, people could have probably have felt differently into the way that 
it is portrayed, maybe even through the media. 
 
I want to indicate to you, sir, that . . . and I'll give you an example or 
two.  I want to indicate to you, sir, that prior to decentralization and 
the Progressive Conservatives coming to government in 1982, that the 
downturn in the agriculture economy had really begun.  And there was a hard 
cry towards Regina here, towards the provincial government under the NDP 
administration at that particular time, as well as a hard and fast cry to 
Ottawa, and that had apparently fell on deaf ears. 
 
Interest rates had sky-rocketed dramatically.  I as a small-business man, I 
can relate to my own personal as well as some of my friends in the business 
community as well, where we had to look at 24 and 25 per cent interest 
rates in our businesses, in our operating loans as well as our mortgages in 
our facilities.  And I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that it had a 
dramatic impact in rural Saskatchewan at that particular time. 
 
As I said, it had fallen on deaf ears, Mr. Speaker.  And that is what had 
come to a point of maybe I guess in some aspects some hard, dramatically 
hard feelings against the NDP administration of that time. 
 
And I took it upon myself as one individual in rural Saskatchewan, to fight 
for the rights of rural Saskatchewan.  Because with that rural base it was 
recognized that our dollars would be mainly spent in the larger urban 
centres in the end -- if not sooner, then later. 
 
But I want to indicate that when the backs were turned on rural 
Saskatchewan by the NDP administration, and now Leader of the Opposition, I 
want to indicate that we as well as urban centres had indicated their 
dislike and had voted against the NDP back in 1982. 
 
On those basis, there was never really a recovery.  There was further 
set-backs in the agricultural sector, as everyone well knows, because of 
the . . . well because of what had taken place across the world -- not even 
in Canada here, Mr. Speaker, but across the world -- of commodity wars and 
everything else. 
 
So you know members opposite here in question period were pointing the 
finger at our Premier here and is saying it was all his fault, what 
happened to agriculture, and things like that.  Well anybody reasonably 
minded would know that that's not the case. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we had to, upon taking hold of the administration 
here, had had to make some fairly significant changes.  And yes there is 
some changes that are I guess fairly difficult to make.  And I think 
probably there are changes that a lot of people find hard. 
 
(1445) 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that even with changes that we've made 
across the . . . well over the period of time I should say, from '82 to 
this point, has helped soften the blow in rural Saskatchewan.  It's not to 



 

 

say there hadn't been some failures out there over our length of 
administration to this point, but at least we've softened it and it was of 
a less dramatic type of blow. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, that through a program such as 
decentralization, that is one particular program that has helped soften 
that blow. 
 
And I would hope, I would hope that the people do not feel . . . The 
employees that have moved out, I know the ones that have already settled in 
other parts of Saskatchewan other than here in Regina have really taken 
their place in the communities across the province that they've moved to 
and have found that gosh, it's not as bad as the NDP portray it to be out 
there in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And I'm surprised by the member of The Battlefords or the member from Quill 
Lakes, you know, that live in more the rural community, and opposing it.  I 
can understand maybe members from Regina here taking a more hard, fast 
stand on it because they are closer associated with higher-up union 
officials that are opposed philosophically to any move that this government 
so makes. 
 
But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people in my riding can feel . . . 
they feel good about having some new neighbours coming into their 
communities.  They have beautiful facilities out in the communities, 
especially in my riding.  I can say that there is not a lack of any kind of 
a type of a facility that is in Regina here that wouldn't be found out in 
my part of the world here, my part of the province. 
 
And I look at the skating rinks, I look at hockey, and I look at figure 
skating.  I look at volleyball and I look at rugby.  I look at the . . . 
And I'm looking at this on the basis of for our young people as well as we 
who are getting older, through recreation, sports, and everything else.  
But the younger people do very well by being able to have these facilities 
at their fingertips. 
 
There's not too much of this as having to get up at 4:30 in the morning 
like they do here in the city to have to take advantage of an ice hockey 
rink or a figure skating rink, you know. The figure-skating clubs and the 
hockey teams, they have actually decent hours in being able to take place 
in their competitions and everything else.  And they're very strong, strong 
clubs.  I know that there are very strong figure-skating clubs in rural 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
And decentralization and the back-up of decentralization should be looked 
at in these views is that they're not . . . people are not and employees 
are not moving into some deserted community.  We have beautiful education 
facilities, Mr. Speaker, with beautiful class-rooms.  As well we have 
gymnasiums and indoor-outdoor sports. 
 
I want to indicate to you that it was the second year in a row, Mr. 
Speaker, that in Lashburn, for instance, the community of Lashburn, that 
the junior men -- and we had 50 young men to choose from -- they have won 



 

 

the Saskatchewan provincial rugby championship, the junior men's 
championship, two years in a row.  And they had to compete against places 
such as Saskatoon and Regina and Humboldt and others. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the competitiveness out there by these young 
people are second to none.  They are full of emotion; they play with great 
emotion; they hold their heads up high.  And, Mr. Speaker, they feel strong 
about their community and the community's survival and stability. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it's not that I am opposed to the stability here in 
Regina.  Those kinds of programs, stability programs here, for instance, 
the community of Regina and Saskatoon or the larger cities especially, 
they, Mr. Speaker, are I guess probably as important to me as a rural 
person, as my own communities are. 
 
I as a member of this Assembly of this government, Mr. Speaker, do not take 
part in the decentralization program as a way of trying to get even with 
some people, some employees of the civil service.  That's not the reason at 
all.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, this -- I believe that decentralization means 
taking government even closer to the people.  It gives the people that have 
more or less centralized here in Regina an opportunity to get closer to the 
people they work for as well and to meet new friends and help stabilize a 
community, as well as carry on with their duties. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, if we take a look at it, I can understand some of 
the emotions that do possibly fly in the face of certain employees in here 
in Regina, and I'm sure that we're prepared as a government to sit down and 
deal with that as it comes to be. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it is my privilege to so move and, Mr. 
Speaker, I move then: 
 

 That this Assembly once again recognizing the extreme hardship faced by 
the rural communities of Saskatchewan as a result of the downturn in our 
agriculture sector, and the importance to our urban centres of 
strengthening and stabilizing these rural communities, commend the 
government for its record of successful decentralization efforts, for 
implementing further decentralization through Fair Share Saskatchewan, for 
its fair and equitable treatment of employees affected by these moves, and 
in particular extend its congratulations and appreciation to the 
Saskatchewan towns and villages that have promoted their communities and 
shown determination to build their communities, and Saskatchewan, through 
this effort. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from Wilkie. 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this House now proceed to 
Resolution No. 46 which reads as follows: 
 



 

 

 That this Legislative Assembly hereby expresses its non-confidence in the 
Government of Saskatchewan and therefore demands the immediate dissolution 
of the Legislature and the calling of a provincial general election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: -- I had to get this straight, so I need to explain it.  I had 
to put the motion.  I recognized you; however, I'll be frank with you, I 
recognized you under the assumption that you were going to ask leave to 
introduce guests or something like that.  Therefore your motion wasn't in 
order because this motion hadn't been put.  I must put the motion and then 
the seconder has an opportunity. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's with pleasure I 
rise to speak in favour of this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you are aware, decentralization is nothing really new to 
the province of Saskatchewan.  This process has been in effect since about 
1984, Mr. Speaker.  The only thing that has changed or is different, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we have gave the decentralization a name, which is Fair 
Share Saskatchewan.  It was called decentralization, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
something that has been done in the past, Mr. Speaker, and has been very 
successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have watched the decentralization process, and we slow 
walked it since 1984.  We have watched the Water Corporation in Moose Jaw, 
we've watched Crop Insurance in Melville, and we have watched Agricultural 
Credit Corporation in Swift Current, Saskatchewan Pension Plan, Mr. 
Speaker, in Kindersley, and the New Careers Corporation in Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could enlarge on that by saying that our group homes, the 
decentralization of our group homes, is another example of decentralization 
which has been very successful, in that we have taken people who are 
handicapped in one degree or another, Mr. Speaker, and put them into a home 
atmosphere.  We decentralized that out of the institutions, Mr. Speaker.  
So this program is really nothing new. 
 
We could talk about rural service centres, Mr. Speaker, which is part of 
the decentralization.  And, Mr. Speaker, all of these moves have been 
successful in terms of government efficiency.  We have watched these and we 
are now prepared, Mr. Speaker, to take the process further.  All these 
moves have been very popular in the communities in which they have been 
moved to. 
 
(1500) 
 
One of the mayors in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, said: it's long overdue.  
He said things like: it's the best thing since sliced bread.  Mr. Speaker, 
they're very enthusiastic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are aware, very much aware, of the trauma that may be 
there for people who'd have to move to a new home, and they are prepared to 
welcome them with open arms.  They're prepared to make their move as easy 



 

 

as it can.  And they are prepared to work with them, not on just one day to 
say hello, but for the weeks and months and years into the move, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are aware, we are aware of the trauma of people moving out 
of the city.  Mr. Speaker, we have young farmers not only losing their jobs 
-- losing their life work, and moving to the city.  So we are aware of 
that; we know that.  And we have put policies in place, Mr. Speaker, to 
alleviate that and help as much as we can. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time the moves were taking place, the members opposite 
played the same game that they're playing today.  They told us the moves 
would kill departments.  They told us the moves would do absolutely nothing 
for the communities involved.  Mr. Speaker, that opinion is not shared by 
the people in the country.  Mr. Speaker, they want a chance to share in the 
spin-off to business that comes from salaries being paid in their 
community. 
 
In my home town of Unity, Mr. Speaker, we have a salt mine, Sifto Salt.  
They employ in the neighbourhood of 95 people plus management.  Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Unity understand where Main Street would be if we 
didn't have the cash inflow from that salt mine. 
 
They embrace those people, Mr. Speaker, and the people of the Sifto Salt 
company embrace the town, because we stand together.  If we closed down the 
Sifto Salt plant, 95 people are out of a job; the town of Unity is out of a 
payroll.  They know that, and they work very well together.  The people of 
my community, Mr. Speaker, are prepared to work with anyone that comes to 
their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this move there is nothing to criticize.  If you prescribe 
to the members opposite that there is nothing to criticize, there must be 
nothing to say.  Mr. Speaker, there is something to say.  There is 
something to say about the residents and the communities that have the 
drive and dedication to build and stabilize their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, there's two questions must be asked -- two 
fundamental questions.  The fundamental question I would ask first: is 
rural Saskatchewan way of life worth saving?  If the answer, Mr. Speaker, 
is yes, then Fair Share fits that, with community bonds, Fair Share, rural 
service centres. All those fit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other question I have to ask myself: if my grandchildren 
say to me, grandpa, how come you let Unity die; you didn't do anything.  If 
I can say to him, I tried, I tried to save it, Mr. Speaker, I think that's 
a better answer they say, we done nothing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they laugh over there. They don't understand. They don't 
understand about small communities.  They don't understand, Mr. Speaker. 
They're not interested.  Mr. Speaker, it all points . . . Mr. Speaker, it 
points to a positive development. 
 
And I get reaction.  And I know when I get reaction from them it's because 



 

 

I hit a nerve.  Mr. Speaker, I know by their reaction that they don't like 
to hear what I say because what I have to say makes sense, Mr. Speaker.  
It's there.  It's that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is go out in the rural communities and you 
will feel, you will feel, the excitement in the air.  Mr. Speaker, there 
was 120 people in the town of Unity.  My wife went to Macklin.  My grandson 
drove the minister to Wilkie.  And each of those, Mr. Speaker, came back 
and said they were positive.  The mayor of Wilkie, who ran for the 
nomination for the NDP and lost, was very excited -- very, very excited in 
this program.  He accepts it; he wants it. 
 
Those over there on the other side of the House won't believe that, Mr. 
Speaker.  All they have to do is call him up.  He's a fair-minded man . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes, right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a grandfather.  And I would say to the member 
over there from Quill Lakes, who's giving me the problem, that I'm probably 
better respected than his grandchildren respect him. 
 
The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Order, order, order.  Order, order.  
I'd just like to draw it to the attention of the hon. member, that we -- 
order -- that we don't mention the hon. member's presence or absence. 
 
Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, if you're wondering 
about Fair Share, Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is look in the people's 
eyes and see the excitement that is happening when we announce Fair Share 
to them. 
 
 DMr. Speaker, is there any way that you can help me with the . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that people don't like to move but people move 
all the time.  I talked to RCMP; I talked to bankers; I talked to elevator 
agents; and, Mr. Speaker, they all have to move.  However, Mr. Speaker, in 
conversation with them, they don't get the consideration that we are giving 
to the people that we are asking to move.  We are asking them to move, Mr. 
Speaker, but we are also putting a package before them that I think is 
fair, I think it's just, and I think they will accept when they know the 
full extent of the package that will be offered to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our areas Fair Share has given them a renewed belief in 
that they can save their small communities.  Mr. Speaker, it was traumatic 
to see businesses close down and to see the feeling that's out there now, 
saying yes, we may be able to save our Saskatchewan way of life in the 
rural communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be unfair to say that the opposition hasn't come out 
with a position on Fair Share, but it would be nice, Mr. Speaker, if they 
would narrow it down to maybe just one position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're asking them, are they for it or against it.  Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it has been a position that they use both in the city . . . they 



 

 

use one in the city and one in the rural communities.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don't think it's fair that they should have a different position in the 
city as they do in the rural country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's not fair to the people.  If they have a position on it 
and they are dead against it, that's fair.  We accept that.  We know they 
won't accept anything we do anyway.  But let us have from them their 
position as to why, why we shouldn't try to save rural Saskatchewan.  
That's all we're asking.  Tell us you're position.  What would you do? 
 
The NDP in Regina, and I quote the member from The Battlefords, he said:  I 
am opposed to Fair Share Saskatchewan.  It would be no different than 
sending people to the salt mines of Siberia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Unity, Saskatchewan, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in the constituency of Wilkie, would . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- Time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this House now proceed to 
resolution no. 46 which reads as follows: 
 

 That this Legislative Assembly hereby expresses its non-confidence in the 
Government of Saskatchewan and therefore demands the immediate dissolution 
of the legislature and the calling of a provincial election. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 4 p.m. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 15 -- Community Economic Development Programs 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased and privileged to have 
this opportunity to address the Assembly today, private members' day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we're presented with an opposition who doesn't have 
the respect for this Assembly and what it means for the province of 
Saskatchewan, what it means for our democracy . . . but to utilize every 
method and every tactic that they can to disrupt the proceedings here . . . 
who don't want to listen to an open and honest debate, who don't want to 
deal openly, fairly, with the issues of the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that they should be disgraced.  It's a disgraceful 
attitude that they display, the way they carry on in this Assembly.  It's 
been my privilege to spend these last nine years here, and I must say that 
one of the things that's disappointed me most has been the decorum of this 
House, the mode of operation of the opposition, as they've looked at every 
opportunity and every initiative as to what it means in political terms as 
opposed to what it means for the people of Saskatchewan; those people who 
did put their trust and confidence in each and every one of the members 
elected to this Assembly. 



 

 

 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- Mr. Speaker, to close my remarks this afternoon, I'm going 
to move a motion relating to community economic development program in our 
province and what it's meant in the various communities that have 
participated in that program. 
 
We have an opportunity to speak to a resolution that puts many of the 
recent happenings seen here in Regina back into perspective.  Mr. Speaker, 
when members of the opposition choose to take the time, they're going to 
have the opportunity to enter into this debate and to put their views 
forward. 
 
Today we have that chance to talk about what the people of this province 
can do when a government that genuinely cares about them and about their 
well-being, gives them the opportunity to demonstrate their enthusiasm and 
their initiative for their own communities -- opportunities for the people 
of this province to not only have a say in how economic development and 
stabilization should be carried out in their own areas, but also the chance 
to actively take part, to participate in those decisions and to implement 
them. 
 
That's what this government has succeeded in doing with the community 
economic development program.  We've successfully utilized the enthusiasm 
and the dedication that has built our province from the ground up and has 
targeted it towards the stabilization and the further development of those 
communities across our great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and again that is what the people of this province -- a 
province that has a strong tradition of hard work -- that's what they've 
been asking for. 
 
They haven't expected a government to serve them everything on a silver 
platter.  They haven't asked for that.  What they do expect, and have every 
right to expect from their government, is to provide the means to achieve 
their goals.  They expect to have the chance to use their abilities and 
they expect government to believe in them and their abilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most unfortunately we see members across the floor who don't 
have that respect for them, who aren't prepared to give them that 
opportunity to do it for themselves, to make their communities what they're 
capable of being.  In contrast to that, Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to say that 
this side of the House does believe in the people of this province and 
we're not prepared to let their determination to build their communities go 
to waste. 
 
The community economic development program is designed to enable urban 
municipalities to improve not only their economic viability, but also the 
social, the cultural, religious viabilities that they have.  It gives the 
residents of Saskatchewan villages, towns, and cities the opportunity to 
make their place the kind of town that anyone would be proud of.  And, Mr. 
Speaker, by the number of communities who are listed in the resolution, I 



 

 

believe it's safe to say that a lot of our people in Saskatchewan are using 
this opportunity to the best of their ability.  They are prepared to put 
their hard work and initiative and dollars on the line to make their 
community successful. 
 
What's so special about these kinds of programs, and why are they proving 
so popular?  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for precisely the same reason I've 
already mentioned a number of times -- the pride of building your 
community; the pride of working with your neighbours; the pride of family 
who have ties to that communities; doing something that the entire 
community can be proud of.  And more importantly, doing something that's 
going to make that place stronger and a more viable place to live and raise 
a family -- a stronger more viable place for mom and dad, grandpa and 
grandma, to spend their later years where they can be proud of what they've 
contributed.  A place that does justice to the heritage of our pioneers, 
where few places in the world who can still boast that in many of their 
communities they have still original pioneers, original settlers there.  
People who came there with a dream and a vision, people who were not forced 
into our communities, people who came by choice because they wanted that 
opportunity to make a better life for themselves, an opportunity to have a 
better place for their children because they recognized the opportunities 
that their communities or future communities held.  They recognized that 
the resources that were at hand could be put to use to provide so many of 
those things that they wished for themselves. 
 
Community economic development committees provide the first steps to this 
renewed commitment to desired development.  These committees are 
responsible for many things, including promoting tourism, advertising local 
attractions, acquiring chiropractors, barbers, other professional and 
business people to their communities and areas.  They're responsible for 
finding out what the community needs most and then finding ways to acquire 
them. 
 
Many instances, one of the first courses of action of those committees is 
to sit down and assess their strengths.  To list, draw up a community 
profile, to list all the things that they do have, all the resources that 
are available within their boundaries.  And on the other side of the sheet 
to draw up a list of the things that they would like to see for their 
community, to take the opportunity to set a goal, to decide consciously 
where they want to go and where they'd like to be in the future. 
 
For this, Mr. Speaker, every member of this Assembly should congratulate 
those members of our communities, those members who put their time and 
effort on a volunteer basis into those committees. 
 
This government, under the leadership of our Premier, the member from 
Estevan, takes great pride in being part of that process, a process that 
has helped rekindle the co-operative spirit that has been such an important 
part of Saskatchewan's heritage, a spirit that has been such an important 
part of making Saskatchewan what it has become. 
 
Projects like community bonds have truly been a spark into a great number 
of communities across the province.  It's been an opportunity for them to 



 

 

recognize that within their own borders, within their own communities, they 
have the wherewithal to promote new business, in some case assist existing 
businesses, to better serve the needs that they have in their area. 
 
We now have 68 incorporated bond corporations with 44 new economic 
development projects under way all across this province.  Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there are more of them to come, many more to come. 
 
People once again have become excited about the potential that their 
communities possess.  Why is it?  Because this government has taken the 
time to listen once more to what the people of this province have wanted.  
We've listened and then we've came up with a plan to implement many of 
those ideas that the public had. 
 
Government is only as good as the people it serves and the people it 
represents.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm proud to say I'm proud to have been a 
member of this government that has listened to those people who have 
brought their ideas forward to government, and have assisted in developing 
programs and plans to let them put them into place -- plans that have 
involved the people . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- Involved the people not only as they've outlined the 
problems, but involved them in finding their solutions -- a plan that's let 
each community lay out their own priorities in that process of 
strengthening not only their economy but also the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, daily we see evidence that our plan is working.  The people 
know that it is working.  That's why manufacturing investment in this 
province has increased by more than 700 per cent.  That's why we have all 
these  
 Dcommunities starting community economic development committees, community 
bond corporations, and putting in community profiles for their Fair Share 
Saskatchewan proposals. 
 
That's why when you travel around the province, people speak with new 
vigour and enthusiasm for what their communities can become.  They see this 
province maturing, this province and their communities coming to its own.  
They see that investing in the futures of the people of their community 
through programs like community bonds and helping people set up community 
development committees, it's much more profitable than buying potash mines; 
much more profitable than nationalizing an oil industry; setting up 
committees to promote home-grown ideas and businesses, working together 
within their community as opposed to some central government doing it all 
for them; continuing that tradition of working together, contributing not 
only to the economic well-being once again but also to those other aspects 
that make life so distinctive and so great in our rural communities. 
 
(1615) 
 
Mr. Speaker, those people also know how important the farm economy is to 
their futures and they know that government must do what it can to protect 



 

 

that industry.  They feel the excitement of new families and jobs coming to 
their areas through Fair Share Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had that opportunity only this morning to participate in the 
announcement in my home constituency of people coming to that community.  
As I had the opportunity to visit with so many of them afterwards, they 
were so enthused about the opportunity to welcome new people to their 
community, not only for what it meant in jobs and the economic side, but 
for what that community and area had to offer to those people as a place to 
live, in the life-style that was available, and the many, many things that 
they're so proud of in north-eastern Saskatchewan. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of thing that makes this job so rewarding, 
seeing people regain that belief that they can do it for themselves and 
they can do it better than anyone else.  They can do it better than people 
in government so far away.  They can do it better than a bureaucrat in 
Regina.  They can do it for themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so unfortunately as we look back over our history, we've seen 
that that belief is something that has been allowed to die by successive 
governments in the past, as they have so many times offered to do 
everything for them.  They've driven that spirit out, but it has been 
rekindled.  People are doing it and they're determined to succeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not so long ago, and I'm sure you recall when the the subject 
of a factory in every town came out in the media, members opposite sat in 
their chairs and chuckled.  In fact many of them did more than chuckle -- 
they outright laughed and treated the idea with scorn.  Mr. Speaker, they 
laughed because they didn't believe it was possible.  They thought it was 
something, that because someone talked about it, it should happen the next 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the very realistic people of this province realize that those 
types of things aren't turned around in a day or a week or in one term of 
office of a government.  Mr. Speaker, they realize it will take time.  They 
realize they have to lay the groundwork and work to that end.  Mr. Speaker, 
they've taken up the challenge and they are working to that end.  Sorry to 
say members opposite haven't put the same faith in the people of our 
province that they have in themselves.  I say shame on them.  Something 
like that isn't going to happen overnight, but the groundwork has been 
laid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge you, I challenge members opposite, to go to the 
people in Melville, who now have a communications plant in their city, and 
tell them that it isn't possible to have that type of development in their 
community.  Go to the people in Wynyard and tell them that it isn't 
possible to bottle water in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again we've seen a display by the member who represents 
that community, a display that he doesn't have the belief in his own people 
to even support them in their enterprises and in what they're doing -- a 
member who treats his own constituents and their development with scorn and 
disdain. 



 

 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, go to the people in Indian Head and tell them that it 
isn't possible to produce medical supplies.  Go to the people in Biggar and 
tell them that it isn't possible to produce world-class barley malt.  Go to 
Saskatoon and tell them that they don't have the know-how to produce 
Saskatchewan's own beer.  Go to your home area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the 
people of Prince Albert, surrounding area, and tell them that they can't 
produce paper.  Some of the finest paper produced is in our Saskatchewan 
resources. 
 
Who has done it, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  It hasn't been government.  It's been 
the people -- our enterprising people, our tradesmen, our business people 
who put those projects together, who've worked on them and are making them 
successful within their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's a long list of those type of projects.  And the list, 
I'm happy to say, is getting longer.  People are recognizing the 
opportunities that are available; they're building on those opportunities. 
 
The dreams that all the people in Saskatchewan have, the dream that there 
will be jobs for them in their own communities, is becoming a reality.  
Partly it's through the work of community economic development committees, 
community bond corporations, but mostly it's through that desire of the 
people of Saskatchewan -- the desire that they have to build, the desire 
that they have to make things better.  Because those people in this 
province are builders, Mr. Speaker, they're going to make it happen. 
 
Members opposite don't like to hear about people building.  They don't like 
to hear about people doing things for themselves.  They would sooner have 
them under their control.  They would sooner say, we'll do it for you.  Mr. 
Speaker, I challenge them to get out and listen to those people and to work 
with them, not against them.  Mr. Speaker, those people in this province 
are builders and it's something that the members on this side of the House 
have recognized, and we share that belief very strongly with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people who are builders follow a plan.  Mr. Speaker, we've 
been following a plan -- a plan that's required spending money to protect 
the people when times were tough.  And that goes back to the very early 
days of this administration in 1982, when we recognized that there were 
things that were out of the control of the people as individuals. 
 
When the government came to the aid of people when interest rates were 
record highs, when people were losing their homes, when members sitting 
opposite were part of a government who turned a callous hand on those 
people and said there's nothing that can be done, this government 
recognized that there was something that can be done.  We assisted those 
people through those times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've seen that since 1982.  We've seen it in assistance to 
agriculture; we've seen it in assistance to business people; we've seen it 
in assistance to students wanting to go to further their education.  And 
we've stood with them.  We've helped them. 
 



 

 

Mr. Speaker, this has been a government that at times in that plan has been 
required to invest in projects to create new jobs for Saskatchewan people 
-- a plan that's required improvements to how we deal with oil and gas 
companies so we could utilize the natural resources this province has been 
blessed with.  It's been a plan that's recognized the enormous amount of 
human potential that the people of this province demonstrate in everything 
they do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had a plan.  We continue to follow that plan.  
From time to time as conditions change, there are certainly amendments, but 
we have stuck to a plan of building and working with the people to make 
their Saskatchewan better, to diversify what we have . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: mHear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sauder: -- To add value to those resources that we have been so 
abundantly blessed with.  The people of this province know that plan, and 
it certainly is helping, particularly in the manufacturing sector, to turn 
around. 
 
Just a few weeks ago, newspapers carried the story of economic 
diversification and how Saskatchewan has done a super job during very 
difficult economic times.  It hasn't been an accident, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
It's because we've had that plan -- a plan where communities and their 
economic development committees have a very large role to play. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's contrast that with what members opposite have to offer 
the people of Saskatchewan -- members who've never taken the time to listen 
to those people, who don't believe that those people can do what they want 
to do. Members opposite who would sooner criticize what's been done and not 
offer realistic solutions or alternatives to the problems that face us. 
 
A government who stands and asks for instant results instead of putting the 
hard work and laying the groundwork for a solid future.  Going by what they 
have said in this House and elsewhere, they're going to increase spending 
in every government department, following their course of tradition by 
having more control.  But at the same time they say they're going to reduce 
taxes and reduce the deficit.  Mr. Speaker, every taxpayer knows that they 
can't have more programs without paying more taxes.  Their policies don't 
add up.  Obviously they haven't learned very basic arithmetic yet.  When 
somebody asks them how they're going to do it, they don't know.  They say, 
we have to look first; we'll have to think about that; we'll set up a 
committee to study it. 
 
How are they going to pay for all their promises?  I'd like to know.  The 
people of my constituency would like to know.  Others in the province are 
asking. 
 
Are they going to give the people of this province the opportunity to build 
and grow through more community development projects, or are they going to 
come in and shut them down, because some of them might involve bigger 
companies? 
 



 

 

Are they going to continue to work with those people who've taken the 
initiative to develop things within their communities.  Are they going to 
provide the support for economic growth and stabilization that the people 
of this province want, or are they going to revert back to their policy of 
buying potash mines, paper mills? 
 
Are they going to stop Fair Share Saskatchewan and deprive rural 
communities across the province of their share of government services and 
the economic spin-offs associated with having government offices located in 
their towns. 
 
I would challenge them all to come clean.  Go out to Nipawin; come out to 
my constituency and tell the people in Nipawin where they stand, that 
they're not going to proceed with that type of support to that community.  
Go out to Weyburn, go out to Swift Current, Gull Lake, go out to all these 
communities and tell them that they don't stand behind them.  Be honest 
with the people. 
 
Those people are asking those questions, and I believe the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Riversdale, has an obligation to provide an 
answer to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've had answers, and we do have a plan, and most importantly 
we believe in those people in our communities and in Saskatchewan.  We know 
how hard the people in Shaunavon, Porcupine Plain, Churchbridge, Meadow 
Lake, and Carlyle have been working.  We know how hard the people in 
Nipawin, Radville, Preeceville, and others have been working.  We also know 
what their communities mean to them. 
 
We know that the tough economic times, particularly in agriculture, is 
doing to their communities and what they've been facing.  It's been 
particularly hard on many of them.  Most of all, Mr. Speaker, we know what 
the people of these communities can do if they're given the tools to go out 
and get it done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the proof is in the results, and I listed many of them 
previously -- places who are doing things for themselves and developing 
their own communities.  Things are getting done, Mr. Speaker.  The mood is 
also changing.  We're beginning to use the potential that this province has 
had from day one, that other governments have been too afraid to use 
because it might lessen the people's dependence on them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're not afraid of Saskatchewan people competing with anyone.  
We're prepared to go out and compete with the best of them.  We're prepared 
to put our resources to use for our development of our future.  And we as a 
government are not afraid of providing them with the tools for development 
through community economic development committees, community development 
bonds, and giving them the assistance that we can.  We're not afraid 
because Saskatchewan people can compete with anyone, and they can win. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why members on this side of the House are so 
determined to continue working with the people of this province.  We 
believe that it is much, much too important to our Saskatchewan future and 



 

 

our way of life to see that potential shelved for only partisan political 
reasons -- shelved once again as it was in the past, and, Mr. Speaker, as 
the people believe, shelved like it would be again if the members opposite 
had their way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with these remarks I'd like to conclude on this.  And at this 
time I'd like to move this motion, seconded by the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster: 
 

 That this Assembly commend the government for its community economic 
development program and in particular extend its congratulations and 
appreciation for their determination to build their communities to the 
following Saskatchewan towns that have established community economic 
development committees under the program:  Assiniboia, Birch Hills, 
Broadview, Canora, Carlyle, Churchbridge, Coronach, Davidson, Esterhazy, 
Eston, Foam Lake, Fort Qu'Appelle, Gravelbourg, Hudson Bay, Humboldt, 
Indian Head, Ituna, Kamsack, Kerrobert, Kindersley, Kipling, Langenburg, 
Langham, Lanigan, La Ronge, Leader, Manitou Beach, Maple Creek, 
Martensville, Meadow Lake, Naicam, Nipawin, Outlook, Porcupine Plain, 
Preeceville, Radville, Redvers, Rocanville, Rosetown, Rosthern, Shaunavon, 
Shellbrook, Spiritwood, Sturgis, Tisdale, Wadena, Wakaw, Waldheim, 
Watrous, Whitewood, Wilkie, Wolseley and Wynyard. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I so move. 
 
(1630) 
 
Mr. Hopfner: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I guess, Mr. Speaker, if 
you would allow me to draw some remarks once again from I have . . . I 
guess probably if nothing else, it is something similar to what rule no. 16 
was earlier on today.  I want to congratulate the member, my colleague from 
Nipawin, for a very sincere speech that he had presented to all of us in 
this Legislative Assembly.  I think probably that was one of the most 
sincere speeches that I've heard from any one member in speaking what comes 
right from the heart, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to get into my remarks, Mr. Speaker, by indicating that over the 
years that the most crucial issues facing Saskatchewan was the need to 
stabilize the agricultural base and rural communities as a foundation for 
urban prosperity and preservation of the Saskatchewan way of life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think members opposite, if they would have listened, the NDP would 
have listened just to what was read in that one sentence, would have said a 
lot.  And then they might have understood what this government and this 
administration has been trying to do for quite some time. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that as I'd said earlier today in 
my remarks under rule 16, that the NDP opposition was turfed from 
government because they had turned their backs on the people of 
Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, those people had an opportunity, the NDP had an 
opportunity, to put fully into practice much of what the Progressive 
Conservative government has done over the last nine years here in 



 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that over nine years I have heard 
members of the NDP Party say, well me too, me too.  I would do that too, 
only I might do it just a little bit different.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 
the people are much wiser than what the NDP give them credit for. 
 
I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have now for some time have 
tried to get members of the opposition to stand in their place and tell us 
what they would do for the people of Saskatchewan in regards to economic 
development in all communities across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess probably again in that very first sentence that I read 
out to you, I will stress a very major point to this sentence.  And it was, 
sir, that a very strong agricultural base, an agricultural community in 
rural Saskatchewan mean a very strong urban entity, and the strength of the 
urban entity just grows and expands in tenfold. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that over the years in my business, I have 
travelled on many occasions to the larger centres for my supplies so that I 
could be of service to the people in my communities.  I want to say that 
those dollars passed through my small community, a community of 900, and 
had made its way into the large urban centre where those jobs were created 
and those people were able to serve me, as I wanted to serve my customers 
back home in my community.  And I'm just one little person, Mr. Speaker, in 
the cog that keeps the province moving. 
 
Our Premier, Mr. Speaker, has understood agriculture.  He has grown up in 
agriculture and he is the first Premier of this province that has come from 
an agricultural background, an economic agricultural background.  And I 
want to indicate to you, sir, that that strength in itself, that 
understanding in itself, has brought us a great distance  
 Dfrom where we were prior to us taking over as a government in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our Premier has brought much strength back into the agricultural sector 
through very tough and economic times caused by world tough and economic 
times.  Commodity wars, Mr. Speaker, for an example, when we, our farmers 
had to look at $2 a bushel wheat.  And we all know that the costs of 
agriculture in this country and indeed our province where we have the 
highest percentage of agriculture right across this country . . . we all 
understand that the farmers cannot survive a $2 price on wheat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have come a long way in the protection of that agricultural 
base.  We have recently just passed in this Legislative Assembly an 
insurance program under the GRIP and NISA Bill which does allow us as 
farmers now to be able to at least plan on a minimum for the particular 
crop year that we move into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, prior to this particular GRIP and NISA program, we 
have also had to go after not only our provincial coffers, go into our 
provincial coffers, but we had to go after federal dollars as well for cash 
injection into the farmers' pockets so that we could do as much as we could 



 

 

to keep those farmers on the land, Mr. Speaker.  And there were many 
farmers in rural Saskatchewan that are very thankful for the help that was 
given them over the years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that maybe in some people's minds that it just wasn't enough.  
But, Mr. Speaker, we kept working and we're keeping on that struggle to 
keep the farmers on the land and to get a buoyant economy back and a stable 
economy back in the agricultural scene. 
 
I know that over the years I would say that there has been in agricultural 
loans, through protection and cash input between provincial and federal 
dollars, something in the neighbourhood of close to 11 billions of dollars 
injected into the agricultural community itself. 
 
And I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that with that $11 billion, I know as 
a small-business man in a small community, that I had some benefit through 
that injection because there had been a lot of the community, the 
agriculture community, come into my business place and have spent a good 
dollar.  And I was able to pass it on through into the larger urban 
centres.  So I'd just like to indicate to you, sir, that that is one of our 
major, major platforms that we've been able to maintain and continue on to 
maintain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we've taken many opportunities in protecting almost all 
sectors of the provincial economy.  I would tend to think that when the 
economy, through the world economy, had taken its toll in Saskatchewan here 
through high interest rates, Mr. Speaker, and low commodities, this 
government, this Progressive Conservative government, has spent money when 
money needed to be spent to shore up, like I just indicated in agriculture.  
But we shored up for people and families.  And small business needed that 
protection as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(1645) 
 
And what we did, Mr. Speaker, we had for instance -- I'll give you an 
example -- we had a mortgage, and we still have a mortgage protection plan 
here in the province of Saskatchewan.  It was the first time ever thought 
of, Mr. Speaker.  And we took the lead in a mortgage protection plan for 
our young people and, well in fact everyone here, Mr. Speaker, that wished 
to own a house in this province.  And I believe when it was first 
introduced it was at thirteen and a quarter per cent, if members opposite 
would remember. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that thirteen and a quarter per cent mortgage interest 
protection, that kept people in their homes.  It kept families together.  
Mr. Speaker, it was a very emotional time when we brought that mortgage 
protection plan into law into this province because the communities were 
very, very vulnerable to the high interest rates.  The stability was taken 
out from underneath them.  And I want to indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
that had a very emotional impact on families right across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a member, those are the things that I love to do, as a 
member of this Assembly and for the love of this province, is to help 



 

 

people -- help people be able to carry on with owning their homes and 
keeping families in their homes and not to have to worry. 
 
I can remember, Mr. Speaker, in '81, as a candidate just running to become 
elected, people came to me and saying, what will you people do for us when 
you form government? Will you help us keep our homes?  I remember that very 
well. And I was one of them that went around, I was one of the earlier 
candidates and said, you bet we're going to work for you to keep your 
homes. 
 
And those people, Mr. Speaker, have those homes today.  And those people 
never, ever did forget that.  They still talk about that 24 per cent 
interest rates.  And that's when the farm economy really took a big 
whipping as well, Mr. Speaker, and the farm families having to leave their 
homes and stuff.  It was just that.  So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to give 
you that as an example. 
 
Another thing that kind of helped stabilize rural Saskatchewan and urban as 
well, and pulled the people of this province together, was such a thing, 
Mr. Speaker, as the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 
 
I want to indicate to you that it was the first time ever program again in 
this province, which many other provinces are now taking a look at.  And 
this has helped the farm wives across this province.  It's helped the 
small-business rural people. It's helped them to be able to look forward to 
some sort of security, Mr. Speaker, at retirement. 
 
And I think probably the statistics will prove in itself the popularity of 
the program that this Progressive Conservative government had gained 
through introducing this program into the province.  So you see, Mr. 
Speaker, that is another type of protection that this government has 
introduced in this province over the last nine years. 
 
And again too, sir, I want to indicate to you that -- and I know I might be 
jumping back and forth here a little bit -- but I want to indicate to you 
as well the farm security Act, that it helped slow down a violent process 
and it helped keep families on the farm up until at least they could deal 
with their own situations and put some very serious thoughts into it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if there was anybody over the years that 
has had any great amount of heart into the thinking of programs to help 
stabilize this province, it has been this Progressive Conservative 
administration. 
 
I want to say as well, sir, that we have built into the provincial mandate 
as well now, Mr. Speaker, community bonds.  Community bonds has been very 
well accepted throughout Saskatchewan.  I can relate to my particular 
riding, Mr. Speaker, and I'll give you one instance and that was in Cut 
Knife, Saskatchewan -- a very, very eager community, a community that wants 
to be second to no place.  I believe they will compete very easily against, 
with their eagerness, with the best of anyone anywhere, at any given time. 
 
But through a community bond issue, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Cut 



 

 

Knife had lured a valve manufacturing plant into their community of 
approximately 600.  And this valve plant is definitely employing a lot of 
people now in the community of Cut Knife.  And I heard rumour here the 
other day, and it's just by rumour that the valve manufacturing plant are 
now thinking about doubling in size, and they have just actually really got 
a kick-start here early in March.  So that was good news. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, when you look at community bonds and you look at 
that stabilizing effect that it can have on rural Saskatchewan, and indeed 
then spread into the urban communities, is phenomenal.  And it goes back to 
then, just as I've indicated to you now, I've given you an example of 
community bonds, I've given you an example of GRIP and NISA. 
 
I want to talk a little bit now about decentralization.  Mr. Speaker, I had 
spoke about decentralization a little bit earlier. In the few communities 
where we had an announcement in my particular riding, I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that our communities were just overwhelmed by the announcements 
and they're looking forward to meeting the new citizens of their 
communities and are hoping that those people that would be prepared to move 
with those positions, that they are going to want to make sure that they 
feel good and they're going to make sure that they feel welcomed into their 
communities. 
 
So I know, Mr. Speaker, that when I talked to those individuals and the 
councils . . . and I congratulate the councils for their hard work and 
dedication and the planning that they've put into it to ask this 
administration for some of the help from the decentralization.  I like to 
say that, Mr. Speaker, that I congratulate these councils, both rural and 
urban councils for that particular hard work and effort. 
 
But the decentralization will definitely mean stability in the communities.  
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that once the people move to these communities and 
take up their positions and take a place in those communities, they're 
going to feel real good.  The quality of life up there, Mr. Speaker, is 
second to none.  I don't say it's any . . . the quality of life is no 
better here in Regina than it is out in Maidstone. 
 
I think probably it's just what we all get used to and where we . . . and 
what I . . . My grand-dad used to say home is where you hang your hat.  And 
you know, like, he I guess is one of the first pioneers into this province 
here in the settlement out by Lake Lenore.  And the member from Quill Lakes 
that represents Lake Lenore might well remember my grand-dad.  His name was 
Mike Hopfner.  And, Mr. Speaker, they had definitely come to this province 
to make a life for themselves and not look back.  I can remember many 
stories my grand-dad told me when I was just a young fella.  I can remember 
his positive attitude about life in the farming community of Lake Lenore. 
 
And I was proud to be a part of that community for the first 16 years of my 
life, Mr. Speaker.  And I saw a portion of that community over the years go 
before me, go down.  Some businesses left as I was a kid growing up in that 
community.  And it hurt, you know, because we lost buddies -- be it boys 
and girls as friends going to school together and things like that.  And it 
hurt when you saw them leaving, and you weren't going to maybe see them 



 

 

again.  That's how you might of thought when you were a young fellow, you 
see. 
 
And as we grow older, well we thought well maybe, by gosh, there could be a 
much better place.  There's much more we could be ourselves.  And I can 
remember the slogan the Premier used back in '82: there's so much more we 
can be.  And that's pretty well what the attitude my grand-dad had back 
when he pioneered.  And I can remember him as a little fellow. 
 
So those kinds of things, you know, Mr. Speaker, are very dear to my heart.  
And I'm sure that members opposite can share the same feelings and same 
experiences and stories like that too.  Maybe some are a little bit younger 
than I am but regardless. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, when I look at these kinds of things, when I look 
at those communities that have kind of dwindled where we used to have five 
implement dealers -- you know, Massey Ferguson and IH (International 
Harvester) and John Deeres and Minneapolis dealers and Cockshutt dealers 
and Case and all the . . . they used to be . . . every one of them had an 
identity in these communities, you see.  And I saw these leave the 
communities, you see. 
 
And again it goes back, well, to the Lake Lenore days as the member from 
Quill Lakes will well remember.  And my dad and my grand-dad had started 
the IH dealership there.  And my dad ran it and he sold out just on 
retirement, and it ended up there were two dealerships left by the time I 
left Lake Lenore, and that was the John Deere dealership and the IH 
dealership.  So all the others went by the way, and that was hard, and so 
did the families. 
 
So now these are things that we are doing through decentralization.  We're 
trying to introduce some new kind of stability into the communities and 
make these people feel like they are part of Saskatchewan, these 
communities are part of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I want to indicate that the infrastructures that we have in place are 
second to none.  Education facilities, you know, I look at some of the . . 
. or talk to some of the profs at the University of Saskatchewan, for 
instance, and how they have indicated that some of the students that have 
gone on to university out of Lashburn, Saskatchewan, for instance, have 
been some of the most top quality type of students that you could ever ask 
for. 
 
And they spoke well of other areas as well.  They spoke well of all rural 
Saskatchewan.  And so that says a lot for the educational facilities that 
we have in our small rural communities. 
 
Sporting facilities as well.  We have very fine structured sporting 
facilities where it gives our young people an opportunity in life to 
compete, to learn what competition is all about.  And, Mr. Speaker, these 
young people are really proud of those communities.  And for members of the 
opposition to say that these communities aren't worth decentralization is 
very unfair.  I think that the members of the opposition should know that 



 

 

these communities are very much . . . 
 
The Speaker: -- It being 5 o'clock, the House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


