




















































Hansard: December 06, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 109 

 December 6, 1991 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 

Tuesday next move: 

 

 That this Assembly, on this 42nd anniversary of the 

Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly of the 

United Nations, formally recognize the extreme importance 

of advancing the cause of human rights in our quest for 

creating a truly just society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure this 

morning to introduce to you and through you to members of 

this Assembly on behalf of my colleague the member for 

Regina Elphinstone, the Minister of Economic Diversification 

and Trade, 12 adult students from SIAST (Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied  Science and Technology) seated in the 

west gallery. 

 

I'd like to ask members to join me in welcoming these students 

here.  I look forward to meeting with you after question period 

to discuss any of the things you felt were important in this 

Assembly, as well as to take some pictures and have some 

refreshments. 

 

The minister is not in today; he's on a trip outside of the 

province and he's asked me to introduce you on his behalf.  So 

I welcome you to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to all present in the legislature this 

morning 55 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from St. Dominic Savio 

School in the constituency of Regina Wascana Plains.  They're 

located in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and they have had a tour.  

They will be meeting with me on the stairs for pictures and 

later, refreshments.  They are accompanied by Bryce Buchanan 

and Michele Buchko, their teachers, and a chaperon, Kathy 

Kwasnicki.  I would be glad to speak with them and I hope that 

they enjoy and learn during their tour and their time with us 

this morning. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, through you and to all members 

it's my pleasure to introduce a number . . . 11 adult guests from 

the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 

Technology) campus in Moose Jaw.  These are all students in 

English as a second language course at the SIAST campus in 

Moose Jaw.  Today they're accompanied by their teacher, Joyce 

Stryker, and their bus driver, Chris Benson. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these students are all relatively newcomers 

to our city, to our province, and to our nation, and so not only 

are they learning of the English language, they're learning of 

our democratic traditions and structures and freedoms. 

 

And in many ways, Mr. Speaker, these are the new generation 

of pioneers to our province.  And as other generations have 

contributed so much to Saskatchewan we know that these too 

will contribute to our province.  So I not only welcome them to 

our legislature, but to our province and nation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to join with my colleague, the member from Moose Jaw 

Wakamow, in welcoming these students from SIAST to this 

their Legislative Assembly -- and for many of these people, if 

not all, Mr. Speaker, their first visit to their Legislative 

Assembly.  I look forward to joining with the member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow later following the question period. 

 

The students will be taking a tour of the Legislative Building, 

and we'll be meeting later for pictures and refreshments and, 

most importantly, a chance to discuss your experiences and to 

say a special welcome not only to the Legislative Assembly but 

welcome to Moose Jaw and Saskatchewan and Canada.  So I'd 

ask all members to once again join in welcoming these very 

special students to the Legislative Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Financial Management Review Commission 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

morning is to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, it is a well-known fact 

that three members of the Gass tribunal have been financial 

contributors or have actively displayed campaign signs and 

literature during campaigns in this province, I think a criteria 

that clearly would define them as being partisan people. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you not agree that if this government, this 

newly elected government, is going to achieve its stated aim of 

setting a new direction for the spending of public moneys in 

this province, that you will now, this day, disband the Gass 

tribunal and allow the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, to head 

a new commission with criteria which are clearly non-partisan 

and which does not prejudice the institutions of this legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In 

response to the member's question, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 

that the members of the Financial Management Review 

Commission were chosen because of their capabilities and 

because of their expertise: an assistant dean of law at the 

University of Saskatchewan; a prominent business lawyer who 

has the background and qualifications to know what to look for 

in the form of this kind of a commission; the Saskatchewan of 

the . . . of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a very prominent 

individual 

  



110 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

in charge of one of the largest business enterprises in the 

province of Saskatchewan; and Mr. Gass, the chairman, former 

president of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. 

 

They were chosen, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of what they 

could contribute to this exercise, in order that the books of the 

province of Saskatchewan can be opened, so that the people of 

Saskatchewan can know what the true financial affairs of the 

province are.  And we're looking forward to the work that 

they're going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Speaker.  To the minister, and I reiterate that three 

members of the Gass tribunal are NDP (New Democratic 

Party) partisans, to the Minister of Finance, is this nothing 

short of a in camera McCarthy-style commission, this Gass 

tribunal that you've put together? 

 

Will the minister not admit today that the terms of reference, 

the political nature of most of the appointees, and the time 

period which is being reviewed can only lead to one 

conclusion, and that is nothing but a political witch-hunt 

designed more to satisfy the government's desire to discredit 

anything good done by the previous government than truly 

examine the financial state of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting to 

hear the members opposite talk about political appointments 

when at the time that they served on this side of the House they 

did nothing else but make political appointments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I also find it disturbing, Mr. 

Speaker, that the members opposite, the critic for Finance 

opposite, would try to discredit prominent Saskatchewan 

citizens who have at their own . . . who are not going to even 

be paid a per diem for the work that they do because they think 

it's important that the difficulties, such financial situation, 

which this province faces be revealed and opened up for the 

public and the government to know. 

 

These people were appointed because of their expertise.  They 

will do the work that is necessary.  In fact they will probably 

consult with the member opposite in the work that they do, and 

do the job of opening the books that is so important to have. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  The chairman of the Gass tribunal yesterday, in 

the Star-Phoenix December 5 issue, laid out some criteria that 

his commission would operate under. 

 

It seems odd to me, Mr. Speaker, that they have limited their 

purview to about a dozen transactions.  They won't name them, 

Mr. Speaker, but about a dozen.  Surprise, surprise that these 

transactions will only be the ones that 

spent large amounts of public money with a high degree of 

public visibility and, Mr. Speaker, that the four members of the 

commission will vote -- behind closed doors, Mr. Speaker -- on 

whether they will investigate further. 

 

Now I would think the members of the media, Mr. Speaker, 

would want to know . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  I'd 

ask the member to put his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- My question to the minister is, Mr. Speaker: 

does he think it proper that four people, three of whom have 

obvious partisanship, should be voting behind closed doors on 

whether to look at a transaction that may involve thousands of 

people's investments in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it is quite proper that the Financial Management 

Review Commission be independent.  It is independent from 

the government; it is important it be that way.  It will set out 

the areas in which it is going to look into within the terms of 

reference which it has before it, which the Provincial Auditor 

helped develop.  And it will report in the public way, not only 

to the government but to the public as well, because this 

inquiry, Mr. Speaker, is important to the public just as much as 

it is important to this legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Supplementary to the same minister, Mr. 

Speaker.  The very fact, Mr. Minister, as I said before, that 

thousands of Saskatchewan people have seen fit to invest in 

some of the government's transactions in the last decade, don't 

you think it's proper . . . and I remind you, no one on this side 

of the House has anything to hide.  We want this out, Mr. 

Minister, in full public purview.  The only way an independent 

review can happen is through the Public Accounts Committee 

with full access of the media and public. 

 

The question then is, Mr. Speaker: will the Premier allow his 

Finance minister to make sure that this Assembly has its 

rightful scrutiny of the dealings of Executive Council?  And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, the only way that that can be done is if 

the Premier has this committee disbanded and turns it over to 

full control of this legislature, which is the Public Accounts 

Committee. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, let me assure you, Mr. 

Speaker, that this report will be openly debated in this 

legislature for the benefit of the member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This report will be considered by 

the public because it would be a public document.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the member at that time will have an opportunity to 

debate it.  And I hope also that this report 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

will be considered by the Public Accounts Committee in its 

deliberations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- New question, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

are you not doing what you so roundly criticized the previous 

government for doing, that of holding meetings in secret 

without full public scrutiny? 

 

You have opted to take the Provincial Auditor into this process 

not as a full participating member, but simply in an advisory 

committee.  He will be asked to comment on things which your 

commission will have voted on in secret, things that the auditor 

will not have the chance to be privy to in person, and neither 

will the members of the media or the public. 

 

You roundly criticized the former government for years 

because they did things behind closed doors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that there is partisanship 

openly displayed by members of this committee, that they are 

voting in secret behind closed doors, will you not this day, Mr. 

Minister, order this commission disbanded and let the auditor 

fulfil his rightful role? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it is really a strange 

performance to hear members opposite defending the auditor 

when they attacked the auditor for nine whole years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, it's because the 

Conservative members and the Leader of the Opposition, when 

he was premier, locked the auditor out of the books of the 

government -- that's why this commission is now set up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This commission is doing what the 

government opposite refused to do for nine years, Mr. Speaker.  

It is opening the books to the people of Saskatchewan and this 

legislature.  And I can assure this House and you, Mr. Speaker, 

that from now on those books will stay open. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Supplementary to the Premier.  Mr. Premier, 

quite seriously, when you're looking at this Legislative 

Assembly and the role of the auditor, and you want to publicly 

examine the books according to the province of Saskatchewan 

and you have partisan members that are involved in this, 

partisan members involved; (2) the media excluded, the media 

is excluded, you know that they can't go to the meetings -- the 

vote will be in secret -- you're going to compromise the auditor 

and the members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

It's contrary to the freedom of information Act introduced by 

our administration, passed here.  It's not consistent, not at all 

consistent with the fact that thousands and tens of thousands of 

people have bought SaskPower bonds, 

Saskoil bonds, Saskoil shares -- people on both sides of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Premier, would you now admit that if you want to have 

true public access and scrutiny that it should not be partisan, it 

should not be secret, and you should not compromise the 

auditor all at the same time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think maybe . . . I think, Mr. 

Speaker, the most appropriate question that could be asked here 

today in view of the members opposite, is what is it that they 

are afraid of in having such an inquiry? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to assure you, Mr. Speaker, 

that this is not a partisan commission.  I want to assure you, 

Mr. Speaker, that it is an open commission and it will make a 

report to the public which members opposite will be able to 

comment on and discuss in this legislature.  I want to assure 

you, Mr. Speaker, that this commission is carrying out what the 

public of Saskatchewan asked of this government to do and 

asked of this legislature to do, and that is open the books of the 

Government of Saskatchewan so that they know all of those 

things which they were refused in the last nine years, and will 

in future know all of those that their government does on their 

behalf in future years as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- One last question, Mr. Speaker.  One final 

supplementary to the Premier.  Would the Premier consider 

proclaiming the freedom of information Act prior to this 

commission and its review? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the freedom of 

information Bill is going to be proclaimed and be proclaimed 

as quickly as possible.  We are in government 36 or 37 days.  

We think the freedom of information Act as suggested by the 

former administration needs a closer review. 

 

I would say to the hon. Leader of the Opposition that as far as 

the Financial Review Commission is concerned, the rules of 

operation are entirely up to them.  What submissions are to be 

made public or not to be made public will be in their purview, 

not the government's purview.  You are free to make 

submissions; you are free to write to the chair, who I think you 

know very well.  And you can explore all of this with them in 

every way going. 
 

And I do say to the hon. members here that we . . . this 

commission has been prompted by the very well-known fact 

that the provincial auditor, the former provincial auditor, Mr. 

Lutz, documented that 50 cents out of every dollar spent by 

your administration, sir, he could not adequately account for . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . And no, that's what the . . . the 

provincial auditor said that.  And the result is . . . I've said the 

commission can make that decision for you.  I've said the 

commission can do this.  The rules are up to the commission 

and this has 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

prompted . . . Now I just wish these people wouldn't be so 

squirmy about the position of the commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Take part, take part.  Let the media 

take part.  The commission chair will know how to handle this 

very well.  These are four very distinguished people, 

notwithstanding your attempt to malign them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Relocation of Piper Aircraft Corporation 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister 

of Economic Diversification and Trade, I pose this question to 

the Premier.  It's come to my attention that Piper Aircraft 

Corporation has made a decision to move its operations to 

Canada and with it some 5,000 jobs.  This corporation has 

made it known that it will not be going to Ontario, which was 

its first choice, because of the unprofessional manner in which 

the Ontario government treated it this week.  My question to 

the hon. member is:  is the Government of Saskatchewan 

actively pursuing Piper Aircraft Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the government 

obviously wants to pursue any viable economic enterprise 

which can benefit the people of this province, this region.  The 

question of the specific one that the member mentions I'm sure 

is on the list of considerations of the Minister of economic 

development and the government.  I think all we can do is 

simply answer that far for today and see what economic or 

other financial considerations are attached to this or any other 

proposal. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Are you 

indeed telling me, sir, that you are unaware as to whether or not 

the Government of Saskatchewan is actively pursuing -- as is 

Nova Scotia, Quebec, and the province of British Columbia -- 

Piper Aircraft Corporation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is not a 

question of being aware or unaware.  What the member is in 

effect saying, or at least suggesting, is based on a Globe and 

Mail newspaper story with which I totally disagree on the 

member's interpretation.  I saw it this morning.  The fact of the 

matter is that a number of governments provincially are 

pursuing economic enterprises.  I think what we need to do as 

Canadians as a whole is come up with an industrial strategy 

which benefits regions that need economic developments such 

as ours.  But it's based on some sound fundamental principles 

and polices which don't end up beggaring other regions or other 

Canadians. 

 

Now the Piper proposal, like any other proposal, needs to be 

weighed in terms of its economic viability, in terms of that kind 

of a consideration.  And that's exactly what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

inform the Premier that Piper Aircraft Corporation is from 

Florida, so it will not be taking anything away from 

any part of Canada.  My question to you, sir, is what is the 

Government of Saskatchewan's policy related to the assistance 

to companies such as Piper Aircraft Corporation which may 

bring with them the job opportunities that Saskatchewan 

residents need? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The policy 

is one which is basically summarized as follows.  We want to 

attract as much investment and business opportunity in this 

province as we can.  We want to do it in a way which is based 

on a proper analysis of the costs and the benefits. 

 

As the hon. Leader of the Liberal party will know, the province 

has been virtually bankrupted as a result of nine and a half 

years of administration of the Leader of the Opposition.  We 

know what the situation is in debt on the operating side.  We 

have yet to discover the contingent liabilities which have 

attached to whole series of financial projects -- huge financial 

projects -- which this government has attached itself, 

something that I think the Gass Commission will assist the 

people of Saskatchewan in informing. 

 

So subject to those caveats, subject to those considerations 

which are legitimate and honest ones, and based on what the 

demands and the requirements are, we will do whatever we can 

to attract the businesses available.  So we're not closing any 

doors necessary to open up investment to the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Supplementary, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Premier, I'm having some difficulty, I think, perhaps in 

understanding this and you can help me further.  I am wanting 

to know if in fact your government is actively pursuing 

something that could possibly bring 5,000 jobs to the province 

of Saskatchewan, that it seems as though other provinces of 

Canada are actively pursuing, that they too would be 

responsible to all of their citizens to determine whether or not it 

would be a good situation for their province. 

 

Please, sir, would you let me know whether or not you are 

aware of whether the Government of Saskatchewan is pursuing 

this company which is going to be coming to Canada from the 

United States. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thought I made that 

absolutely clear to the member opposite.  I'll repeat again for 

the members in the opposition, this government is pursuing any 

credible possible economic enterprise, including Piper, which 

could benefit the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now that's the question that you put to us; that's the answer I've 

given to you straight across the piece. 

 

I have said that we have a couple of considerations which have 

to be taken into account, namely that the province is 

bankrupted, virtually bankrupted, thanks to the nine and a half 

years of the Conservative administration.  That is a 

consideration.  And we have to also consider what the other 

factors are pertaining to the offers or lack of offers from other 

regions. 

  



114 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

But the answer is, we're trying to get employment for the 

province of Saskatchewan and this is one of the aspects we're 

looking at. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

like to ask the Premier a supplementary to the line of 

questioning that has just gone on.  Five thousand jobs, Mr. 

Speaker, and Mr. Premier, in Saskatchewan means an awful 

lot. 

 

Now for you to say that you are going to be looking at all 

things, I want to know and I want to be put on record right 

now, what have you specifically done to contact the Piper 

Aircraft company of Florida to specifically negotiate with them 

the possibility of them bringing these jobs to Saskatchewan, in 

contradiction to what the Ontario Premier, Bob Rae has already 

said, that Piper is not welcome in Ontario? 

 

I want you to say to the people of Saskatchewan now, what 

have you specifically done to attract 5,000 jobs to 

Saskatchewan, to Saskatoon perhaps, to complement 

Promavia? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to refrain from 

responding to all aspects of that question at this time . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- . . . at this time.  But soon we'll be 

making some responses there.  But for the time being, let me 

say that it is not going to be the policy of this government in 

serious discussions, negotiations with respect to economic 

matters when we're discussing them, to be doing this in an open 

area at a preliminary stage.  It will be the policy of this 

government to make public the documentation pertaining to 

any economic development, unlike the policy of the former 

administration. 

 

And the comments that I've given to the Leader of the Liberal 

Party pertain.  We are examining the options that are there.  

The contacts that have been made are the appropriate ones by 

the Ministry of economic development.  And for the time 

being, that's as far as I can go and I'm not going to go any 

further this morning. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You didn't go anywhere.  What do you mean, 

you're not going to go further? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  You have not been recognized by the 

Chair, sir.  Order.  I recognize the member from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I tend to get excited 

when I have asked a very, very pertinent, important question, 

and when I see the Premier laughing over there in response to 

my serious question, I get 

excited.  Because he did not go anywhere.  What do you mean, 

you're not going to go any further?  You didn't go anywhere.  

You didn't answer my question.  What have you specifically 

done to attract 5,000 jobs to this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from 

Rosthern is a very excitable fellow; he's demonstrated that 

again.  But I would ask the hon. member just to sort of keep his 

cool and his calm, chill out a little bit.  We're not going to 

adopt a policy like the former administration which is to run 

out and scratch up on the back of an envelope an economic 

deal that is faced by a minister in the corridor of the hallway. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- We're not going to scratch out kind of 

deals like that -- produced the GigaTexts of the world, the 

Joytecs, and the Supercarts of the world . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And we're not going to do it a very 

excited way.  We're going to do it in a calm, rational, 

economic, business-like way. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Daryl Bean Letter 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, one thing is for sure: I'm really 

going to get chilled off because after a cold shoulder like that, 

there's nothing else for me to be doing here. 

 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to change direction, and I 

direct a new question, a totally different new question now, to 

the Premier as well.  And I want to preface my question with a 

short quotation.  And this is the quotation, Mr. Premier, that I 

want you to react to: 

 

 After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad and the 

vampire, he had some awful stuff left with which he made a 

scab.  A scab is a two-legged animal with a corkscrew soul, a 

waterlogged brain, and a . . . backbone of jelly and glue.  

Where others have hearts, he carries a tumour of rotten 

principles . . . No man has a right to scab as long as there is a 

pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a rope long enough 

to hang his body with. 

 

Mr. Premier, my question to you is based on this quotation, and 

I quote a fellow called Daryl Bean who, as we all know, is a 

national vice-president to the NDP Party.  This letter, this 

quotation . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay, put your question. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I certainly have a question.  

Mr. Premier, based on this letter written to three grandmothers 

who were in fear of losing their jobs -- this letter was written to 

three grandmothers -- Mr. Premier, the question is this.  

Considering this day opposing violence against women and 

considering that these very violent words were written to 

mothers by national vice-president of the NDP, will you and 

Bob Rae join together today and condemn this contemptible 

action? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the hon. 

member from Rosthern, first of all I do not know whether 

Daryl Bean is a national vice-president of the federal NDP or 

not.  I do not know that. 

 

And I want to say to the hon. member from Rosthern and to 

you, sir, Mr. Speaker, I will answer questions pertaining to the 

actions and the deeds and the words of this administration right 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And so I would say to Mr. Excitement 

over there, please calm down.  But if you want to ask me any 

question with respect to the Saskatchewan provincial 

government in the legislature and our government policy, I'll 

try to answer it. 

 

If you have questions about Daryl Bean and what he has said or 

he has not said and whether you agree or disagree with it, 

please, sir, take your complaints directly to Mr. Daryl Bean. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to amend The Medical Profession Act, 1981. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Education 

and Health Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Liquor Consumption Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary 

Provisions) Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would seek 

leave to move directly to the government motions to consider 

item number 1, our motion respecting the Montreal massacre. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Canada's National Day of Remembrance and Action on 

Violence Against Women 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

rise today to speak on a matter of grave importance to the 

people of this province.  Today is an official day of 

remembrance and action on violence against women.  The 

Saskatchewan government recognizes today as an appropriate, 

meaningful, and positive memorial to the 14 young women 

who were so tragically killed on December 6, 1989 in 

Montreal. 

 

We can only assume because Marc Lepine went into the 

engineering building that day, separated the men from the 

women, then screamed: you're all a bunch of feminists, before 

he shot them, that he obviously believed that they had 

overstepped their rightful place in society.  For this he put an 

end to their promising lives and to their plans for the future.  

All because they had stepped beyond what he considered to be 

the traditional role of women. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there are people today who share 

the view that women have no place as engineers, truck drivers, 

physicians, or even indeed politicians.  There are those who see 

victims of rape not as people who have suffered incredible pain 

and psychological trauma, but rather as women who asked for 

it and who deserved the assault.  There are people who think 

that wife beating can be prevented by just keeping the  



116 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

children quiet and the house immaculate.  If not, then the 

beating is deserved. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, violence against women is a serious 

problem.  It affects women of all ages, of all cultures, of all 

economic situations and abilities.  Violence and the threat of 

violence deprives Saskatchewan women of their ability to 

achieve full equality in Canadian society.  Violence manifests 

itself in many ways, Mr. Speaker, including physical assault, 

sexual assault, psychological and emotional abuse, 

pornography, sexual harassment, and pervasive social attitudes 

that condone violence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me quote some statistics which reflect the 

serious dimension of this problem.  In Canada it is estimated 

that at least one in every ten women is battered by her husband 

or her male partner.  A recent Alberta study puts it at one in 

eight.  Three-quarters of wife assaults involve physical effects 

such as broken bones, burns, bites, lacerations, black eyes, gun 

wounds and death. 

 

Sixty-two per cent of all women murdered in Canada are 

victims of domestic violence.  Every 17 minutes a sexual 

assault is committed in Canada, and 90 per cent of the victims 

are female. 

 

In 1990, 27,000 sexual assaults were reported to police -- 

almost double the figure reported in 1984.  Women who have 

been sexually assaulted are approximately five times more 

likely to have a nervous breakdown, six times more likely 

rather to attempt suicide, Mr. Speaker, and eight times as likely 

to commit suicide or die prematurely. 

 

One in every four women will be sexually assaulted at some 

time in her life.  One half of these women will be assaulted 

before they reach the age of 17.  Eighty per cent of women 

incarcerated under federal jurisdiction have had a history of 

physical or sexual abuse. 

 

A study of women with disabilities found that 42 per cent of 

women with disabilities report they have been physically or 

sexually abused and that a female child born with a disability 

has a 52 per cent chance of being abused at some time during 

her life. 

 

Female victims of elder abuse outnumber male victims two to 

one.  Fifty-six per cent of women who were surveyed in several 

urban Canadian cities told researchers they feel unsafe when 

walking alone in their neighbourhoods after dark.  The results 

of another recent study indicate that 90 per cent of women 

report experiencing some form of sexual harassment on the job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the statistics are appalling, but the more we talk 

about them the more we learn about the facts and teach our 

children and all of society that violence against women, or 

indeed against any person, is unacceptable.  It is wrong, it is 

never justified, and it must stop. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1045) 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The more we learn about the devastating 

effects and the pervasiveness of violence in 

our society the more we can take those necessary steps to 

progressing toward a more fair and equitable and supportive 

community for all of our members including women and 

children. 

 

It is important to note that violence against women is not 

natural.  Nine out of ten men do not beat their wives.  Violence 

is a learned behaviour.  It is an unnatural behaviour.  It is based 

on the idea that men should control women rather than the idea 

of the equality of men and women in a shared humanity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this national day of remembrance and action, I 

want to encourage all members of this Assembly and all 

members of society to join with us today in recognizing the 

valuable work being done by the sexual assault centres and 

shelters for battered women in this province. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have 11 crisis or sexual assault centres.  

They are located in Melfort, Kindersley, Regina, Saskatoon, 

Yorkton, Lloydminster, Prince Albert, North Battleford, and 

Swift Current.  Last year nine of these community 

organizations served 1,856 people who were affected either 

directly or indirectly by a sexual assault -- 1,115 of their clients 

had himself or herself been sexually assaulted.  Of these, 89 per 

cent were female. 

 

In addition there are 10 shelters for battered women.  These 

shelters are located in Regina, Saskatoon, North Battleford, 

Yorkton, La Ronge, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Prince Albert, 

and a safe-house program in Melfort. 

 

It is committed women in this province who saw to it that 

shelters for battered women, services to sexual assault victims, 

and a second-stage housing project have been set up.  These 

groups continue to talk about the issues and to undertake public 

education. 

 

Today it is appropriate that we recognize their work and the 

contributions of all people, men and women, who are working 

to eliminate violence in our society and to help victims of 

violence. 

 

Regina and Saskatoon have women's support group programs, 

and there are several treatment programs for batterers and 

sexual assault offenders.  Teachers in our schools have the 

option of teaching family violence and child abuse in the health 

curriculum.  And personal and social values and skills that 

promote respect for others are being taught across the 

curriculum as one of the common essential learnings. 

 

Indeed today, Mr. Speaker, whole communities are working 

together to address the issue.  For example, the Touchwood 

File Hills Qu'Appelle District Indian women have developed a 

training manual on family violence.  It is entitled Community 

Response to Family Violence.  Over 100 women have taken 

the four-day training course.  And the workshop raises the level 

of community awareness, gives an understanding of the cycle 

of violence, and makes community members aware of 

appropriate services.  Resource people from the community, 

such as the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 

participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage every Saskatchewan citizen to  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

follow the example of this Indian community and to talk about 

the attitudes and circumstances which allow violence against 

women and others in this province.  Each and every one of us 

should be aware of violence 365 days a year.  But today, let's 

give it special attention. 

 

Just a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, violence against women was 

still a laughing matter for some of Canada's politicians.  On 

May 12, 1982, when the problem of wife-battering was raised 

in the House of Commons as a serious problem affecting one in 

every ten women, laughter echoed through the House.  Let me 

contrast this action with the action of the members of the 

House of Commons this past October, when federal members 

of parliament unanimously approved NDP member Dawn 

Black's private member's Bill declaring December 6 to be a 

national day of remembrance and action on violence against 

women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, governments working together across this land 

can do a lot to address this problem.  National task forces have 

been created and Saskatchewan has participated in these.  And 

just last week as Minister responsible for the Status of Women 

I announced this government's support for Building Blocks: 

Framework for a National Strategy on Violence Against 

Women. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- This document outlines measures which 

can be taken by various levels of government, communities, 

and individuals in order to eliminate violence against women.  

Mr. Speaker, the elimination of violence is a priority of our 

government.  And although in Saskatchewan we are facing 

very serious financial restraints, we will within the confines of 

those restraints take whatever steps we can to help the women, 

children, and families affected by violence. 

 

For that reason today I wish to reiterate the Lake Louise 

declaration on violence against women, to which Saskatchewan 

is a signatory, and this declaration says: 

 

 We, the ministers responsible for the status of women in 

Canada, are committed to achieving full equality for women 

in all aspects of life.  As Canadians, we value the inherent 

worth and dignity of every individual and we expect all 

persons to treat one another with respect.  Since violence and 

its threat are depriving many women of their ability to 

achieve equality, we declare that: violence against women is 

a crime and punishable under law; women are entitled to live 

in a safe environment; offenders must be held accountable for 

their behaviour; the elimination of violence against women 

requires a response including prevention, public education, 

services and enforcement of the law; every individual, 

community and government in Canada must do everything 

possible to help the women, children and families affected by 

violence; we must all work together to achieve a society free 

from violence. 

 

And that's the Lake Louise declaration, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- As a society we all pay the cost of this 

violence.  We pay in health care costs, in social service costs, 

in court system costs, and in increased use of the penal system.  

But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, we pay a terrible personal 

and human cost. 

 

Mr. Speaker, society's tolerance of violence minimizes the 

gravity of the impact of violence on the lives of the people 

affected.  It will take a concerted effort by both men and 

women, by teachers, police officers, judges, governments, 

churches, and many other groups and individuals acting 

together to change this tolerance for violence. 

 

In legislatures across this country today this serious problem is 

being addressed, and MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) are speaking out against this violence in the hope of 

raising public awareness and in this way contributing to 

reducing society's tolerance of violence against women and 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we all wear a white ribbon as declaration of 

our personal commitment to ending violence against women.  

And together with others in the province, we can work to 

ensure that we build a society that accepts women and men as 

equal, one where women choose their roles rather than having 

them designated at birth.  That is when violence against women 

will no longer be tolerated. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, let me assure the people of this 

province that our government recognizes that we have a role to 

play in eliminating violence.  We support the work of the 

Canadian panel on violence against women, and we will 

continue to support all future intergovernmental efforts aimed 

at eliminating violence.  We will work with the federal 

government in their public education campaign centred on the 

prevention of violence against women, and we support the 

work of the federal, provincial, and territorial Justice ministers 

and attorney generals' work on gender equity in the courts. 

 

Finally, let me state our commitment to working with 

community organizations, churches, businesses, unions, and 

women's organizations, and individuals, to find creative and 

innovative solutions which will work towards the elimination 

of violence in all of its forms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to move the following motion: 

 

 That this Assembly on the occasion of Canada's National Day 

of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women 

recognizes the seriousness of this problem and expresses its 

determination to eliminate this violence in our society 

through programs which include prevention, public 

education, support services, and the strict enforcement of the 

law. 

 

And it's seconded by the member for Yorkton.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise, Mr. Speaker, 

  



118 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

as a seconder to this motion to speak to an issue that confronts 

our lives and paralyses our society.  A day to remember, Mr. 

Speaker, a tragedy of 14 young women killed on December 6, 

1989 in Montreal.  A day, Mr. Speaker, to designate and 

resolve as an Assembly to collectively work at eliminating the 

actions of violence against women and families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, violence and fear of violence threatens the 

personal security and safety and equality of all women every 

day -- in the home, on the street, and at work.  When women 

are denied their basic rights of security of person, they cannot 

participate as equals in society. 

 

Violence and the threats of violence are depriving women of 

their ability to achieve full equity in our society.  Violence 

against women is deeply rooted in our socialization process, in 

our power structures, and in our institutions. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, family violence and violence against 

women is a grave and serious problem in our society.  The 

violence centred around women takes on many forms, physical 

and sexual assault, psychological and emotional abuse.  Mr. 

Speaker, the victimization of women is devastating and the 

trauma experienced from the incidents creates dysfunctioning 

in the lives of women and families that leave permanent 

emotional scars, and in many instances are irreparable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is truly a myth that violence against women and 

families is culturally or socially associated, because violence 

against women and families has no boundaries of status, age, 

culture, economic situation, or ability.  Mr. Speaker, violence 

against women is a societal ill which is precipitated by men. 

 

Violence against women, Mr. Speaker, isn't an inherent 

behaviour and all men are not violent.  We, as men, Mr. 

Speaker, have created cultures where men use violence against 

other men to solve differences between nations, where every 

boy is forced to learn to fight or he is branded as a sissy, and 

where men have forms of power and privilege that women 

have not yet enjoyed. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, men have been defined as part of the 

problem.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that men will also be part of 

the solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, women, men, and children of our 

society all pay for violence against women, both emotionally 

and socially.  We all pay financially for the police intervention, 

for lawyers in courts to process the crimes, for health care 

needs to treat the women's injuries, for counselling and support 

services for the women and children, and for the transition 

houses and safe shelters which are often the only place women 

can go to keep out of danger. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the social costs of violence and fear are even 

more devastating.  When fearful women isolate and withdraw 

from the community to protect themselves, the community 

begins to die.  Because I believe that women are still the 

keepers of our communities.  They are still the community 

volunteers and we can find them in the minor sports arenas, the 

arts and cultural boards, the parent-teacher associations, and on 

and on.  Violence against women creates isolation, fragments 

society, and debilitates communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on this national day of remembrance, I ask all the 

members of this Assembly and all the people of this great 

province's society to recognize our first-line employees who 

are working in the field and are serving our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also ask this Assembly to recognize the women 

of this House, and the commitment and dedication and 

perseverance in achieving a place in this Assembly.  Because 

through your victories you have and will influence the future 

status of women in this province, and at the same time will 

educate this traditional system on the principles of equality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Mr. Speaker, I also wish to recognize our 

Premier for his commitment to the people of this province with 

this selection and appointment of women to his Executive 

Council.  This kind of signal, Mr. Speaker, points to the future, 

that both he and our government are sincere in achieving the 

ideal of equality of men and women. 

 

The statistical data on family violence and violence against 

women has been substantially covered by the member from 

Regina Hillsdale and I will not recite them.  But the incidents 

in this province are staggering. 

 

As a 20-year public servant and executive director of a human 

social service agency in this province, working with families, 

children, women, prior to entering political life, I know that we 

have a lot of education to do in this province, Mr. Speaker, in 

order to reduce and eliminate violence against women and 

families. 

 

(1100) 

 

Mr. Speaker, women want to be truly an integral part of our 

community and society in which we live.  Violence isolates.  

Women will come to fear violence less and the violence against 

them will be reduced.  Only then will we become equals, 

respected and involved partners in our society. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, as a government and a society, we 

want to ensure that women and children, as well as men, have 

the right to live freely from violence.  We must have the 

courage, Mr. Speaker, to change our hierarchical structures.  

Mr. Speaker, we must turn towards co-operative ways of 

interacting, rather than to the competitive model. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the commensuration of this day, we must take 

our vision of experience, our wisdom, and our power so that 

together we can arrive at a new consciousness of equality for 

men and women. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we in 

the opposition would like to join this Assembly in recognition 

of Canada's national day for the remembrance and action on 

violence against women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that a day has been set aside for 

such an important issue.  Violence -- whether it is physical, 

sexual, emotional, or economical -- is not acceptable, and yet it 

is happening repeatedly throughout the world. 

 

Helping all victims of violence must be a priority to all 

Saskatchewan people, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, to all people in 

the world.  Violence is transmitted through generations, and if 

this cycle is to be broken we must provide not only support for 

the victims but we must educate the whole of society.  Mr. 

Speaker, society must receive and comprehend the message 

that violence is wrong.  And it's our opinion, Mr. Speaker, that 

those in the leadership role must be especially careful that they 

do not indicate in any way that they condone violence. 

 

Children of abused women are also victims.  They are victims 

in danger of becoming a new generation of abusing parents and 

partners. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, some may be surprised that I have 

included the term economic violence in these remarks.  But 

while not as openly brutal as physical violence, those who 

would deny proper economic support to their spouses, and 

indeed the elderly widowed, are guilty of a great violence 

indeed.  That is why I am proud of the maintenance 

enforcement program we have in our province.  Through this 

service economic means can be sought, alleviating some of the 

difficulty. 

 

And although economic abuse can be tragic, Mr. Speaker, 

equally as tragic is the abuse that senior women suffer at the 

hands of children and adults, strangers.  Society must be 

especially outraged at these horrific actions, Mr. Speaker.  

Statistics on wives who are physically abused would astonish 

most people.  This abuse must be stopped to protect and 

prevent families from breaking down. 

 

And I have high hopes, Mr. Speaker, that this government will 

do more than simply recognize this day.  There is much a 

government can do, such as automatic maintenance 

enforcement, fund safe houses, and promote counselling for the 

abused, and indeed, Mr. Speaker, for the abuser. 

 

I strongly urge the Attorney General of this province to pursue 

severe measures for the protection of those guilty of such 

violence.  And I believe a national day of remembrance and 

action is an appropriate step in the process to do away with 

violence.  It is my sincere hope that a national day such as this, 

along with support services, professional counselling, and 

educational programming, will continue to work toward the 

elimination of this very serious problem in our society, Mr. 

Speaker. 

With that I would like to commend the member from Hillsdale 

for bringing this motion forward.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a significant 

day in Canada, a day now marked by senseless blood stains on 

the pages of our history books.  And it is a day that gives us 

pause for sobering thought in this legislature when we reflect 

upon the horror that we felt two years ago when the lives of 14 

young women ended without warning. 

 

This horrible episode must not be without purpose.  It is 

something where the deaths of these young women must not be 

in vain.  The agony and sorrow of those left to mourn must not 

be futile.  This is truly a time for a call to action for those of us 

who have been moved by this massacre. 

 

With one in ten women in this country being battered, there is 

much that we are responsible to change.  And out of respect for 

these women and for their survivors left to mourn this senseless 

and tragic loss, I say let us take action.  Let us make this day to 

remember the extent and severity of violence against women in 

Saskatchewan, in Canada, and around the world. 

 

And let us all commit, Mr. Speaker, to working harder, all of 

us, as women, as mothers, as wives, as sisters, to stand up 

against the prejudices and inequities in our society.  It shall be 

up to us as the elected representatives of the people, to ensure 

that offenders receive treatment, that offenders receive 

punishment, that the bitterness and bigotry and violence 

towards women here at home is eliminated. 

 

And to the other women in this legislature who I'm proud to 

have as my colleagues in this government, let me say this:  let 

us look to our sons, our brothers, our fathers, and our husbands, 

and our friends, and indeed to these men who are our 

colleagues in government, and let us ask them to be our 

partners in this struggle.  For as men they must accept not only 

some responsibility for the problem, but they must bear equally 

in the responsibility for the solution.  So let us help each other 

to move toward the evolution of attitudes.  For progress, I 

believe, is being made, and we need their help if we are to 

ensure that the event we solemnly remember today is never to 

be repeated. 

 

We must support and encourage progress, and we must hold 

men in our lives and in society accountable in our homes and in 

schools and in businesses and indeed in our courts, when they 

fail in their responsibilities. 

 

As tribute to those who have died, and as hope for those 

hundreds of thousands of women who endure violence in their 

daily lives, we must provide leadership and commitment from 

this Assembly. 

 

We must be strong because those who are abused and 

threatened will need to know that we have the strength and the 

courage to defend them.  We must be sensitive and patient 

because change takes time.  But we must also be committed to 

those who are weary and battered and 

  



120 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

afraid.  And we must offer shelter and compassion and 

resources through our powers in this House, because we must 

protect those who are our sisters, from the very young to the 

elderly, for abuse and violence has no barriers of age or race or 

income.  And we must press forward to ensure that violence 

against women becomes completely unconscionable in our 

society. 

 

Every government has a chance to change some things.  So let 

this be one of them.  And there may be many things which are 

out of reach for us in terms of change, but this is something 

upon which we really can have an impact.  Our attitudes, in 

fact our behaviour, are things that are malleable in our society.  

So let's work to reshape attitudes of those who perpetuate this 

crisis of violence in Saskatchewan. 

 

We can take positive steps to ensure that the deaths of these 

young women have true meaning for each of us.  And I ask this 

House on behalf of the mother of one of the young women who 

was murdered in Montreal, with whom I met last Saturday, that 

we use this day each year as a day to measure our progress in 

the war against violence towards women. 

 

Let us commit today to work towards the improvement of the 

law and the support systems that deal with this issue.  Let's 

strengthen to resolve to make this province, our nation, a safer 

place -- a place in which fear of violence is no longer a part of 

anyone's lives. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to intervene with a 

few short remarks in support of the powerful statements that 

have been made on this subject by the previous speakers, and 

especially by the Minister of Health and the member for 

Saskatoon Greystone. 

 

All aspects of this question are of intense concern to all 

members of this House, and all concerned people across 

Canada.  It is unfortunate that it takes an incident of the 

horrifying dimensions of the incident in Montreal two years 

ago to bring this issue to the top of our minds and to the top of 

our agendas.  But it is there and we must all endeavour to 

ensure that it does stay on the top of our minds and at the top of 

our agenda. 

 

The idea of family violence, Mr. Speaker, is a subject that has 

been much in the news lately, an aspect of the broad issue of 

violence towards women.  Family violence carries in it the 

horrifying idea that our society produces people who are 

physically and mentally cruel to the people who they should 

love the most: their families, their spouses, their children.  The 

idea that there are children who live in homes where they don't 

feel safe, where they have to go through the mental gymnastics 

of finding ways to rationalize the behaviour of their parents, 

trying to take the blame upon themselves, trying to make sense 

of what is essentially an irrational attitude towards them by one 

or both of their parents. 

 

This is a matter that has received attention by successive 

governments in Saskatchewan, by the previous 

administration and -- I believe in spades -- by our 

administration.  This will be a priority of our government. 

 

In addition to the efforts of government, there are efforts in the 

communities in Saskatchewan and indeed across Canada.  I 

mention one with which the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone will be familiar and that is the program at the 

Saskatoon Mental Health Clinic called Alternatives, where men 

who are violent to their partners have a place to go, a program 

to support them and to try and help them, which focuses on the 

male abuse of power.  I think that I correctly state the focus of 

that program. 

 

It's one example of a large number of efforts that are being 

made by various sectors in our society to cope with this 

horrifying idea of fathers and parents who are violent towards 

spouses and children.  And we will continue to try and support 

those efforts in whatever way we can, and to initiate others.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1115) 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to join with my colleagues on both sides of the House in 

commending the Minister of Health for introducing this motion 

of remembrance.  And I also want to pay special tribute to the 

thousands of women across this country that asked for a special 

day to remember the 14 young engineering students that were 

killed in the massacre in Montreal.  I want to thank those 

women because they were able to lobby all members of the 

federal House of Commons in getting this special day to 

remember. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for many people in this House, I am sure that they 

have come from families where violence -- verbal violence, 

physical violence, emotional violence -- was not part of their 

growing up.  And for me personally, Mr. Speaker, I did not 

really become aware of violence until I became a person who 

was interested in becoming an elected member of the 

legislature. 

 

And as I went door to door in the constituencies that I've 

represented since 1986, I came to know women, particularly 

older women, who had experienced a lifelong of verbal 

violence, physical violence, and emotional violence. 

 

And I think in particular of a 86-year-old woman who was out 

in her backyard when I was door knocking and I came into her 

backyard and she was crying.  And I asked her what the 

problem was, why was she crying.  Well she was in a situation 

where her husband regularly beat her and she had to leave the 

house in order to protect herself.  And she thought if she was in 

her backyard the neighbours would see and she wouldn't have 

to continue that cycle of violence for that particular day. 

 

And when I saw this woman, she had very little hair.  It looked 

as though because of her nerves she was pulling her hair, and 

she had very little hair.  And I asked her, why don't you go to 

an interval house, or isn't there anybody that can come and 

make sure that this doesn't continue? 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

 This woman was obviously an immigrant.  She spoke very 

little English.  She had no children.  She had no family in this 

country.  And when I said, what about the transition house, 

which was just down the street, she didn't know about it. 

 

And it seems to me that on this day of remembrance of the 

women, we also have to remember the victims of violence that 

are still in their homes being victims of violence.  And 

somehow as government and as all members of this legislature 

we have to ensure that people who want to be safe and have a 

desire to be safe have a place to go. 

 

And that means, Mr. Speaker, that we are going to have to not 

only provide safe places for people, but we are also going to 

make sure that people are aware of where they can go and who 

can help them. 

 

And I'm pleased, Mr. Speaker, that for the first time in this 

Legislative Assembly we have 12 women that were elected on 

October 21, 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- The 12 women not only represent urban 

Saskatchewan, but they also represent rural Saskatchewan 

where this problem of violence is just as prevalent as it is in the 

cities. 

 

And I am sure with all of the progressive members of the 

legislature, male members of the legislature who have been 

elected, and if we have the will to do it, we can ensure that 

women and children, older women, younger women, rural 

women, urban women, women who don't speak English, 

women who do speak English, have access to the kinds of 

services that will ensure that they are protected and their 

children are protected. 

 

And I am sure if we have will to do it, Mr. Speaker -- and I 

know we do -- that we will not only deal with services for 

women and children, but we will ensure that the batterers who 

also are victims, because they come from homes where this 

was something that the family did and it's a learned behaviour, 

that they will have access to services and counselling; and all 

of us if we have the will to do it, can eliminate violence, verbal 

violence, physical violence, and emotional violence towards 

those people in our community. 

 

So I thank the member from Regina Hillsdale for the 

opportunity to commemorate this day.  It's a most important 

day and I'm sure if we leave this legislature committed to 

eliminating violence and helping our victims and helping those 

who are the perpetrators, we can have a truly just society where 

men and women are equal. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Shillington: -- As a technical matter, Mr. Speaker, I beg 

leave to return to special orders of throne speech, so 

I'll ask the House for that. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Murray, seconded by Mr. 

Flavel. 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Time did not allow 

me to finish my presentation last night so I would like to 

conclude it this morning. 

 

In my speech last night I mentioned some of the issues we the 

government are committed to, such as dealing with the 

agricultural crisis and repealing legislation which provided for 

the expansion and harmonization of the provincial sales tax. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that 

the members of the opposition have claimed that the 

establishment of a Financial Management Review Commission 

is a witch-hunt, an attempt to embarrass the previous 

government. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Speaker, that an independent review 

of our financial records of this province by an independent and 

non-partisan commission that would only provide us with an 

unbiased inventory of our financial assets and liabilities, and 

would suggest ways to improve financial accountability and 

efficiency of government, is a good fiscal management and 

sound common sense. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- I suggest to the members opposite that if they 

would have followed these same such principles, we would not 

be in the mess that we are in here today. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would ask a question of the members 

opposite:  what are you afraid of?  Is your opposition to the 

Gass Commission based on a fear that it will tell us the truth 

about where has all the money gone? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Mr. Speaker, some of the members of the 

opposition claim that the throne speech contains no plan.  Our 

former premier keeps saying, where's the beef?  I would 

suggest to the former premier that even though we intend to 

work as hard as possible on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan, that it will take a little longer than a month to 

clean up after nine and a half years of Tory mismanagement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- Nine and a  



122 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

half years of deficit, nine and a half years of reduced services, 

nine and a half years of continuing scandal, nine and a half 

years of patronage, nine and a half years of attacking the weak 

and helpless in our society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason why I am standing here in support of 

the throne speech is because the people of Saskatchewan had a 

beef and it was with the members of the opposition. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- The people of Saskatchewan were fed up, and 

on election night they demonstrated that.  They weren't going 

to take any more.  And the members of the opposition know 

what happened.  And I will say, Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee 

to you, the members of the opposition, that nine and a half 

years from today, we will look back on the record of our 

government and we will do so with pride and with a sense of 

achievement. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- The most important of all, we will not be afraid 

to go and ask the people of Saskatchewan for their support in 

an election because we will have earned their trust and their 

support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what does this throne speech mean to me.  I 

would suggest to the members of the opposition that it 

illustrates the profound difference between our parties, the two 

visions of our province's future.  You measure success by the 

size of house in which you live.  New Democrats measure 

success by what we contribute in mind and character to the 

community in which we live and serve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Harper: -- You measure success by how you make your 

living.  New Democrats measure success by how you live. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the choice is clear.  The path that we are taking 

now is the one that will lead us to a sense of worth in the things 

that we create, a path that leads us to brotherhood, not only for 

today but for all the years to follow -- a brotherhood not just of 

words but of acts and deeds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as this government sets out on a great journey, I 

would hope that all of us here, each and every member, would 

ask themselves what manner of member do I want to be, then 

act on it in all that we do. 

 

Let us aim high in our aspirations for the people of 

Saskatchewan so that, working together, we can create a 

Saskatchewan that honours the dignity of each and the 

brotherhood of all.  The throne speech is a first step in that 

direction, and I am very pleased to do my small part in 

supporting the motion.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is quite an honour to 

reply to the Speech from the Throne.  And I sincerely 

congratulate you on your election to the office of Speaker, Mr. 

Speaker.  I know you will be presiding in a just and fair 

manner over these proceedings as we embark on the 22nd 

sitting of the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

During our proceedings however, we must not forget that the 

fine people of this province deserve to know the basics of what 

is and will be happening in this government caucus and this 

building during the next few weeks of our first session. 

 

As the people come to know us as a fair and caring 

government, they will also come to know us as responsible and 

approachable representatives, as concerned human beings who 

are striving to make Saskatchewan's future a brighter one. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Certainly our Premier will lead us during the next 

few weeks and beyond, demonstrating over and over again his 

people-before-politics philosophy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- The Kelvington-Wadena constituencies have 

been represented by many outstanding members.  F.A. 

Dewhurst from the Wadena constituency served in the 

Speaker's chair during the Blakeney government's first term.  

Mr. Speaker, I know you will carry on the tradition he helped 

establish of fairness and impartiality, commanding respect 

from both sides of the House. 

 

Collectively we will accomplish many tasks on behalf of the 

people who elected us.  And I pause here to extend my 

congratulations to my fellow NDP colleagues, both the newly 

elected and re-elected.  It was a victorious election, worthy of 

the battles we all successfully fought.  Again congratulations 

and congratulations to our cabinet members.  Your talents and 

energy will take us forward into the future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1130) 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Mr. Speaker, campaigning with integrity and 

honesty has achieved an historic landmark victory for 

democratic socialism in Saskatchewan -- a victory that would 

have not been possible without the electorate at large, and in 

specific the voters in my constituency.  I thank them for the 

trust they have placed in me, particularly considering how vast 

an area I represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, located 

in north-east Saskatchewan, consists of parts of the previous 

constituencies of Kelvington and Wadena.  It has an agriculture 

economy with some forestry in the north end.  This has been a 

bell-wether riding.  Since 1944 the seat has consistently elected 

a government member. 

 

I covered a lot of territory during my campaign and tried to 

meet as many people as I could.  I represent 9,885 constituents 

scattered over an area that stretches from Highway 52 to as far 

north as Round Lake and includes Kelliher, Jasmin, 

Parkerview, West Bend, Bankend, Wishart, Mozart, Elfros, 

Leslie, Foam Lake, Tuffnell, Chorney Beach, Sheho, Pasweign, 

Wadena, Kylemore,  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

Kuroki, Margo, Invermay, Hendon, Fosston, Rose Valley, 

Kelvington, Nut Mountain, Perigord, and the Fishing Lake and 

Yellow Quill Reserves. 

 

While I would like to personally thank each and every one of 

the people in these communities, I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 

we would not have enough time to read out the countless 

numbers of names of our supporters.  Of the people who 

supported me, to them, and they know who they are, I thank 

you. 

 

That support, Mr. Speaker, was critical.  It came from 

well-informed voters, friends, neighbours, and communities 

who take their politics very seriously.  So seriously that we 

have, and I say this with immense pride, the largest number of 

NDP memberships in 1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- These good people know the issues and know 

party policy.  They obviously have a good handle on what our 

province needs for the future because on October 21 they 

elected an NDP government, an NDP MLA to represent their 

concerns.  And not only did they elect to vote NDP in 

Kelvington-Wadena, they opted to cast their votes 

province-wide for the NDP in 54 other constituencies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after years of uncertainty we now have the return 

of a caring, sharing, compassionate government . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- . . . which will put the needs of the people and the 

needs of our communities first.  Although the people of my 

riding are well versed in partisan politics, I have every 

intention of putting politics aside as I serve them, no matter 

whom they voted for on October 21.  After all, who they voted 

for isn't relevant to doing a good job on their behalf.  Doing a 

good job means representing everyone to the best of my ability. 

 

My constituency boasts of some of the finest agriculture land in 

this province, often called the sure-crop district, a rich and 

fertile area that consistently produces.  There are other 

industries, labourers, and professional people; however, 

agriculture as a way of life is the most prominent, a way of life 

that focuses and revolves around the family farm. 

 

There are two theories about family farms, Mr. Speaker.  The 

first theory is that farming is strictly a business where only the 

strong, the wealthy and clever survive, leaving the weaker ones 

to fall by the wayside, perhaps to be called losers.  The NDP do 

not -- repeat, do not -- agree with this philosophy.  Yes farming 

is a business, but first and foremost it is a time-honoured, 

traditional way of life.  A true Saskatchewan way of life, it is 

definitely worth preserving and protecting. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- I raise this point because it is devastating to hear 

about the number of farmers who have been forced to leave the 

land, a choice they had hoped they would 

never have to make.  During the previous administration 

approximately 1,000 farmers left every year the Tories were in 

power.  While this was happening the old government did little 

to stop this out-migration.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, they even said, 

in order to make our farm economy more efficient, another 30 

per cent or 20,000 family farms would have to go, be put out of 

business to ensure the prosperity of larger operations.  I am 

talking about 100,000 people involved in those family farms. 

 

One certainly has to wonder just what was the plan for 

agriculture before October 21 or was there one.  We need more 

farmers not less. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- That is why, Mr. Speaker, the new NDP 

government will be designing and redesigning agriculture 

programs. 

 

Before we forge ahead with our plans, we must get a sense of 

what kind of debt load this province is facing.  We must get a 

handle on the massive farm debt. 

 

And there are other questions such as: why should family farms 

have to purchase their land every 25 years just because one 

family member is retiring and another wishes to take over?  

This may be an ideal situation for the banks and other financial 

institutions, but it is certainly not ideal for the people they 

serve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, imagine how many hundreds of thousands of 

dollars of interest we are talking about.  Many of my 

neighbours benefitted from the old land bank system initially 

designed by Allan Blakeney.  Although the land bank had its 

flaws, it was better than the system we have now, otherwise 

known as bank land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- And I'm speaking about some 1.2 million acres.  

We also have to clearly recognize that the PC's free trade deal 

with the United States caused the end of the two-price system 

for wheat, undermined the Canadian Wheat Board, and failed 

to address the international grain subsidy war that has driven 

down world prices. 

 

We need to support the Canadian Wheat Board and orderly 

marketing.  Orderly marketing has proven itself in ensuring 

adequate returns to producers.  Although safety nets like GRIP 

(gross revenue insurance program) and NISA (net income 

stabilization account) are a start, they must and will be 

reworked to accomplish a meaningful, long-term solution. 

 

As I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, this province has seen a mass 

exodus of over 80,000 people from all walks of life.  But 

perhaps the hardest-hit area is our agriculture sector.  That is 

very clear when you look at our cities.  Growth has not been 

evident for some years now, and so we know that our rural 

people are not leaving their farms for the cities; they are 

leaving their farms and leaving the province. 

 

Between 1986 and 1991, in Kelvington-Wadena alone, we lost 

1,050 voters.  While this may be a head count of  



124 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

those who are eligible to vote, it does not reveal the other 

frightening side of the picture -- along with those 1,050 

departed votes, Mr. Speaker, were many children under the age 

of 18 who took their futures with them. 

 

I remember a remark made in 1982 by the then government: 

bring your children home.  It seems to me that did not happen.  

They had nothing to come back to, nothing to come back for; 

there was no plan.  Saskatchewan was faced with a future 

generation drain and along with our children went our farm 

families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that situation is slowly beginning to reverse itself 

since we took office.  There is a renewed sense of optimism 

among the electorate.  The tide is turning, Mr. Speaker.  But 

this certainly reaffirms a need for new farm programs aimed at 

small and medium-sized farms, programs that will attract 

young people and those who left.  We need them to carry on 

with farming, a most notable enterprise.  The only way to 

revitalize rural Saskatchewan is to repopulate it.  Communities 

and co-operatives will come into play with new job creation. 

 

We need more farmers and we need jobs for rural 

Saskatchewan, new jobs designed specifically for rural 

Saskatchewan, not borrowed from our city cousins.  I think that 

message came through loud and clear at election time.  As an 

example, the polls of Foam Lake and Wadena, even though 

they may have benefitted from Fair Share, overwhelmingly 

voted for NDP government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Let's face it, Mr. Speaker, the last decade has 

been a pressure cooker in agriculture.  However other sectors 

have also suffered.  For instance, education -- between 25 to 30 

per cent of our students never finish high school.  We are 

talking about tomorrow's leaders.  We must do better for our 

young people.  We will strive to make education accessible and 

affordable for everyone, regardless of income, gender, race, 

disability, or geographic location. 

 

Education, Mr. Speaker, is not a privilege; it's a right.  We will 

work to restore proper funding to education.  However first we 

must repopulate rural Saskatchewan.  For what is the good of 

proper funding alone when there are fewer and fewer students 

in our rural schools and fewer and fewer schools for our 

children?  I am proud to say that I have recently been elected to 

chair the caucus committee on local government and education, 

and hope to make significant changes in this area. 

 

I cannot emphasize enough the need to revitalize and 

repopulate rural Saskatchewan.  It means the survival of rural 

Saskatchewan and the very survival of this province. 

 

Speaking of this province, when I travel through this great land 

I often realize how much we have to be proud of.  For instance, 

we are universally recognized as the home of medicare. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1145) 

Mr. Kluz: -- That is a significant achievement, Mr. Speaker.  It 

is something that deserves respect and nurturing.  And yet in 

the last decade we have seen the gradual deterioration of the 

system and many other health programs, the elimination of the 

school-based dental program, changes to the prescription drug 

plan.  These things should not have happened.  We will work to 

enhance our health care system for every citizen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity to talk to many seniors 

over the last two years -- our pioneers, the very foundation of 

this province.  There are many senior issues, people's issues 

really, that concern them and should concern us all -- housing, 

health care, transportation, to name a few.  However what 

disturbs them even more is witnessing the rapid erosion of this 

once great province over the last decade.  This is a sad state of 

affairs, one that impacts on all of us, now and well into the 

future. 

 

When I speak of erosion of programs, I also again speak of the 

massive debt we are saddled with in Saskatchewan.  In the last 

decade, Mr. Speaker, we have gone from a surplus budget to a 

projected total deficit budget of $6 billion -- $6 billion.  The 

mismanagement of the past is first and foremost in everyone's 

mind.  We will be struggling to deal with this debt for many 

years to come.  But with common sense, financial 

management, we can and will overcome this crushing burden. 

 

We will strive to balance the books in this term of office, and 

we'll work out a solution to pay back the debt.  With good 

management, Mr. Speaker, and a little luck, this may be 

accomplished within the next decade or so -- accomplished 

with the co-operation of the people of Saskatchewan and every 

member of this House.  And with good financial management 

and co-operation, we will restore Saskatchewan its former 

proud reputation as one of the best provinces to live in Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- The fine people of this province deserve no less.  

Mr. Speaker, speaking of financial management, I am proud to 

say I am part of the government that repealed the 

harmonization of the PST (provincial sales tax) with the GST 

(goods and services tax). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- We could have eliminated the debt a lot more 

quickly with the harmonization, but we would also have 

eliminated the tourism and restaurant industries.  It would also 

have meant the death of a number of small and mid-sized 

businesses.  Once again, I'm proud to repeal this unfair tax, and 

my constituents are happy and relieved also.  We will work on 

a fair taxation system for the 1990s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, before I close, I want to say that I also firmly 

believe it is time to review regulations pertaining to storage of 

dangerous chemicals that affect our environment.  I refer to the 

recent near disaster at Grand Coulee.  Can you imagine the 

previous government not even having the common sense to 

store those highly toxic chemicals -- cyanide of all things -- 

without adequate protection. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- We have to take action. 

 

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, it will be with the co-operation of 

the people and every member of this House that we can and 

will give Saskatchewan the reputation it once had as being a 

leader, a province others envy.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, first of all I would like to congratulate you on 

your election to the Speaker's Chair.  I want to also 

congratulate all the re-elected members and the newly elected 

members on both sides of the House. 

 

If I look a little tired and nervous this morning, it's because I 

have actually been in the bullpen for 23 hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate those members 

that made the cabinet and say to them, your talents and your 

drive have been recognized.  The challenge ahead of you is 

great, but I think each one of you is up to that challenge and I 

look forward to working with you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly believe that our 

new Premier, who has worked so long and hard for this 

province, is to be congratulated.  To me, Mr. Speaker, he has 

always believed in reasonable, responsible, attainable policies 

and put them ahead of personal popularity, choosing rather if 

necessary to lose with integrity than to make promises and be 

unable to keep them.  And the people of this province have 

rewarded him with this historic victory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the people back home, 

the people of my constituency of Nipawin.  I recognize the 

responsibility they have placed in me, and I'll do my best for 

them. 

 

I thought I would in my first speech in this House today have 

the best story I know and bring the best, comical story that I 

know.  And so I was going to do that, but I see quite a few of 

the members on our side and at least one of the members 

opposite have possibly heard this story, because it's the kind of 

a story that will just knock the hair right off the top of your 

head.  And so seeing as some people have heard it before, I'm 

going to forego that one. 

 

The constituency of Nipawin lies in the north-east and takes in 

the northernmost and easternmost agriculture land.  It also 

includes the edge of the forest, the northern forest, and includes 

two reserves.  Mr. Speaker, in the case of much of this province 

. . . as is in the case of much of the province, agriculture is the 

most important back home.  Our agriculture in our constituency 

is probably more diversified than in some others.  We have 

several farms that have cattle as an important part of their 

operation.  We also in our constituency have three community 

pastures, provincial pastures, that are very important to the 

farmers in the area.  Mr. Speaker, provincial pastures have a 

special place in my heart as I was manager of one of those 

three pastures for eight years and worked in it for five more. 

 

Besides, Mr. Speaker, our farmers, besides the regular grains 

that most people grow such as wheat and barley, flax and oats, 

our farmers also grow a lot of the specialty crops, and they 

have worked them into their crop rotation on a regular basis, 

such as peas, and lentils, alfalfa, grass seeds of all kinds, and so 

on. 

 

We grow a lot of alfalfa back in my constituency.  A lot of it 

for dehy (dehydrating) that's exported either in the form of 

pellets or cubes.  We also grow a lot of alfalfa for the 

production of the seed.  And along with the seed production 

goes the leafcutter bee business.  These leafcutter bees, Mr. 

Speaker, the farmers in my area grow and reproduce these 

bees, which in turn pollinate the alfalfa and increase the 

production of the seed. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is only half of the story of the birds and the 

bees, as you well know.  The other half is honey-bees.  Honey 

is another product that's produced in abundance in my area.  

With all the blossoms on the fields of clover and alfalfa and 

especially canola, our bees do very well and we have a lot of 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at Nipawin we have a -- speaking of canola -- we 

have a crushing plant which is a very much appreciated 

industry in our area, both as a major employer and also an 

outlet for the canola grown in the area. 

 

Another major influence in our constituency are two large 

hydroelectric dams on the Saskatchewan River.  The 

construction of these over the years has been a boost, a major 

boost to the economy of the area.  And the two lakes -- I should 

say man-made -- have created a very exciting tourist attraction.  

The local people along with visitors very much enjoy the 

natural beauty of this area of the province.  The regional park at 

Nipawin and the provincial park . . . or the Pasqua Park I 

should say at Carrot River are very popular and very well used. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that without a doubt we have the best 

place in the province to fish.  We have very large-sized pike, 

wall-eye pike . . . I should say northern pike and wall-eye, 

record size being caught all summer long, right at the town.  

There's many places up there to fish.  Many Saskatchewan 

people as well as those from other provinces and from the 

United States have found this area of the province to be exactly 

what they're looking for come holiday time.  The people of 

Nipawin have really done an excellent job of promoting this 

industry in the past and expanding it.  And as word gets 

around, it increases every year. 

 

Now just this past fall, Mr. Speaker, the tourism potential of 

our area received another big boost with the discovery in the 

arbour field in Carrot River area of a pre-historic crocodile 

affectionately known as "Big Bert."  He is said to be 85 billion 

years old -- older than the dinosaurs.  This fossil, by the way, is 

in excellent condition.  I've never seen a fossil that is so well 

preserved in all the museums 

  



126 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

that I've been in.  And just the other day -- I think a week ago 

today -- I had the honour of unveiling him, and he's located at 

the Museum of Natural History just a few blocks north of the 

legislature here.  It's the only one ever found in Canada, and 

he's one of only four or five in North America. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our area of the province was moved into by the 

people around from 1910 to 1940, with many of the pioneers in 

that area coming from this part of the province because of the 

drought and the dust of the '30s.  And they moved into that area 

of the province because of the forest and the game.  They were 

better able to support their families if they worked hard and 

make a living. 

 

In the first years logging and lumber was king in that area, and 

even today there are many people that have mills and log and 

cut pulp for the mill at Prince Albert, and it's very much 

appreciated in our area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a new MLA, a few days ago I listened with 

intent to the Speech from the Throne and I was pleased to hear 

what I heard and I whole-heartedly supported.  In the past nine 

and a half years Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan people have 

endured many hard times, most of them due to bad weather, 

poor grain prices, and bad government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people cannot do anything about the bad weather.  

They can't do very much about the bad prices.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we did find the solution for the bad government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1200) 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- In the last nine and a half years thousands and 

thousands of small farms and small businesses have gone broke 

and left the province, many of them.  The numbers are 

staggering and we've heard them over and over, but the 

numbers do not do . . . do not tell the whole story of the 

heartaches and the heart-breaks and the pain and the headaches 

that these people that are involved have experienced.  That's the 

tragedy that's happened. 

 

As things went from bad to even worse, the broken dreams, the 

lost hopes, the despair have taken their toll on the people of the 

province.  Many of them are young.  They gave up. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne talked about a new 

beginning, and that is exactly what we need at this time in 

history.  We need a new beginning.  These last nine and a half 

years of waste and mismanagement, patronage and corruption, 

financial irresponsibility, have come to pass. And most of the 

people of the province are glad they have passed.  This was 

clearly shown on October 21. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of my constituency are very 

responsible people and reasonable people and so are the people 

of the province.  They are not expecting miracles, but they do 

expect a better government.  We know that first of all we must 

get our financial house in order.  They understand that and we 

all understand that.  First of all we have to get our financial 

house in order. And that is what 

we are doing, as we promised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, several years ago, I think it was about 13 or 14 

years ago, I had an uncle -- he's passed away now -- and I 

talked with him one day and I told him I was thinking of going 

into politics.  He said, don't do it. I said, why not?  He said, you 

don't have a chance.  I said, why not?  He said, you've got two 

things against you, Tom.  He said, number one, you're ugly, 

and number two, you're bald. 

 

And I just want to say to the member from Moose Jaw Palliser 

how much inspiration and encouragement he has been in this 

area over the years without even realizing it and without 

knowing it.  I mean that was the thing that I thought was so 

good of him.  But he's been a great example for me and gave 

me hope. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, agriculture was mentioned as a 

major priority of our government and I'm glad it was, because I 

know and so does our government know that if we lose our 

farms, we lose our towns.  And if we lose our towns, we lose 

the major part of Saskatchewan.  The family farm is vital to the 

prosperity of our province and we realize that. 

 

The people back home in my constituency realize that our 

farms and indeed the province are in a very serious, even 

precarious I should say, position because of the debt we have 

both on our farms personally and as a province -- the highest 

per capita debt in North America.  It has limited us in the 

options we have.  Responsible, reasonable people realize that.  

But the people in my constituency, and I believe the whole 

province, are prepared to do -- to co-operate and work together 

and do -- what we have to do.  They realize that no one person, 

and in fact no one party can solve the problems that we face 

because of the magnitude of them alone.  I had hoped that the 

days of narrow-mindedness and non co 

_operation were over. 

 

I was glad to see, Mr. Speaker, the other day, the co-operation 

shown by the groups, the farming organizations and others, as 

they joined together to lobby Ottawa.  They are to be 

congratulated and so are the politicians from the various parties 

and the various provinces that put aside their differences, saw 

the responsibility they had to their farms and to their provinces 

and went to work on their behalf. 

 

Needless to say I was extremely disappointed in the member 

from Estevan and our former premier.  And it was a shame, Mr. 

Speaker, that he was not there because he could have helped 

and it would have helped.  And people realize that and people 

are going to remember that, that we have to put aside our 

differences and we have to work together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- And the days of narrow-minded, non 

co-operation are going to have to be put aside if we are going 

to succeed. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

It was also encouraging, Mr. Speaker, to see in the Speech 

from the Throne that the proposed changes to the GRIP and 

NISA programs are being negotiated with other governments 

involved, and that consultation with the lending institutions that 

are so integrally involved are going on daily. 

 

Now this lobby to Ottawa was right and it was in order because 

the problems facing our farms to a great part are caused 

directly because of decisions made by other federal 

governments. 

 

And our government has to respond.  Our federal government 

has to respond and meet the challenge. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also mentioned in the throne speech was the need 

for democratic reform and our plans to proceed in that area -- a 

code of ethics, a conflict of interest guide-lines.  And after the 

goings-on of the last nine and a half years, we have a long 

ways to go in restoring the trust in the minds of the people of 

this province, of politics and politicians. 

 

I was glad also to see that in your comments, Mr. Speaker, 

when you took your chair, about wanting to, and being 

determined to, improve the decorum in the House.  Because 

our government is responding to that and we are planning to 

increase and improve the decorum in the House, and I will 

commit to that as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, about a year and a half ago my 

home town had its unveiling of its history book.  And in our 

part of the province all the towns along the way whether they're 

big or small, have been putting together history books. 

 

And I was never much to read one until our own history book 

was unveiled, as so often is the case.  You don't really get 

involved in things until something personal happens in your 

life. 

 

And our town put together a history book of the history of the 

early pioneers of the area.  And I took it home and I read it, Mr. 

Speaker.  And as I read story after story of the pioneer families 

of that area I realized as never before the extent of the 

problems that they faced and overcame. 

 

Our pioneers in Saskatchewan have set us a clear example of 

what it takes when the going gets tough.  And we are in those 

kind of times again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They didn't look at how things were in the province with 

despair and criticize one another.  They put aside their 

differences.  They put aside their differences of language, 

religion, customs, even politics, and they worked together, Mr. 

Speaker.  They worked hard together and made this province 

the kind of place that it's been, the kind of home that it's been 

for you and me. 

 

I appreciate what they did for me.  And surely, Mr. Speaker, 

we must do the same for our children and our children's 

children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the challenges that we face today have been faced 

before and overcome.  Are we up to the past?  Each one of us 

has to examine ourself and see the reasons that we are in 

politics.  Why are we here and what are we doing?  Are we 

doing this for the better of our province and our communities, 

or are we doing it for gain? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that we're up to the task and I consider it 

a personal privilege to be here today and to serve the people.  

This is a new beginning and I'm proud to be part of it and I 

support the motion. 

 

Thank you. 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure and pride 

that I rise to speak.  This is my first speech in the legislature. 

However in some ways it represents what I have worked for all 

my life. 

 

As a kid back home, we had politics for breakfast, dinner, and 

supper.  My family thought in political terms from the time of 

the other Great Depression.  I am honoured and proud that I 

was chosen by my peers to represent them in this noble 

institution, this institution of democracy. 

 

I am proud of the many dedicated men and women who 

worked so hard to elect me and return a New Democratic 

government to our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 

congratulate you on your election as Speaker, a role which I 

know you will fulfil fairly and with wisdom.  I also 

congratulate all the members on their election.  I believe those 

of us that are serving the people of our constituencies have an 

obligation and a responsibility to serve them fairly and with 

compassion. 
 

I intend to keep in touch with the people in Redberry with my 

office and very capable staff in Hafford.  In addition, I am 

looking forward to meeting with groups and individuals all 

over the constituency.  It is with great enthusiasm that I face 

the challenge of the next four years of serving the people of 

Redberry, and also to play my part in the government of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Jess: -- My greatest pleasure comes from touring around 

Redberry and meeting with the people back home.  

Incidentally, Redberry is the most beautiful constituency in 

Saskatchewan. 
 

The people of Redberry are from many parts of the world, with 

the largest ethnic groups being first of all the original 

Canadians.  My constituency contains no less than six reserves:  

Beardy, Mistawasis, Muskeg Lake, Moosomin, Saulteaux, and 

the newest and yet to be settled, the Lucky Man Band. 
 

A very large number of my constituents are of Metis ancestry, 

a proud and noble group.  This group has made a great 

contribution to the history of our area.  As well, Mr. Speaker, 

we have many people of French origin, and of course the 

descendants of the Anglo-Saxon. 
 

In the central part of Redberry we find people of Russian, 

Ukrainian, Polish, and German descent.  The blend of  



128 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

these nationalities and many others gives us the rich and 

complex culture that we enjoy in Redberry. 

 

I often joke that it took four great nations just to produce me.  

As my sons are the 10th generation on my father's side born in 

this country, we have been here longer than most. 

 

Another bit of history is the fact that one of my ancestors was 

prime minister of this country.  He also was one of the Fathers 

of Confederation, Sir Charles Tupper. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1215) 

 

Mr. Jess: -- I would appreciate it very much, Mr. Speaker, if 

you would keep that fact a secret, as he was a Tory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, the people of Redberry are very 

industrious, hard-working, rural people.  The largest town is 

Duck Lake, with approximately 700 people.  The overall 

largest community is Beardy's Reserve, containing over 2,000 

people. 

 

Redberry is primarily a mixed farming area.  Despite its natural 

beauty, however, tourism potential has hardly been touched.  

This is definitely a growth area in my constituency.  Due to the 

economy, some of the small towns have died, and others may 

well soon be beyond salvage.  These towns, like the farming 

community around, have been drastically devastated during the 

last decade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see the commitment to agriculture 

in the throne speech, and it is in this area that I will address the 

most of my comments.  Mr. Speaker, farmers have told me of 

their serious concerns about federal government policies which 

impact negatively on the farming community.  Rural post 

office closures and worries about rail line abandonment have 

not helped. 

 

During recent years the federal government has used tax dollars 

to artificially prop up the Canadian dollar, with great success -- 

great success for the multinational corporations; not so great 

for Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people who depend on 

the exports of our products to make their living. 

 

In recent years that support has created an environment where 

the Canadian dollar has risen 18 cents -- 18 cents from its 

lowest point -- and each time the dollar goes up 1 cent, 

Canadian farmers lose $1.3 billion.  That's $23.4 billion in 

total, not to mention increased freight costs, not to mention the 

loss of the two-price system -- $23.4 billion, and Saskatchewan 

people should be happy with the share of 800 million, not when 

the hurt occurred but a year and a half later. 

 

Even then, Mr. Speaker, only a partial payment and the rest to 

come later yet.  No wonder the farmers of Redberry and the 

rest of Saskatchewan are unable to survive. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also need to establish a system of 

intergenerational land transfer.  Unlike the previous 

administration, our goal is not to transfer land from a whole 

generation of farmers to the banking institutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am confident of my government's commitment 

to solving these and other problems faced by farmers and 

small-business people. 

 

Before the election the people of Redberry would come to me 

with their problems and concerns in dealing with institutions 

like the ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan).  I am confident that ACS will change, and 

change it must. 

 

The goal of the new government is unlike that of the previous 

administration, as our goal is not to sacrifice two-thirds of our 

farmers, not even one-third of our farmers.  Our goal is to save 

every last farmer from ruin, every last farmer that is humanly 

possible to save. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- We must move toward a policy of protecting the 

people of this great province.  Under an NDP government, 

Saskatchewan will in fact become a good place to farm, and 

consequently to run small business, indeed to live. 

 

Saskatchewan will once again be known as the province that 

looks after its elderly and its sick.  We must once again be 

recognized as a leader in health care in North America.  Our 

tax dollars will be redirected to encourage small business.  The 

Cargills and the Weyerhaeusers of the world have their own 

agenda.  Let them use their own money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- It would not take a very big share of the dollars 

now directed to foreign companies to staff and supply hospitals 

and nursing facilities in places like Hafford, Rabbit Lake, or 

Borden. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would now like to take this opportunity to 

explain some of my concerns with the existing GRIP and NISA 

programs to clarify what changes I see as necessary.  First of 

all, any safety net is not worth the paper that it's written on 

unless it contains a cost-of-production formula. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, at the present time the formula is 

based on only 70 per cent of the previous year's moving 

average and drops to less than 60 per cent after premiums are 

deducted.  Farmers have told me of their concerns about this. 

 

As it now stands, GRIP favours high production areas.  For 

example, when wheat declines to 25 bushels per acre the price 

and the yield guarantee would be only a hundred dollars per 

acre minus the premium.  Presently support is based on what 

you grow.  It doesn't protect you from low quotas, poor export 

sales. Cash flow could be very poor but still it may not trigger 

any GRIP payments. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

The farmers in Redberry are concerned with this program.  In 

its present form it may allow a few farmers to survive, but it 

also provides a source of cheap labour to continue to produce 

cheap food for all time.  The GRIP's main problem is the fact 

that it is designed and it will self-destruct, which makes it the 

shortest long-term program possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- The leaders of the opposition should realize that if 

there had been a consistent plan for farmers, that there would 

be no need to call for federal money each time there is a 

shortfall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other problems with GRIP as well.  A 

50-bushel crop even at $2 a bushel would not trigger any GRIP 

payment.  It has been suggested that farmers have the option to 

continue with crop insurance.  Farmers have told me that this is 

not a reasonable alternative when the present support price for 

wheat under the present crop insurance is only $2.40 per 

bushel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the support level will decline dramatically as we 

move from the present 4.15 per bushel for wheat; we are 

moving from higher late 1970 prices to the low prices of the 

1980s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to clear up some misconceptions about this 

program.  The public should not look on GRIP as being 

popular because of the high percentage of farmers signing up.  

Farmers join mainly out of desperation.  The western grain 

stabilization was being eliminated.  Crop insurance protection 

had been drastically reduced, making it impractical for most 

farmers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to encourage greater participation, farmers were 

offered reduced premiums for one year.  On the other hand, 

they were threatened with not qualifying for other special grain 

payments if they did not join GRIP.  It was the old story of the 

government using the carrot and the stick to ensure a large 

initial sign-up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Mr. Speaker, farmers have told me over and over 

of their concerns about the slow pay-out.  This will force 

farmers to borrow money to meet the financial obligations.  

Interest costs will further reduce benefits.  Mr. Speaker, 

farmers fear that under the present plan, banks could be the 

greatest beneficiaries of GRIP. 

 

I would like to, for just a moment, focus my attention on NISA.  

Mr. Speaker, there is a perception in the farming community 

that NISA has deliberately been designed to benefit the top 

one-third of the financially stable farmers.  That's in order to 

speed up the demise of the other two-thirds.  The greatest 

benefit is to those who need it the least, and little benefit is 

given to farmers who are in financial trouble.  There is a fairly 

attractive pay-out for the current year; however the paperwork 

required to become involved in a . . . (inaudible) . . . pay-out is 

absolutely ridiculous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to take this opportunity to share 

some of my own long-term views on agriculture as they impact 

on Saskatchewan as a whole in the '90s.  One idea that I would 

bring forward is the establishment of a rural repopulation 

program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Jess: -- Starting with a training employment program 

involving young people wishing to become involved in 

farming.  Such a program would assist farmers who need help 

on their farms and who can't afford wages for full-time 

employees.  Mr. Speaker, I suggest an example of eight months 

of work and three months of training, similar to the school of 

agriculture course in practical agriculture. 

 

Such an investment in rural youth can be justified by the fact 

that a similar investment in other young people has been an 

accepted rule for generations.  My position is that these young 

people in the rural areas have as many rights as anyone else.  I 

submit that their contribution would be valuable to our 

province, as they would remain in Saskatchewan. 

 

I often tell the story of a friend of mine that went through 

dental college, and at that time the investment by the province 

was approximately $50,000.  And since that time, he's been out 

of province and all his taxes and all his talents have been 

utilized somewhere else.  If I had been given, or any of my 

generation, the same kind of investment, I could have bought 

and equipped the farm that I'm on and, thank you very much, I 

wouldn't have needed any other assistance. 

 

I suggest that lip service using the term "family farm" is really 

not enough.  We must make a conscious effort to revitalize the 

rural communities by reversing the flow of young people off of 

our farms.  Actually, a ribbon-cutting ceremony on a new town 

hall or an arena, as important as these projects may be, is 

somewhat of an empty gesture if the population base is being 

eroded. 

 

When we look at one of our major problems, that of competing 

with European farm subsidies, I feel we should question why 

Europe has chosen to go in this direction.  I suggest that it is 

the conscious decision to keep people on the land.  This is done 

for many reasons.  I wonder if instead of condemning their 

approach to the rural problems, we might learn from their 

actions. 

 

In conclusion, I would like to again extend my congratulations 

to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all other elected representatives in 

this legislature.  I believe that the direction given by the Speech 

from the Throne has demonstrated that Saskatchewan can, with 

responsible management, once again be a place that truly 

respects humanity first.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1230) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's an honour for me to join 

in the debate this morning to the speech of Her Honour, the 

Honourable Sylvia Fedoruk.  Certainly being able to rise and 

speak in this House is historic and 

  



130 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

something that each member of this House cherishes and has 

cherished over the years. 

 

And there are many members in this House who have been 

here a lot longer than I have, but I appreciate the opportunity to 

join in, to be part of this Assembly, to thank the members of 

my . . . the men and women of my constituency who voted on 

my behalf and who gave me the honour of representing them 

here in the constituency for . . . or in the Assembly for a second 

term.  I'd like to thank them from the bottom of my heart for all 

their support, their encouragement, and their hard work.  And I 

don't believe anyone knows any better than I do the importance 

of hard work, as has already been mentioned on a number of 

occasions by some of my colleagues and former colleagues and 

some of the people who worked for me. 

 

Yes, we had a major landslide in the Moosomin constituency.  

But truly democracy works on the basis of 50 per cent plus one.  

And all a person needs to represent an area is 50 per cent plus 

one.  I understand the members of the government do have a 

few as well who won by a landslide and I guess we can all take 

credit for that.  But what it indicates is the determination, the 

hard work, and the commitment of many people who believe in 

individuals like myself. 

 

And so I say thank you to my friends and neighbours who 

believed in me and through their expression at the polls put 

faith in my abilities.  And I believe in them as well and I 

endeavour over the next period of years to represent them as 

fairly and as honestly as I believe I can and have tried over the 

past four or five years in this House. 

 

It's because of these fine people that I am here today, and they 

are that, just fine people; people who know the meaning of 

hard work, people who are willing to lend a helping hand to 

their friends and their neighbours; people who have deep roots 

in agriculture and in the family. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I guess as all members in this Assembly, we 

can all go back to our tradition.  We can all look back to our 

grandparents or our parents, and our grandparents, our great 

grandparents, our friends and neighbours we live with.  And we 

think back of the difficult times men and women faced over the 

years.  But we all see, we see, Mr. Speaker, the commitment 

that men and women made to their communities and to this 

province, not only in helping neighbours, but believing in the 

family and in family traditions. 

 

And the Moosomin constituency has a real sense of community 

spirit.  Certainly I am proud to bring the concerns and issues 

Moosomin faces forward and to be a strong voice for them in 

this Assembly. 

 

And yes, Mr. Speaker, I'm sure that the members of the 

opposition, we may be few in number, but certainly the 

members on the opposite side of the House can reflect back a 

few years and realize the few number they were.  And yet did 

that hinder them in their abilities or their willingness to serve 

their constituents and their province and their community?  No 

it didn't.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I intend as a member of the 

opposition caucus, to speak out very strongly and as loudly as I 

can, to represent my 

constituents, to represent all my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, we all have concerns.  And I guess 

one of the things in politics that maybe most people find 

frustrating at times is when, as you're out campaigning and you 

meet someone on the street and an individual will come up to 

you and you'll say hello and chit-chat for a while, and then you 

get an accolade and someone . . . and the comment is, I sure 

appreciate the job you've done for me.  I sure appreciate the 

way you showed your concern and went to bat on my behalf 

and the results that were obtained, but I'm sorry, I won't be able 

to vote for you. 

 

Well you know, this is the democratic system.  This is the 

democratic process, and every member in this House is 

responsible to all their constituents.  They're responsible to 

represent them as fairly and honestly as they know how.  And 

that has been my endeavour since being elected for the first 

time in 1986, and I intend to continue to represent my 

constituency in that way. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have concerns about what direction our province 

is heading.  What is in store for our children and our parents?  

That is part of the reason I am so pleased to have, among other 

responsibilities as a member of Her Majesty's Loyal 

Opposition, the response for the portfolio of the Families. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people who are familiar with me know where my 

priorities lie.  And I'm not ashamed to let this Assembly know 

that there's a very important place in my life for God first; my 

wife and my family second; and thirdly, my responsibility to 

serve my constituents and to serve them well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't think this could be any one of us in 

establishing guide-lines and principles and ideals.  It would 

probably serve us well to realize that there are important places 

to present to . . . or priorities we must establish for our lives.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I have laid those out because I believe in 

them.  I believe if we have a commitment to God and family, 

we indeed . . . it will measure well in our commitment to 

society. 

 

And this afternoon, or this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as 

well, all members of this House joined in expressing our 

sympathy and our condolences to the violence that was seen 

two years ago in Montreal -- violence and actions against 

women. 

 

And truly as a society it behoves us to reach out to those less 

fortunate than ourselves, whether it be women; whether it be 

children; whether it be the unborn; whoever it is.  Whether it be 

another nationality or a race, Mr. Speaker, we ought to reach 

out and embrace each and every one of them. 

 

Though my priorities are placed in specific numerical order, I 

take each one very seriously.  Mr. Speaker, as a husband and 

father, and now with my new responsibilities involving the 

family, I have some very serious concerns about 

Saskatchewan's future. 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 131 

What happens to our provincial economy is important, but 

without protecting and improving the very core of our lives, the 

family, what is left?  Even the discussion this morning, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we can ask ourselves, where has our country, 

our province, or we -- where have we as a generation of people 

gone in relationship to the values and moral values that the men 

and women who came to this country years ago and through 

the years fought for and stood up for. 

 

And I believe that as we look over the next few years we must 

go back to the roots and establish our family values, establish 

our moral values, raise our children on values that they can 

stand up on and believe in.  What's the point of building and 

expanding industries if we have no children, no family to carry 

on our legacy? 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's part of the reason I have so many concerns 

today.  Recently the people of Saskatchewan were able to cast 

their ballots to have a direct opinion on some very important 

questions -- questions which were put forward, I know, through 

the term that I was in government; questions that were put 

forward to my colleagues even prior to my involvement in 

government; opportunities for people to speak out on very 

important issues, important issues that they were given the 

privilege of voting on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this last election three plebiscite questions were 

placed before the people and three results came in.  And what 

were the results, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Well first of all, on the 

first plebiscite question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the question was 

given whether the people of the province wanted balanced 

budgets or deficit financing.  And the overwhelming result, 

over 79 per cent were asking for a balanced budget. 

 

What about a voice in the decision-making process regarding 

our country's constitution.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look 

at our country today and the constitutional discussion we are 

involved in, it appears that we are becoming more involved in 

the constitutional discussion than we are in the very needs of 

individuals around us.  And indeed I'm sure that many people 

were voicing that opinion when they voted overwhelmingly in 

favour of more open discussion on the country's constitution, 

even in fact 79 per cent. 

 

I suppose if we were to go back to 1979 or 1980, 1981 when 

the members on the government side of the House were, and 

for government at that time, were into constitutional debate, 

had we had a more open constitutional debate at that time we 

may not find ourselves in the same situation we face today. 

 

And thirdly, the public has definite views on abortion and how 

abortions should be funded, and there again an overwhelming 

response opposed to publicly funded abortions.  Mr. Speaker, 

the people voted not to publicly fund abortions but rather to 

take that responsibility off the backs of taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the plebiscites, we look at how 

people spoke out. 

 

A letter to the editor in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix 

basically reiterates some of the view that was expressed 

through the election process, and I quote: 

 

 I hope the new government understands that people don't 

want any more debt.  I remind Education minister, the 

member from Saskatoon, that we do not need and cannot 

afford another school board in this province.  We need 

governments that can manage finances and not cater to every 

special interest group that shouts and hollers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public casts their ballots, and as the public 

was speaking, the public that were speaking to us came from 

every background you could find in this province, every 

political persuasion, and they made a clear, conscientious 

decision.  Their minds are made up, sir. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the concern I have today about the 

plebiscite question is whether the NDP government will honour 

the wishes of the people; whether they indeed will listen; 

whether indeed they are willing to lay out a plan of how they're 

going to attack the deficit. 

 

Certainly we have heard over the past number of years on 

many occasions, criticisms regarding deficits, regarding deficit 

spending.  But at the same time we've heard criticism about 

being uncaring. 

 

Well let me just remind you a little bit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 

where was the caring in 1982 when interest rates were at 22 per 

cent?  Where was the caring for young families who couldn't 

make their mortgage payments, or farmers who were having 

difficulty staying on the farm?  Where was the caring for those 

families? 

 

Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we've been reminded this 

morning, we faced some difficult times through the '80s -- 

some low grain prices; certainly we faced drought.  We faced 

circumstances beyond our control. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, I believe if you would have asked men 

and women around the province in the early '80s whether 

government should respond and help them, I think people 

would have said yes, we believe government should be there.  

We believe government should be there to help when times are 

difficult.  And certainly in better years, and might I suggest, 

maybe through the '70s would have been a time to put aside, to 

build up for the poor years that . . . we know we live in cycles.  

We live in cycles when commodities are up and commodities 

are down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be watching this government.  I wonder, 

will the minister . . . or the member from Riversdale be willing 

to answer these questions today.  Is he or his government going 

to listen to the people, or are they going to appoint groups of 

maybe two or three partisan people to continue to develop 

policy on their behalf?  Are they going to come through with 

promises of honest and open government? 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the member from Riversdale means what he 

says, I believe he must honour the plebiscite questions and the 

results that were indicated by the electorate as 

  



132 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

they voted on election day. 

 

(1245) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to remind the member how hard 

it is to get a straight answer; how hard it was to get a straight 

answer on these questions before the election.  And it seemed 

that the member was quite adept at giving the answer his 

audience was looking for.  Certainly when he was in Tisdale, 

what was his answer regarding Fair Share?  Well 

decentralization isn't bad.  When he was back in the Queen 

City, what was the answer?  Well it certainly isn't good. 

 

Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no pending election to 

worry about.  No pro-life activists protest in your presence.  

Today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people deserve answers.  And 

I believe the people at this moment are willing to sit back and 

give the government an opportunity to deliver on their 

promises.  After all, it's a basic democratic right to know what 

to expect from the government elected by the people. 

 

However when we talk about promises, I've run into so many 

people over the past month and a half, that I'm wondering 

where the government was on its promise to eliminate the PST.  

Certainly that was the term that many people throughout our 

province, when they heard the term PST, they put into a factor, 

or in their mind was a total provincial E&H (education and 

health) tax. 

 

How many business men who had customers come into their 

businesses and indicate, you can't charge me tax on that now; 

we've elected a new government and they've eliminated the tax. 

 

Certainly it's been in the media.  Many people have seen it.  In 

fact the Leader-Post finance department says:  Some confused 

by PST changes.  That indicates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to me, 

that many people certainly were confused. 

 

When we asked for the NDP to lay it out as clear as they could, 

which was very difficult to do, it appeared that it just got 

washed up and the waters even got murkier.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

they are duly elected and we give them that honour. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what are the NDP going to do, not just about the 

plebiscite questions, but on other important issues as well.  

Take the proclamation of freedom of information Act.  Mr. 

Speaker, on page 1 of the throne speech, the government talks 

about being . . . reinstating the proclamation, being open and 

honest. 

 

 My government accepts with enthusiasm its mandate to 

provide Saskatchewan people with honest, open, accessible 

and truly accountable government. 

 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen in this first week of 

the Legislative Assembly, we ask ourselves maybe how honest 

and how open are the government going to be.  What better 

way could the NDP show the people of Saskatchewan how true 

they are in their word than to proclaim the freedom of 

information Act. 

Mr. Speaker, just a few short months ago, members from both 

sides of the House stood in this Assembly and voted in favour 

of the freedom of information Act.  And there's no doubt that 

we all believe that we must be more open, more honest, and 

more free, so that the general public, as we've heard a number 

of speakers indicate, the general public have a better idea of the 

workings and the goings-on of government, feel that they are 

more accessible. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the cynicism that we see in the eyes of the 

public . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cynicism we see in the 

eyes of the public will certainly be changed as they have more 

respect for their representation, for their duly elected leaders. 

 

However, when we talk about open and honest, we've been 

discussing in this House for the last few days the appointment 

of a committee, a committee which the members opposite 

suggested would be non-partisan, and suggested that in being 

open and honest it would be available to all. 

 

I would think if a committee is open and honest, the Leader of 

the Opposition would have indeed responded to my colleague, 

the member from Thunder Creek, when he asked the leader and 

indicated his willingness to sit down with the government to be 

part of this process and to suggest some names for the 

government in appointing this committee. 

 

I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would have made the 

committee more . . . a sign to the general public that it was 

more non-partisan and open.  And I believe, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that this side of the House has indicated their 

willingness to work with government to help make government 

more effective. 

 

But then when we talk about openness and honesty, prior to the 

election, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions we heard the 

government of the day, the newly elected government making 

promises that they wouldn't go into massive firings or asking 

people to let people go, to find other employment -- that they 

would be fair. 

 

And yet what have we heard in the media?  What have we 

seen?  Well there's nothing wrong with those proposals.  They 

don't go far enough in talking about reform.  The problem is 

they focus on the political process and ignore where you find 

much of the real power in government. 

 

What we have seen in the past few days as the real power in 

government is in the hands of a few basically directed towards 

a few.  Since the NDP took power last month this group of 

people has moved into positions of power.  They are 

individuals with political ties to the NDP who effectively are 

replacing the Tory elites within government. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all realize that in politics there 

will be appointments.  We all realize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

people will move in and out.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can 

also acknowledge that when a political appointment or a 

political appointee, when they take on a position, realize that a 

change in government 

  



December 6, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

may mean their job is not there. 

 

But what about all the people who have worked in the civil 

service through the years -- people who have worked so hard, 

been diligent, have done their job well.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

would suggest to you when we get beyond the political 

appointments and into the ranks of government, people who 

have worked their way up through numerous governments or 

even the 200 crop insurance employees, that we have stepped 

beyond partisan political appointed individuals.  And it's time, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we indeed worked with people to give 

them a better understanding of government and indeed got 

away from this blatant political partisanship. 

 

The NDP have promised many times over to provide an open 

government.  Yet I fail to see where they're keeping their word. 

 

They promised a non-partisan government, yet in a few short 

months what have they done?  They closed trading offices.  

And we just heard today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the Piper 

Aircraft looking at possibly locating in Canada.  Wouldn't the 

trade office in Minnesota have been an excellent place to work 

to develop and enhance our province and look at bringing more 

industry and development into our province?  What about the 

Far East? 

 

What about replacing private-sector board members with NDP 

politicians and forming a partisan committee to conduct an 

NDP . . . and would we dare call it a witch hunt, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? -- known as the Gass tribunal, headed by Donald 

Gass, accompanied by who else, Garf Stevenson, President of 

Sask Wheat Pool?  Where is the openness, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  My colleague, the member from Thunder Creek, 

indeed asked for that openness and asked for an opportunity to 

speak out and to voice his concerns. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk about openness in 

government and non-partisanship, what about this column in 

the Star-Phoenix, "Proposal unfair." 

 

 The provincial government should abandon the idea of using 

only unionized contractors on big public projects. 

 

What is that telling the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan?  What is that telling the hard-working people of 

this province?  As the article says, it seems the NDP is already 

attempting to intimidate, the sin for which it condemned it 

predecessor, rewarding its political friends.  In fact the Labour 

minister says jobs done by unionized companies go a lot 

smoother and tend to happen on target, within budget, and tend 

to employ more Saskatchewan people. 

 

Now I would ask you to take a look at the Co-op upgrader and 

the work done on the Co-op upgrader.  I'm sure, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you would have to admit there were many 

Saskatchewan people involved in that project.  Mitchell should 

not expect the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to swallow 

generalizations like those unless he can produce some strong 

supporting evidence.  I think there are many private companies 

out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, small businesses that can prove 

to you 

and show you that they can be efficient and that they can be 

effective and certainly can complete their jobs on time with a 

very skill in their workmanship. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think when comments like this are 

made, it reflects on, not on openness in government, but indeed 

the fact that partisan politics continues to be part of our 

democratic, so-called democratic, system.  Where is the open 

and honesty in government?  I am concerned -- concerned that 

the NDP just made promises with no intention of delivering 

them; concern the member from Riversdale didn't mean what 

he promised when he said, open the books; concern, Mr. 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan were taken on an 

NDP ride to gain power at the expense of taxpayers. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am here to ensure that the 

Moosomin families and other families in our province are not 

taken advantage of.  As the opposition member responsible for 

families, I am troubled as to what the new government will do 

with the Family Foundation.  In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

having moved the Family Foundation into the Department of 

Education, I'm concerned that this foundation may be lost in 

the shuffle.  I don't believe there is any way the Family 

Foundation can continue to have the same impact while it is 

buried inside a department the size of the Education 

department. 

 

The question, Mr. Speaker, is: does the NDP recognize the 

importance of the family and therefore the Family Foundation?  

And if so, why would the member from Riversdale submerge it 

deep within the Education department? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the NDP cannot deny the 

success of the Family Foundation in just two short years.  Take 

a look at its record.  Forums about families were held in over 

150 communities all across this great province to identify 

problems and find ways to solve them. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these forums were open.  They were 

open to all individuals, they were non-partisan.  People were 

invited to attend . . . or people who attended were members of 

school boards, principals, teachers, members of community 

organizations, and civic officials, people from all walks of life, 

people who cared about their communities and their families. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP cannot ignore the fact that the 

Family Foundation deals with problems 90 per cent of the 

people in Saskatchewan face on a daily basis -- 9 out of 10 

people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are not the problems of the 

Department of Education but are completely non-political, 

affecting all walks of life -- family problems like parents 

communicating with teenagers.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I haven't 

quite reached that situation, but certainly I realize the 

difficulties that parents face in dealing with teenagers in the 

complexity of our society today. 

 

Talking about drugs with our children.  Part of the difficulty 

faced by women and children and abused individuals can be 

reflected in the fact the effect that 

  



134 Saskatchewan Hansard December 6, 1991 

drugs and alcohol have on individuals and certainly how they 

treat those around them. 

 

Dealing with ageing parents.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, many 

people in this province are elderly.  And certainly we have seen 

over the last number of years with the improvements in health 

care that many people are living longer.  In fact, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, my grandfather was 91 when he passed away.  All of 

my grandparents were well into their late '80's and early '90's, 

and each and every one of them were very healthy when they 

passed away and left this life.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm 

glad that we as grandchildren and our parents were able to lend 

a helping hand to our grandparents. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the major concerns we all 

face is budgeting,  and of course many others.  Setting a budget 

for the family, how do we plan?  I believe this Foundation had 

significant input on the welfare of many people in our 

province.  The Foundation responded to hunger in such a way 

that they don't even talk about hunger in school systems any 

longer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP talk about spending millions of dollars 

to feed every child in Saskatchewan; however, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I would suggest, rather than make political 

observations, let's talk to the school systems.  Let's take the 

time to talk to the principals.  Let's ask them for their advice 

and their interest. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.   It now being 1 o'clock p.m., 

this House stands adjourned until Monday at 2 o'clock p.m.  

Have a good weekend. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 


