




















































Hansard: December 21, 1991


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 507 

 December 21, 1991 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 

 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 13 - An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 

Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I have only one question or perhaps a series 

of questions, Mr. Chairman, to the minister. 

 

In view of the fact that -- and I'm particularly talking about the 

Wakamow Valley Authority -- has had access to both 

Saskatchewan Works and the New Careers Corporation in 

order to carry on with their endeavours, and it looks like 

Saskatchewan Works has been shut down and we don't know 

what the future for New Careers is, can the Minister assure the 

House that there will be some contingency in place, some other 

area perhaps of government that would be available to 

Wakamow if these ones are taken away from them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Chairman, I've had discussions with 

the Authorities and we are looking at other avenues to establish 

other programs or allow them to tap into work programs.  The 

name of the program we haven't decided.  But we're in 

consultation now and we realize that avenue for them was a 

good avenue for work and we are exploring what is possible. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- I would like to thank the opposition 

members for their co-operation and I look forward to it in the 

future.  Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

thank you for your time in answering our questions.  And also 

thank you to your officials for coming in this evening. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce her officials. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce 

Mr. Doug Burnett, a solicitor for SaskTel. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to have the 

minister outline a few of the impacts that this holding company 

will provide -- or the benefits that this holding company will 

provide -- as it relates to negotiations with the CRTC 

(Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications 

Commission) and its reasons for setting it up.  I'm aware of 

some of them but I'd like you to outline how you perceive this 

to go. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, as these matters had 

been considered previously by the members opposite when 

they were in government, they'll find that they're fairly familiar 

with the issues, I believe, and they really haven't changed in 

that the CRTC or the federal government does have the 

authority to regulate SaskTel, the integral portions thereof; they 

have signified their intention to proceed with that legislation on 

a federal level. 

 

In fact, they had set a deadline of mid-December, but the 

federal House has prorogued for the holiday without bringing it 

forward.  But we do expect them to be introduced early in 

January in the federal House, and the purpose of the legislation, 

as outlined in the reading, was to establish the holding 

company which will hold the assets or the portions that are 

subject to regulation, being the basic service and the long 

distance portion of the telecommunications company in the 

holding company and in the main company, and to form a 

holding company into which to transfer all the non-integral 

assets, being the mobile portions, the real estate, the shares in 

WESTBRIDGE and assets of that nature. 

 

The parts of the operation that are exempt from the regulations 

that we anticipate so that expansion and flexibility in 

responding to the new technology in the telecommunications 

industry will be more easily accomplished, with the goals of 

public ownership and the objectives of provincial systems more 

easily accomplished within that structure. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess that the resolve with 

which you hold those observations, I guess, is what we would 

like to see you commit yourself to, and we know that because 

of the scattered nature of the telephone service in the province 

of Saskatchewan, that it's almost an absolute necessity that you 

do that, and we want to know from you your resolve in making 

sure that that happens and so that we have a level of 

consistency on how our rates are being charged. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that's one of the 

objectives.  As the members opposite realize there's been an 

intense amount of competition in the long distance 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

area and at the time when SaskTel was an integral part of a 

network and the technology was at that kind of a stage, we 

were a requirement of the bigger players in the system if you 

like, because they needed us to get to where they wanted to go.  

But with satellite technology, if we don't try to play ball, if you 

like, and be good partners in the Canadian system, we can be 

just skipped over by satellite. 

 

So I guess what we will do and, as I said in the previous 

reading, we will still continue to oppose the federal regulation 

with the most intense vigour possible, but with the full 

knowledge that the federal government does retain the power to 

regulate if they wish to do that. 

 

So what we really would like to do is to have these Bills passed 

and in a position to proclaim, but not to proclaim them unless 

the federal regulations take effect.  And we feel that it's better 

to be prepared in anticipation of the regulations -- even though 

we intend to oppose their application -- than it is to wait until 

the federal regulations are in place and then be seen to be 

attempting to evade them after the fact.  So that's the purpose of 

this exercise, is to prepare ourselves to protect the integrity of 

our own system and our own objectives in terms of serving 

rural Saskatchewan and the local telephone rates as much as 

possible, but at the same time be prepared for what others 

might foist upon us that we don't particularly desire, but they 

are in a position to do. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One more question, Mr. Chairman. Madam 

Minister, could you explain to me how SaskTel International 

will be a part of that.  I think we're partners with that on 

western Canada.  Would you explain some of that, how it's 

going to work. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, that was my omission 

in describing the non-integral assets that would become part of 

the assets of the holding company.  I mentioned the share 

holdings in WESTBRIDGE, the mobile operations, and I failed 

to mention our interest in SaskTel International where there is a 

great opportunity for expansion into other markets in the world, 

and particularly the eastern European bloc and South America 

and other parts of the world that the members opposite will be 

acquainted with the opportunities that are there for us to 

expand and compete and make profits which will help us to 

maintain a reasonable rate structure for our subscribers at 

home, which is after all the objective of a Crown corporation. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 

 

Clauses 1 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I want to just thank the minister and her 

officials for their presentation here today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- I thank the members opposite for their 

co-operation, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1915) 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

on my right Mr. John Wright, who's the deputy minister of 

Finance; and behind me, Mr. Kirk McGregor, who's the 

executive director of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Just a few short questions for the minister, 

Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, how much revenue, now that 

you've had time to reflect properly, will be lost by passing this 

particular Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We anticipate there will be a loss of 

72 million in the remainder of what is left of the fiscal year 

since the PST (provincial sales tax) was eliminated.  As I 

indicated to the members on previous occasions, we have 

implemented cost-saving measures to compensate for that loss 

and have taken other measures which have been actually dealt 

with in this legislature, which will even bring further savings 

and reduce the projected deficit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, is 

that 72 million simply on the goods side or did that include the 

services side that was supposed to come in with January 1? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It includes all of the otherwise what 

would have been anticipated revenues -- that is the total 

amount that is anticipated that would have been revenues for 

the remainder of the fiscal year had the PST remained in place. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- How much revenue was collected under the 

harmonized sales taxes up to the point of when you stopped 

collecting it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- 79.1 million. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, how much revenue was the 

department projecting would have been garnered in the next 

fiscal year under full harmonization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am informed that although for this 

fiscal year it's projected that there would be revenues of about 

$140 million, in the next full fiscal year because of 

announcements that were made since the announcement in 

February of the PST, the revenues 



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

would have been in '82-83 $118 million. 

 

The reason for that is because subsequent to the original 

announcements there were announcements of certain input tax 

credits, MUSH (municipalities, universities, schools and 

hospitals) rebates -- that's municipal, university, all those kind 

of things -- tourist rebates, housing rebates, Indian exemptions, 

and all these kind of things, so that revenues in the next fiscal 

year actually would have been less, I am informed, than they 

were projected to be in this fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I'll have another series of questions.  Mr. 

Minister, the numbers that you gave me on the reduction in this 

fiscal year, did they include the lowering of the consumption 

tax?  Were those figures included in there? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes.  Everything is included in that 

figure.  The reduction of that and as well as other cost savings, 

which the member will have because he will have the technical 

appendix which we provided to the public, and to the members 

opposite and the media, when I released the statement on what 

the projected deficit was going to be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you obviously, in making the 

decision to cancel the harmonized taxes, did some cost-benefit 

analysis and I understand that your party made some analogies 

that said that people were taking . . . there was more being 

taken out of the system than there was benefit.  And I find it a 

little strange that if the projections from the department were 

that the amount of money collected would actually drop in the 

next fiscal year even with full harmonization -- in other words, 

both the goods and services side as compared to this year -- 

obviously the net impact on the economy would be less, not 

more. 

 

I believe at one time there were projections of up to $240 

million being garnered.  You're telling me that there was only 

going to be 118.  Obviously some of the pain that was talked 

about around the piece wasn't going to be quite what you were 

projecting, sir.  And I'm wondering how you square these $118 

million with both goods and services with the figures that you 

were throwing out to the public a little earlier in the year and 

about the damage that this particular tax was going to do upon 

the public of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess the problem 

with the rationale that the member provides opposite is that the 

pain that he talks on would have been all in the wrong places.  

The consumer would have had to pay.  People who go to work 

every morning and come home after work, they would have 

had to pay. 

 

The distribution of this PST was such that, Mr. Chairman, the 

analysis that we did showed that in four years the province 

would lose 7,500 jobs.  Under the conditions that we are today, 

fiscally and economically, that was just unacceptable to this 

government. 

 

We did our analysis.  We thought it was a tax that was 

inappropriate.  We consulted the people of Saskatchewan.  The 

people said -- well in the area of about 75 per cent -- that the 

tax was unacceptable.  And 

we decided as a policy decision, that the PST was not the kind 

of tax that this province could sustain; because of the state of 

the economy, that it is a tax that had to be eliminated.  We 

made that commitment and we carried out that commitment. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, another question to the 

minister.  Mr. Minister, has your department done an analysis 

of what this Bill will cost the average farmer with its passing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think it would be 

helpful to the House because members will be familiar that 

there is a current education and health tax exemption that is 

very wide and very broad.  I have it here if the member wants 

me to go through it.  It is several pages long . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I will give that to you.  It is several pages long.  

Therefore benefits to the farm population of the province of 

Saskatchewan, because of the exemptions of the E&H tax 

(education and health), an annual benefit of $150 million a 

year, which is very significant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, whether there are 

any net losses to farmers because of the elimination of the PST 

--I suspect very little.  I don't have a precise number. 

 

But although the farmers would have had some rebates because 

of the additional items that were added, the farm population 

would have also had some extra and additional costs which 

would not be rebated because farm people would have had to 

pay the PST on every single item that they purchased, 

including services and labour that they might hire to do some 

work on the farm if they did some work on construction or 

anything else.  So the net loss to farmers because of the 

elimination of the PST, Mr. Chairman, is negligible. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I find it a little strange that you 

would not have that figure because I know for a fact that that 

particular figure was calculated by the Department of Finance 

during last spring's budget preparations.  There was a figure of 

what the savings would be, by sector, for all types of business 

in this province and, with all due respect to the Finance 

Minister, I remember going out with officials from the 

department talking to citizens of the province and talking about 

those numbers, so I know that you have them. 

 

I know that you have what will happen with an average farmer 

with simply the goods side; I know what you will have with the 

goods and services side, the same that you will have with a fuel 

dealer, and you will have with all sorts of sectors because the 

department calculated those figures. 

 

And sir, I would simply ask you to ask your officials and give 

us those figures because they have been calculated. 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think responsible 

taxation measures mean that you can't just 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

look at one sector of the economy, you have to look at the 

whole economy.  And if you looked at the impact of the PST 

on the economy as a whole, it was damaging.  It was going to 

create the loss of 7,500 jobs. 

 

I have here, and I can get into them, although I don't think it 

will be necessary, people who have testified in statements 

through the media and reports that they've given, indicating 

how devastating the PST was to a wide range of industries in 

the province of Saskatchewan, from service industries to 

people who were selling reading materials, a whole wide range 

of industries -- how every consumer including the farm 

population was going to be impacted by paying a massive new 

tax which was going to reduce the amount of consumer dollar 

that would be available. 

 

You can't therefore, Mr. Speaker, look at one sector of the 

economy without looking at all of the economy and how this 

kind of a tax would impact on it.  The impact of this tax, of 

$440 million as the members opposite had estimated, over four 

years, was a very devastating impact on the economy of the 

whole. 

 

The farm population still maintains a $150 million benefit 

because of the exemptions under The Education and Health 

Tax Act.  That remains, and I think that that's a very substantial 

benefit. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, we may have to be here a 

while, because agriculture today in Saskatchewan is still one of 

our largest sectors of the economy.  It is in a very difficult 

income situation.  As a matter of fact, I believe your officials 

have shown you the graphs that show where net farm realized 

income has dropped below the zero line and in effect is in a 

loss position.  Any added increase in cost to that sector only 

makes that graph dip further down. 

 

And I know, sir, that your officials have those figures.  And I'm 

just asking a simple question.  I don't need a long dissertation 

on your calculations about what the tax did.  I asked about 

farmers and what the average loss per farmer will be in 

Saskatchewan as per this Bill.  Simple. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, if one were to, only 

in isolation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's what you're 

asking, but that's not what I'm talking about.  Because, Mr. 

Chairman, tax policy should be geared to make sure that it 

works in such a way that the whole economy is working in the 

best possible way. 

 

The farm population of Saskatchewan, if the PST had remained 

in place . . . We don't have an average per-farm figure and I 

don't think the former government had an average per-farm 

figure.  There may be a modest difference, but I'm telling the 

House, Mr. Chairman, that when one takes into consideration 

the amount of tax credit that an individual farm operation 

would have got, depending on the farm operation, compared to 

the increased cost because of the wide range of taxes that the 

farmers would have to pay, on which the farm family would 

get no rebate -- everything from restaurant meals to services 

that the farmers would have had to pay after January 1 -- the 

amount would have been negligible. 
 

But there are other costs that would have been imposed 

on farm communities, like on everybody else, because of the 

PST.  Because they don't only pay the PST on goods they buy. 

They would have had to pay increased taxes to their 

municipalities because the analysis showed that, for example, 

the school trustees association indicated that the new provincial 

PST would have cost up to $6 million a year additionally.  

Where would that money come from?  It would have come 

from increased taxes on farms and homes in Saskatchewan. 

 

The rural municipalities would spend more than $9 million per 

year on gravel, Mr. Chairman.  Where would that money come 

from?  That money would come from increased property taxes. 

 

So when you add all of that up, Mr. Chairman, the amount that 

a farm family would have saved -- so-called as the members 

tried to argue -- because of the rebate or the tax credit on the 

PST, as I indicated earlier, would have been negligible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister is trying very 

hard to make this sound plausible.  But unfortunately, he's 

talking to a practising farmer with two sections of land plus a 

little bit.  And I do dabble with the books a little bit and I do 

know what my GST (goods and services tax) rebates are.  And 

I do keep very close track of what we buy and what we sell and 

what the costs are.  And in my particular farming operation it is 

running anywhere between $1,500 and $2,000 a quarter. 

 

Now, that's simply my GST.  In adding up what would have 

happened with the other situation, that would have nearly 

doubled on my farm.  And I don't consider myself to be that 

different from a lot of my neighbours. 

 

Now I realize on a straight grain operation it may be slightly 

less because I'm diversified.  But the minister cannot sit here 

tonight and tell me that there was no net benefit to agriculture 

by harmonizing the two taxes. 

 

And I have simply asked the Minister . . . There are 60,000 

farms in the province.  He must have a number that he could 

say that these farms will lose because, sir, I will lose.  And you 

can add it up any way you want with any kind of excuse you 

want -- I'm going to lose on my farm. 

 

Now I just want you to tell me, sir, what that average loss will 

be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I am informed that 

when this PST was brought in, even then there was no 

calculation by the former government on the so-called benefit 

on the average, to the average farmer, that there might have 

been.  There was no calculation then.  It is not something you 

can calculate that simply. 

 

But along with that, Mr. Chairman, it is important to note 

something else -- that under the PST farm peoples' cash flow 

was being affected in a very significant way.  The farm 

population was asked -- as everybody else who might have got 

a rebate -- pay, wait several months, apply, and then get the 

rebate, so that the cash flow of individual farmers, because they 

had to pay the tax up 



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

front, was a detriment. 

 

By removing the PST, Mr. Chairman, that cash flow problem is 

removed, because the E&H tax exemptions which are there 

now are right up front at the point of purchase, when the farmer 

purchases his piece of equipment or whatever it is that he's 

purchasing which is exempt.  So in a number of ways there is a 

better benefit by a direct exemption as exists under The 

Education and Health Tax Act which exists now, which 

provides benefits of $150 million. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess we're going to 

have to desist on this line of questioning because obviously the 

minister doesn't have an answer. 

 

Mr. Minister, the effect of harmonization meant that your 

particular department had less employees and there was less 

cost to the taxpayer in running the Department of Finance.  

Now with changing horses in mid-stream, can you tell the 

Assembly what new costs you've incurred and how many 

people you're going to have to hire to replace the ones that 

would have changed through harmonization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, nothing changes 

with the elimination of the PST.  There was no change in the 

numbers of personnel.  Down the road there would have been.  

There would have been some provincial employees who would 

have become employees of the federal government instead of 

the province -- not in a significant way.  But because this had 

not gone all the way through the system, none of that has 

changed.  Therefore there is no change in the number of 

employees who are involved in the Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, if those changes had occurred, 

would they have amounted to approximately 40 people and 

about $5 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I am told that if this 

thing had been fully completed it might have involved 

somewhere in the area of 40 people.  The net gain would have 

not been in a major way because we would have shared 50/50 

with the federal government, even though the employees would 

have been working under the federal government jurisdiction. 

 

We may have lost some of these employees to other provinces 

because of the way that the federal government is 

administering this program and therefore there would have 

been that loss to the economic activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  But it is true.  The member is correct.  It would 

have saved some amount of dollars in administration but not 

the full amount because of the 50/50 cost sharing of the 

administration of the program. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, with the passage of this Bill the 

federal government will no longer collect the tax at the border.  

Does the minister have any plans to compensate for this loss in 

the border shopping situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I have no plans at the present time 

to announce.  It is a matter of great concern 

as the member well knows.  I'm sure it was a matter of concern 

under the former administration and it's a concern to ours.  We 

are actively pursuing whatever options may be available to us 

in order to deal with this. 

 

But I might remind the House that one of . . . the PST being in 

place was certainly not of any benefit in trying to deal with that 

situation, because I have statements made from business people 

in Moosomin and business people in Estevan and business 

people who formed an organization along the border 

communities, along the United States border, who make 

presentations to me and other members of our caucus when the 

PST Bill was being introduced, very concerned that the PST 

was going to drive more people to go shopping south of the 

border. 
 

I thought one of the most telling comments was by Mr. 

Symons: 
 

 . . . Marv Symons, who owns a hotel and convenience store 

in Estevan (who said). 

 

 It's one thing for the Americans to be aggressive.  It's another 

thing to spoon feed 'em our business. 

 

I don't mean to use that frivolously, but I think that that reflects 

quite accurately the concern that business people near the 

border of the United States and clearly near the border of 

Alberta were expressing when this tax was coming in.  We 

listened to them as part of our decision making, when we were 

deciding what position the New Democratic Party was to take 

on the PST, and we thought that they had a good point. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, your department must've done 

some analysis of cross-border shopping.  I'm sure that they 

have an idea of what the value of the loss is to the province.  I'd 

ask you a combined question: would you give me your 

department's best Estimates of what the province is losing and 

also tell me are there more sort of consumer goods purchased 

by people going across or do they go across to eat hamburgers 

-- the nature of the goods?  I mean do they buy more TVs or do 

they buy more hamburgers -- this tax loss that we're suffering -- 

which is it? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the loss is in 

consumer goods.  It's not in services, by and large.  So the loss 

is clearly because of the purchases of consumer goods.  The 

amount of tax loss to the province of Saskatchewan is in the 

range of between 1 million and $2 million.  As members will 

understand, it's difficult to be precise in that, but I'm told by the 

people in Finance that the loss is between 1 million and $2 

million a year. 
 

(1945) 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, were most consumer goods 

already taxed at the 7 per cent E&H level prior to 

harmonization? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, most were. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- That's sort of what I thought.  Mr. Minister, 

has your department done any analysis on the impact of 

deharmonizing as far as the resource sectors go?  I would ask 

you to be . . . I'll be generic; I don't ask you



512 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

to go through oil, gas, mining, but put them all together and I'm 

sure they must have some type of an idea of what that loss 

would be. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We have not done a sector analysis, 

Mr. Chairman.  But we did say, and the member will find it in 

the technical analysis which was provided, that: 

 

 The removal of the . . . Education and Health Tax base 

expansions will result in an overall reduction of the 

provincial tax burden by $72.0 million . . . 

 

And here are some of the things that come as a result of that. 

 

 (There will be) an increase in personal disposable income of 

$112 million (at the consumer).  (There will be) an increase 

in personal expenditures on goods and services of $99 

million.  (There will be) an increase in the provincial Gross 

Domestic Product of 0.4 per cent or $76 million; and, an 

increase in employment in the Province by approximately 

2,000 jobs. 

 

That is a very significant impact that comes about because of 

the removal of the PST, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I'm trying to be as brief 

with the minister as possible, but the minister keeps refusing.  I 

did take the time, Mr. Chairman, to read the same list that the 

minister just read.  That wasn't the question I asked. 

 

The question is that Saskatchewan is a primary producer of 

resources -- oil, gas, uranium, gold, you know, potash -- all of 

those sorts of things that we sell in the world market.  I just 

want to know what the best estimation of his officials is of the 

effect that passing this Bill, deharmonizing, will have on that 

particular sector. 

 

The minister is the Minister of Finance. He's trying to design a 

budget; he knows what the revenues are, or he will project 

what the revenues are from oil, gas, potash, and all those 

things.  He must have an idea. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- By the previous government's 

analysis, when they did the sector-specific analysis it was done 

on information provided by the federal government.  We want 

to develop our own information.  We don't find that the federal 

government's information in these kinds of things is 

particularly reliable for our purposes. 

 

So we have not at this point of time done a sector-by-sector 

analysis, the kind of which the member is looking for.  But as 

we develop our budgetary process for the next fiscal year, all of 

that will be taken into consideration.  We will look at where we 

need to do certain things on different sectors in the economy, 

where we need to look at where we might make the tax base 

more fair, where we might look where we need to provide 

some incentives. 

 

That's a process which we will be going through.  But we'll be 

doing it on the basis of the information that we develop here in 

Saskatchewan rather than relying strictly 

on the federal government's statistics, which sometimes are 

accurate and sometimes are not. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if it wasn't getting on 

and Saturday night, one would almost have to laugh.  What the 

minister's trying to tell this House tonight, that bean counting 

on the federal level is different than bean counting on the 

provincial level. 

 

Mr. Minister, the only reason that you don't want to give that 

answer is it flies in the face of the arguments that you've been 

trying to make for months in this province. 

 

Anybody involved with the resource sector knows that there 

was a net benefit; and that net benefit is calculated in many 

ways, and that net benefit can do various things for your 

province.  So I guess I agree with you on one thing, sir: you 

calculate that net benefit and compare it to what you can 

achieve in other areas. 

 

But, sir, you know it's there, and I don't know why you don't 

stand on your feet and be truthful with the House and just say 

the net benefit was estimated at -- I don't care if you want to 

qualify it as federal, provincial, or whatever -- just tell this 

House what it was calculated at. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, in the long run there 

obviously would have been some benefit from this process to 

the resource industry.  But there would have been a net cost -- a 

negative net cost -- to the consumer.  There would have been a 

negative cost to the small-business people in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And that's why I repeat, as I said earlier, Mr. 

Chairman, that when one looks at the impact of a tax measure, 

one has to look at the overall impact on all of the economy.  

And when you look at the overall impact of the PST, it was 

very damaging to the Saskatchewan economy; it was damaging 

to the Saskatchewan consumer, the working person, the farmer; 

it was damaging to the small-business people in such a way, 

Mr. Chairman, that the only appropriate thing to do was what 

the people of Saskatchewan wanted us to do, and that is 

eliminate the PST. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, if the minister wishes to give 

me a net hurt number, I'd like that too.  Give me the net hurt, 

and give me the net benefit.  Okay?  Give me the two of them, 

side by side.  And then we'll let the folks at least compare them.  

You give the one for the resource sector and then give me your 

worst-case scenario on your consumer sector and we'll let the 

folks out there compare the two and judge for themselves.  

Okay? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well as I said earlier, we don't have 

a sector-by-sector analysis, but I can tell . . . but I'll get to the 

global . . . okay, here's the whole thing. 
 

The cost to the Saskatchewan economy would have been over 

$440 million in four years.  The cost to the Saskatchewan 

economy would have been 7,500 jobs.  That's the global figure 

that the member is looking for. 
 

If he wants to know the so-called net benefit to the resource 

sector, I can't provide it to him.  We have not done that kind of 

a sectoral analysis, but we will be doing a review of all of the 

tax measures and how they impact  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

on different parts of the economy as we do our budgetary 

analysis between now and the next budget. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I find it quite strange that the 

minister has taken the time to do the calculations for the 

numbers that he wants to give, but the other numbers that were 

probably calculated long in advance of the minister's numbers, 

he can't seem to find or they're missing or he . . . I think the 

minister probably has more of a mental block as far as giving 

them out in comparison to his own rather than the fact that they 

don't exist, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Minister, what is the department's estimate of the impact 

on jobs with synchronization and without it?  I know your party 

has said that getting rid of it, as you just said now, is going to 

create 7,500 jobs.  But I do know that prior to the election -- 

and I do know this for sure, Mr. Finance Minister -- the 

department did do some calculations about the net benefit 

job-wise with synchronization.  I have a fairly good memory 

and I do know that that was there.  So would you please ask 

your officials what that was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, there are two ways 

to look at it.  The only analysis the former government done 

was an alleged analysis of the long-run impact of the 

harmonization -- the new term members use opposite is 

synchronization when it used to be called harmonization -- that 

the harmonization would have in the long run, according to that 

analysis which I personally question, would have in their 

opinion brought about some development of some jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

But when you take into consideration the kind of impact that 

the PST and the harmonization would have had in the short 

run, then I submit that the catch-up that would have been 

necessary, because of the damage that would have been done in 

the short run, it would have been impossible to make up for 

that short-run damage. 

 

It was brought in at the wrong time.  It was brought in at a time 

when it was extremely detrimental to the economy.  It was 

brought in only months after the GST.  It was going to result in 

a massive reduction in consumer spending.  It was most 

certainly going to result in the closing of many small-business 

operations in the province of Saskatchewan.  And it was going 

to in the short run eliminate, in four years, 7,500 jobs. 

 

That's the short-run impact of the PST.  Now according -- as 

the member says and I take him at his word -- according to the 

analysis that the former government did, in the long run there 

may have been some positive impact.  But then I was told the 

same thing when the government said that there was going to 

be a positive impact out of the Free Trade Agreement.  And I 

have yet to see it. 

 

I have yet to see it in Ontario where they have lost somewhere 

in the area of 300,000 jobs because of the Free Trade 

Agreement, and where in Saskatchewan there has been a very 

negative impact because of the Free Trade Agreement.  The 

same arguments were 

used in the FTA (Free Trade Agreement), the same arguments 

were used in the PST, and in both cases those same arguments 

were flawed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, once again the minister 

has an aversion to giving us a number.  My recollection of 

Estimates in this House over the last six and a half years was 

that the former opposition used to sit and ask the Finance 

minister questions all the time about simple numbers.  And this 

minister likes to stand and talk politics. 

 

Well I can assure the minister, as far as this particular topic 

goes, we can stand and talk politics for days in here if that's his 

desire.  But I think in the spirit of co-operation I simply asked 

the minister for a number, not a whole bunch of qualifications.  

If he wants to talk about free trade, I'll talk about free trade.  I 

can assure the minister I can talk on it as long as he can. 

 

But that's not the question at hand.  The question at hand is 

some simple answers on this particular Bill, and I've asked the 

minister for that job number.  Would he please give it to the 

Assembly and would he please table the two analyses. 

 

And one final thing, Mr., Minister, before I take my seat on this 

question.  You said you doubt the numbers put together by the 

former government.  Well, sir, you must doubt the numbers 

that the same officials have put together for you, because the 

same folks are spinning the same story, only two different 

ways.  So if you're personally doubting, Mr. Minister, I suggest 

that you may have to change things over there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Chairman, that it is really quite inappropriate for any member 

of this legislature to say those kinds of things and make those 

kinds of allegations about officials who are not able to defend 

themselves, whether it's in this House or whether it's outside of 

the House.  And I regret that the member opposite is doing that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Get off the rhetoric and answer the 

question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not the rhetoric.  You may call 

it rhetoric, Mr. Chairman, but I will stand here at any time, at 

any time, as long as you want, and I will not allow to go by, a 

member of the opposition or a member of this side of the 

House, to allege that officials are giving wrong information. 

 

Now all I'm saying to the member opposite is that the analysis 

that was provided by the former government when they 

brought in the PST, was an analysis that was hurriedly put 

together when the pressure and the heat was on from the public 

in order to try to justify the implementation of the PST. 

 

If the member wants, I will get for him the analysis which he 

has, I know, that the former government put together, because 

they tabled it in the House.  But I'm saying that I want to 

develop -- by careful research, which is the way this 

government works -- my own analysis and this government's 

own analysis. 

  



514 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

The part that we have done already is that the PST, brought in 

at this time, would have been damaging to the economy and 

would have lost 7,500 jobs in four years.  It would have taken 

consumer spending . . . a big blow to consumer spending.  

There would have been a price increase, according to the 

former government's analysis, of 1.7 per cent.  People will buy 

less because of the reduced amount of consumer spending they 

would have.  There would have been an impact on cross-border 

shopping. 

 

When we considered all of those things, we decided that we 

had to find a better way.  And we're going to be looking at a 

better way in which to address this overall problem of taxation, 

a way that's going to be different than the PST, because we 

really could not live with it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister makes it very 

tempting for this side of the House also to launch into a self 

righteous tirade.  That minister was the one that said he took 

issue with his officials.  It wasn't me.  It was he that stood in his 

place and said he took issue with the information provided.  I 

simply reminded him that he was working with basically the 

same deck. 

 

Now you say, Mr. Minister, that that analysis was hurried, it 

was rushed, there was no thought.  Well I suggest to you, sir, 

that there was a whole lot more thought went into it than the 

all-of-a-sudden switch in the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

Party's stance on this particular thing from the member from 

Churchill Downs right through the summer into an election 

campaign.  Well all of a sudden, you had some magic figures in 

your hands. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now we've had two months since the election and I guarantee 

you that's a shorter period of time than in the analysis done by 

the Department of Finance prior to harmonization.  So come 

on, Mr. Minister, don't try and lead the public on about your 

splendid analytical ways. 

 

Now, sir, I asked you a simple question, a comparison of the 

numbers on jobs created with synchronization and without it, 

and would you table those two studies in the legislature please, 

sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sorry to take so 

long on this one, but I wanted to make sure that I provided the 

best numbers I could have for the member opposite so we don't 

get engaging into debate again here. 

 

But I want to put it in the context of the way it has to be put.  

The former government, in the statements that they made, said 

that in the long run there would be a benefit in jobs.  Now there 

was never any comment made about what long run meant.  It 

could be 5 years, it could be 10 years, it could be 20 years.  

And that was never stated, because I'm not sure . . . and I'm not 

critical of that because I'm not sure how you can accurately 

state that, because that really depends on the time when the 

economy settles down -- when all of this has run through, when 

things have turned around, and then you might have this 

benefit. 
 

And according to what the former government said, that 

in the long run there would have been a net impact of 5,000 

jobs.  But if you balance that off on what was happening in the 

short run during this transition, at which time the former 

government said that there were going to be significant 

problems -- they admitted that; said it publicly -- there would 

have been a loss of 7,500 jobs. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, it doesn't take a mathematical genius to 

understand that if you lose 7,500 jobs in the transition period, 

and you hope that you might gain 5,000 jobs in the long run, 

whatever that might be, you really haven't gained anything.  

And so when you even put it in those kinds of terms, Mr. 

Chairman, the appropriate thing was to eliminate the PST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we are making progress.  

Will the minister table those two particular analytical studies to 

this Assembly so that all members may become apprised of all 

of the diligent research that went into the both of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to tell the 

member that those studies have already been tabled in this 

House, as well as have been already tabled the economic 

offsets which I released a month or five weeks ago.  They've 

been tabled in the House and they're already available. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member 

that there was a lot more research went into what 

harmonization would do for the economy than what this 

document provides to members of this House or this province 

of what deharmonization will do for the economy. 

 

And I would hope that the Minister of Finance is a little more 

diligent in his undertakings than what he has provided in this 

particular document for people to truly understand the financial 

choices that are available to us in this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you don't have anything more significant than 

this to table, I think I'll leave it up to the people to judge as to 

the job you're doing. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I just 

have a simple question for the minister if he could keep his 

answer in simple terms. 

 

What effect has your analysis . . . or your analysis has 

determined the effect that this Act is going to have on child tax 

credits, in terms of the low income people and also those 

individuals that are on social assistance.  Could you tell the 

Assembly the impact that this will have on 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

those individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, first of all there is 

no change of . . . in any way for people on social assistance.  

There is no impact one way or the other.  There is some impact 

on low income people with children.  That is being addressed.  

There is a net benefit in a major way to single people, to low 

income senior citizens who have no children.  So there 

obviously is a need therefore for a review of the income 

support programs that are provided by governments for low 

income people. 

 

The Minister of Social Services several weeks ago did 

announce that the government is undertaking a review of 

assistance programs for low income people so that we can 

provide a reasonable, rational, equitable system of support for 

low income people which we will be doing when the review is 

complete. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, are 

you aware of the . . . is your department aware of the study that 

was done by an all-party committee of the House of Commons 

that looked at this whole situation and the best way to place 

money in the hands of low income people and that the most 

cost effective, most effective way to enhance the buying power 

of people in this situation was indeed through a family or child 

tax credit system?  Are you aware of that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, obviously the department has 

seen it.  I have yet not had time to study it myself.  There is a 

need for us to look at this as we do the study which we are 

undertaking and the review which we are undertaking on 

income support programs for low income people and the poor 

which I have indicated that the Minister of Social Services has 

announced we are doing at the present time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, if after you take the time to read 

this particular document and study, would the minister look 

seriously at implementing the recommendations of that 

particular committee if they make the most economic sense for 

Saskatchewan and also some of the other recommendations 

that go along with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We will take into consideration all 

of the information that is available and develop some of our 

own.  This is not an area in which I think governments, no 

matter what their political stripe or where they are, should be 

taking lightly.  We are not going to take this area lightly.  We 

think it's important.  And we will do all that we have to do in 

order to make sure that what comes out of the other end, when 

we're in the position to make decisions, are the appropriate 

kinds of things that address the problem in a meaningful way. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm glad to hear that answer 

from the minister because if there is a very significant benefit 

in this area that is achieved through the child tax credit system . 

. . the family tax credit system, and it points squarely at 

reintroducing some synchronization of our taxation system, 

would the minister be prepared to, in conjunction with the 

family tax credit study, as prepared by Social Services, to 

reconsider, if that makes the most sense? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll certainly be taking that into 

consideration as part of the larger study.  There are some 

benefits.  I agree with the member opposite in providing this 

kind of assistance on a more regular basis than on an annual 

basis, that's . . . the principle I do not argue with.  And that's 

going to be part of the consideration that we'll be undertaking. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, would the minister give us the 

volume of dollars, that impact, as it relates to the total cost the 

family tax credit would have been. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The original estimate indicated that 

it would involve $35 million; the revised estimate indicates that 

it would have in fact been $26.5 million; and the amount that 

has been paid out, up to the last quarter, the first three quarters, 

was $19 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do I understand you correct that you paid in 

the third quarter, or the fourth quarter of this year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  Just the first, second, and third 

quarter.  The  first, second, and third quarter, and the amount 

that has been expended in those three quarters is $19 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How many families are affected by the 

expenditure of those $19 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- About 70,000. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And how many children would that have 

been? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We estimate about 120,000. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So in my observation of this, that there's 

70,000 families with about 1.6 children per family.  What 

would that average out at at a per family . . . At 1.5 how many 

dollars would they get?  Can you give me that figure off hand? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We can do that, but I just wanted to 

add, mention something about the statistics I'm giving you 

because I don't want to mislead the House or the member. 

 

We don't have the exact numbers because we have to wait for 

the federal government to provide them, because the way the 

system was set up, everything is relied on the federal 

government doing the work on this kind of thing.  That is not 

provided until when, the end of the fiscal year?  That is not 

provided until the end of the fiscal year. 

 

So I'm giving you estimations as best as I can, but when we do 

get the federal government numbers, I will give you an 

undertaking that I will provide them to you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On that payment for the family tax credit, 

that's the fiscal year end, not the calendar year end then.  Is that 

it?  Okay. 

 

How many of them . . . do you have that split off in any way in 

rural families, in urban families? 

  



516 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

(2015) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We don't have it.  We have to wait 

until we get, as I indicated, the statistics from the federal 

government. 

 

But I can assure the member opposite that if he wishes -- it's 

better if he reminds me in the letter, but if he wishes -- as soon 

as we get them from the federal government I'll make them 

available. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, is the federal government 

paying the equivalent amount to the exact dollar in the GST on 

the family tax credit on the same basis? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm informed that the answer is no.  

The federal government provides some tax credit for 

individuals, the provincial did not.  So the answer to your 

question is no. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I just have one final question for the 

minister, Mr. Chairman.  How is it, Mr. Minister, that you will 

rely totally upon the federal government for figures as far as 

the expenditures for 120,000 children and 70,000 families and 

so far $19 million in a harmonized tax system, and yet on 

resourced revenue, you just discredit the feds totally.  You 

don't accept their numbers; you don't care what they are. 

 

I mean we got the same guys on the federal side, sir, 

calculating for 120,000 kids and you won't accept their figures 

on 8,000 oil wells and a few mines.  It just seems kind of a 

contradiction, Mr. Minister, that we needed to get clarified 

here.  Why is one set of numbers all right from the feds and the 

other not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer's very simple.  Because 

one is hard data, one is hard data.  It's the statistics, that's the 

numbers of children, numbers of families and so on.  The other 

number is an estimation based on an economic model which is 

provided by the federal government. 

 

You take three economists and you ask them to give you an 

economic model and you at least get two different economic 

models.  So although one is hard data, the other one is simply 

an estimation based on an economic model.  That is a very 

significant difference and that's why I say what I say. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, before the officials leave I 

would just like to thank the minister and his officials.  And I'd 

like to say to the minister that I do respect your officials a 

whole lot.  I had the opportunity to work with all of them on 

several occasions and they are very competent people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

thank the member for those comments and I accept 

what he has just said.  And I want to . . . let's put aside the other 

comments we both made.  And I want to thank the members 

opposite for the questions.  They were good questions.  And I 

look forward to the next time when we can engage in this kind 

of debate again. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow Valley 

Authority and the Wascana Centre Authority 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move Bill 16 now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the Bill now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 
 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 3 be 

now moved a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 4 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4 

now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 2 now 

be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

(2030) 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Government Financial Procedure 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure again 

to resume debate on the supply motion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- This is such a fundamental question of process to 

the opposition and a great deal of discussion regarding this 

motion is needed.  We believe, in opposition, the only way for 

proper process to move forward was in a budgetary process.  

We agreed to limit the discussion in the budget process and go 

directly into Estimates, but so far we have not seen any answer 

from the government side.  What is wrong with us asking 

questions of the various ministers regarding their respective 

departments? 

 

I had a number of questions specific to each ministry from my 

constituency, some of these which were concerns in the health 

care areas, concerns about the facilities in Eatonia and Eston; 

concerns in education regarding the high school, for example, 

in Eston, Saskatchewan; the low enrolments in rural schools. 
 

Some of the other concerns centred around the recreational 

complexes in various communities in my constituency, the rec 

plex in Kindersley for example and the rec plex in Eston.  And 

we had a number of concerns specific to Highway 317 which is 

in my constituency and it joins the Wilkie constituency; 

concerns regarding the community college in Kindersley as 

well; the Sask Works program; environmental concerns relative 

to the oil industry; a number of questions specific to 

Saskatchewan 

Crop Insurance; a number of concerns and questions specific to 

GRIP (gross revenue insurance program); questions specific to 

the oil and gas industry; questions regarding rural hotels and 

electronic gaming; and primarily, I guess, the question is tax 

revenue and where is it going to come from for this new 

government. 

 

Because of the serious concerns about the supply motion, we 

have a lot of questions that need to be answered.  We don't 

believe the Finance minister would be able to answer all of 

those specific-type questions relative to the various 

departments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's at this time I'd like to move an amendment to 

this motion, seconded by the member from Morse.  The motion 

is as follows: 

 

 That all words after the phrase "fiscal year:" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 (1) The government shall table Estimates for each 

department, crown corporation, board and 

commission consistent with the constitutional 

conventions of Saskatchewan and the rules of this 

Assembly; 

 

 (2) when tabled in the Assembly, the Estimates are hereby 

referred to the Committee of Finance and shall be 

dealt with in the normal manner except that the 

government will call Estimates on a daily basis until 

they are approved or the Assembly is prorogued; 

 

 (3) the time provided for the budget debate shall, for this 

procedure only, be limited to 15 minutes. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out a 

number of things in this discussion on the supply motion and 

the amendment that I find rather interesting about why we are 

where we are and why we're doing what we're doing. 

 

There's a number of things, Mr. Speaker, that I find 

substantially interesting.  We had tabled in this Assembly a 

book called 1991-92 Financial Report, and in it there were 

some things were significant that I think should be drawn to the 

attention of the public. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance stood earlier in this 

House and said they had time for this or they didn't have time 

for that.  It was convenient for him to hide behind the role of a 

new government when it was to his benefit and not say 

anything about facts and figures that dealt with things that I 

know that the Department of Finance had, and I believe that he 

could have easily had prepared himself for answering those 

questions in a way that would have been open and would have 

provided this House with the information that was pertinent to 

establish some of the things that we wanted to talk about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this book is a summary of income, and it deals 

with two columns in this book.  One, it deals with what was 

forecast for 1991-92, and it deals with it very 

  



518 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

close to what we would have dealt with on a budget-line basis 

from the spring of 1991.  And when we look through that, what 

they have alongside that table is another of what actually 

happened in 1990-91. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that's what they did on that one.  They didn't 

want to show to this Assembly what the real income was, 

because in fact, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance would 

have had to justify his creative arithmetic in relation to the 

Estimates on the deficit that he brought forward.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think that is one interesting point. 

 

The second thing that he did is when he came to expenditures, 

he knew that he would have to justify the expenditures that he 

had had to this point, and in that case he brought in two . . . 

four lines actually, one on actual for '90-91.  And in the light of 

what he provided for us, he did put in actually what was spent 

from April through to this point in time.  I'm not just sure of the 

exact date when this would have been issued for; however that 

is what he brought in.  Through this process, he could increase 

the cost and decrease the income without having to justify it in 

the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that causes us on this side of the House, as 

an opposition, a considerable amount of problem, because we 

could not ask, we could not come to any kind of realization on 

what each individual line department had for income, what 

each individual line department had for expense, nor could we 

inquire of him how these related to the kinds of things that we 

thought were pertinent for what is going to be spent from here 

to the end of this fiscal year.  We have no way of coming to 

that realization of those numbers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Finance, through the 

discussion he had here on the E&H and the family income tax 

credit . . . is what he's going to provide us for in his review and 

his overview of the Estimates as it relates to Rural 

Development, Agriculture, or any of the other departments -- of 

Health -- he's got to be kidding not only himself but the whole 

of the province of Saskatchewan.  Because I don't think he can 

do it. 

 

The second point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is this: that 

throughout this book he took the time to put together exactly 

what it would have been considered in a mini budget.  He put 

the subvotes in, he put all of those information items in here on 

what he is going to cost out.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what 

you would normally find in a budget. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, those points tell me that, number one, he did 

have the time to put together the actual figures.  He did have 

the time to do that, but his constraint was that he didn't want to 

have the ministers of the Crown answering the questions that 

were going to come from this opposition, because he knew that 

we knew what was in those departments prior to him taking 

over office.  And he also knew that we knew what the answers 

were, and therefore could quiz his ministers in a way that they 

wouldn't be able to give the answers in a proper fashion. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the department . . . or the 

Government of Saskatchewan decided they weren't 

going to allow the royal opposition, the loyal opposition, to 

deal with the Estimates in the proper fashion.  That's the reason 

why that minister decided that he was going to change the way 

things have traditionally been done through custom and 

precedent for over 400 years in the parliamentary system. 

 

He decided to change it and, Mr. Speaker, it's an example of 

the kinds of things that this three weeks of government and 

Legislative Assembly process have been subjected to by a 

government that said they were going to be open and honest, 

reveal the things that were there. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they have been less that realistic in an 

honest approach to the focus of providing a budget.  They have 

been less than honest with us in its relationship to some of the 

Bills they brought forward. 

 

And to top it all off, Mr. Speaker, they wanted us to approve 

the amount of spending that we're going to be doing in this last 

quarter.  They want to have us from last . . . from this week 

Monday to now have all of the assessments done, to have an 

understanding of all of those Estimates, and he wanted us, six 

days later, to have a review of all that process. 

 

Top that with, Mr. Speaker, some very, very crushing, 

fundamentally wrong kinds of Bills that they put into this 

House.  It is, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, a very, very sad day 

for Saskatchewan that this Finance minister would provide this 

kind of a financial statement to this Assembly and not even let 

the members of this Assembly discuss and review the 

expenditures that he's going to have in his budget from here on. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is a budget.  He presented it as a financial 

paper because he didn't have the courage to have his ministers 

and then this government stand there and defend what they 

were going to spend their money on. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wish to make 

a few comments pertaining to the amendment before the House 

on this particular motion by the Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would say through you to the Finance minister 

and all the members of this House, that if the members of that 

government truly believed the rhetoric that they have put out in 

the province of Saskatchewan, this business about 

co-operating, about changing the ways that things are done, 

then I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Finance 

would have approached the opposition and explained the bind 

that he was in. 

 

The minister stood in his place in this House and gave all sorts 

of reasons of why he had to suspend the rules of this 

legislature, why he had to change many years of precedent, 

why the things that our forbears in this House and in this 

province . . . took and earned as their right. 

 

And instead of coming to the opposition and saying, because of 

the unique circumstances, we would ask you 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

to be co-operative, that we know we have new ministers who 

would not be totally conversant with the previous financial 

picture as laid down by the previous government; we wish to 

come before this Assembly and put our stamp on the final 

quarter spending.  And by putting our stamp on that final 

quarter spending we're going to need to have some 

co-operation, we are going to need to do things a little bit 

different than perhaps we have in the past. 

 

And I am sure, Mr. Speaker, with that type of approach that 

this opposition would have been most co-operative.  Probably 

time limits could have been worked out for each minister.  

Probably certain criteria could have been worked out where the 

remarks and the questioning would have been limited simply to 

the expenditures made by the new administration and have 

nothing to do with expenditures made by the previous 

administration.  And if that line of questioning had to be fairly 

narrow that the two House leaders could have sat down, Mr. 

Speaker, in co-operation, and worked upon a line of 

questioning, narrow in its focus, but still all-encompassing and 

still allowing members of this legislature to exercise their 

traditional rights and privileges.  And we would not have had 

to have a Bill with the heavy hand of setting aside the rules and 

regulations that have been developed over time, that I suggest 

to you, Mr. Speaker, have a lot of credibility and credence 

attached to them.  And instead the decision is to come in and 

use the heavy hand of the New Democratic Party majority in 

this House. 

 

(2045) 

 

And it brings me back, Mr. Speaker, as I have suggested on so 

many other occasions in this House, on so many of the matters 

that we've had to deal with here in the last three weeks, and that 

is the only rationale that I can possibly arrive at, that any 

thinking person in this province can possibly arrive at, and that 

is the government has a political agenda which doesn't have 

anything to do with the sound financial management of this 

province.  This government is on an agenda -- a vindictive one 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker -- and the way they wish to 

accomplish this is to set aside the things that we have taken as 

our rights as citizens in this province and supersede those with 

an agenda by this particular government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Kindersley pointed out why it 

is absolutely fundamental that members of this legislature have 

the opportunity to question ministers of the Crown as always 

has happened in this legislature vis-a-vis their various areas of 

concern.  And I said, Mr. Speaker, that could have been done in 

a narrow frame, agreed upon mutually, so that we do not have 

to go through the exercise of having on the books of this 

province this heinous motion brought in by the Minister of 

Finance, which takes away the rules and precedents and 

procedures of this House.  And, Mr. Speaker, I find that 

reprehensible, that we have had to go through this particular 

debate on this Bill when probably all of the questioning of the 

various ministers could have been handled in a much shorter 

time. 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that those things could have been agreed 

upon and handled in a very different manner than 

what this government has presented to this House.  And that is 

why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment.  And I 

would urge all members of this legislature, before we set aside 

what has been proven and true in this province, that we all 

support this amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just two or three very brief 

comments and I will not take a great deal of time of the House. 

 

I want to say to the House and to you, Mr. Speaker, that there 

indeed is an interest on the part of the members in the 

government, and I am sure that there is an interest in the 

members opposite, in sound financial management.  That is one 

of the reasons why it's important to dispose of this supply Bill 

by the legislature, in a vote of the legislature, rather than 

continuing to fund the operations of the government in the last 

fiscal year through special warrants. 

 

That was clearly an option that was available to the 

government.  We could have used it.  But we decided that there 

was enough concern in the public of Saskatchewan, and 

certainly concern on the part of the members in the government 

side of the House, about special warrants, that we wanted the 

legislature to vote on a supply Bill which is really -- I guess 

this is not an accurate analogy but in some ways a voting on a 

special warrant -- is a supply Bill to pay for the expenditures 

that are necessary to complete this fiscal year by the end of 

March of 1992. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, what I have tried to do, and what the 

government has attempted to do, is provide the supply that is 

being requested so that the members can deal with it and vote 

on it.  We will have a right, this legislature will have a full 

right, to review those expenditures when the next budget is 

brought in for the next fiscal year because during the debate on 

that budget not only will the proposals in the budget be debated 

and not only will the Estimates of that budget be debated in 

committee, but so will the supplementary Estimates be debated 

which will be the Estimates for this fiscal year that were paid 

by special warrant and by interim supply. 

 

So all of that will be available at that time and ministers will 

have to justify the expenditures for this fiscal year, as they 

should, even though those expenditures were made under the 

budget of the former government. 

 

But rather than, Mr. Speaker . . . finally I want to say that rather 

simply continuing with the special warrant situation it is 

important in our view that it is this legislature who deals with 

the supply as I think is appropriate. 

 

That doesn't mean, Mr. Speaker, that at some time in the future 

there will not be special warrants.  They are there for a 

purpose.  They are there for the purpose that in case of 

emergency or special circumstances a government may from 

time to time have to deal with special warrants.  But when there 

is an opportunity for the legislature to deal with supply as there 

is an opportunity here in this short session, then I think we 

should take advantage of it and that's why this supply Bill is 

here today. 

 

And so, although I understand the members opposite concern, I 

want to make it clear that it was our view that  



520 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

under the circumstances and the shortness in time there really 

was no other alternative but to proceed in this form and that's 

why it's here and that's why I think, Mr. Speaker, that the 

amendment is . . . I cannot support the amendment and I will 

ask the House to instead support the main motion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Point of order.  Are we talking about the 

motion or are we talking about the amendment?  I understood 

you to say motion, sir. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

The division bells rang from 8:53 p.m. until 9:02 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lorje 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Tchorzewski Hamilton 

Lingenfelter Johnson 

Koskie Trew 

 Shillington 

Scott Anguish 

McPherson Goulet 

Kujawa Kowalsky 

Crofford Carson 

Harper Mitchell 

Renaud Cunningham 

Langford Upshall 

Jess Hagel 

Haverstock Bradley 

-- 31 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Goohsen 

Swenson D'Autremont 

Boyd  

-- 9 

MOTIONS 

 

Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on 

Crown Corporations 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Regina Dewdney, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Langford be substituted for that of Mr. 

Anguish on the list of members on the Standing Committee 

on Crown Corporations. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Substitution of Member on the Standing Committee on 

Public Accounts 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Hillsdale, by leave of the Assembly: 

 

 That the name of Mr. Anguish be substituted for 

that of Mr. Langford on the list of members on the Standing 

Committee of Public Accounts. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask for leave 

to introduce some visitors. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative 

Assembly, it's indeed my pleasure to welcome from my 

constituency Mr. Steven Ross, who is here supervising some 

young boxers.  They've entered a boxing card here, a provincial 

boxing card here from right here in Regina hosted by the 

Regina club.  So along with Steven Ross, our three young 

boxers, Greg Naytowhow, Curtis Munroe, and Duncan Bird. 

 

And along with the boxers are of course Pearl Stockdale, who 

works for Touchwood File Hills Tribal Council.  And please 

welcome these people.  And before we extend the House 

welcome, I would like to say a few words in Cree also to the 

young boxers. 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 

 

Okay, please welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, I would also ask for leave to 

welcome the guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my pleasure to join with 

my colleague from Cumberland to welcome Steven Ross and 

the boxers.  And I especially want to welcome to the Assembly 

a former colleague, teaching colleague of mine, Pearl 

Stockdale, with whom I spent several years at Carlton 

Comprehensive High School in Prince Albert -- not only in the 

class-room, but also on many committees.  And it's good to see 

you again, Pearl.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to 

inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 

resolution, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly.  And therefore, Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the last quarter of the fiscal year ending March 31, 

1992, the sum  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

of $954,534,200 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question 

for the minister.  And I suspect, given the exercise we went 

through a little earlier in the House, I'll get about the same 

answers, but we'll give it a shot here and see what happens 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Minister, in the Department of Economic Diversification 

and Trade -- I believe it's page 27, item 4 -- you have allocated 

a sum of $1.1182 million.  Can the minister please tell us what 

portion of that was gained by closing down the trade offices in 

various centres around the world -- and I refer to Minneapolis, 

Hong Kong, and Zurich -- what contingent liabilities he still 

has there vis-a-vis his office space, and what other contingent 

liabilities he would have vis-a-vis employees, foreign nationals, 

that were employed in those various trade offices? 

 

The Chair: -- I wonder if the Minister of Finance might 

introduce his officials -- I neglected to ask him to do that 

earlier -- before he answers? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Basically the same people are here: 

our deputy, John Wright, who's seated on my right; Kirk 

McGregor, executive director taxation, intergovernmental 

affairs on my left behind me; and John Law, executive director 

of the Treasury Board branch on my right behind me. 

 

Now if I may respond to the member's question opposite.  The 

savings will only be nominal in this fiscal year, but taking into 

account the closure of Zurich, at the end of this fiscal year, 

savings of about $1.8 million will be realized.  In subsequent 

years these savings will be reduced by expenditures for 

contractual agents as we need them from time to time.  But the 

savings in a full fiscal year, which will be next fiscal year, will 

be $1.8 million -- this year very negligible because pretty well 

the expenditures have been made. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, as part of that question I asked 

if you had any contingent . . . as part of the question I asked, 

did you have any continuing, contingent liabilities vis-a-vis 

office space and foreign nationals that are continuing to cost 

the Government of Saskatchewan money in those particular 

locations? 

 

(2115) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In response to the member's 

question, yes, there is office space.  We're in the process now 

of arranging sublet leasing of the office space so that we can 

cover that off. 

 

There is obviously some staff that has been let go and there is a 

process of working out the arrangements for the appropriate 

severance that will be made.  I don't have that, but as soon as it 

is available, I can assure the member that I will provide it to 

him.  And I am asking my officials to keep track of these kinds 

of questions so I can do that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess I should 

make the point immediately, Mr. Minister, that 

this is exactly what the opposition has been pointing out during 

this debate for some time. 

 

No one on this side of the House expects that you will have any 

of these answers.  And I'm sure your officials will be very 

diligent in trying to provide us with information. 

 

But the very fact is, sir, you've said to me that you have 

contingent liabilities of one million eight hundred dollars . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . well, a portion of that, a portion of 

that, you just said, was tied up in trying to sublease office 

space; that you still have foreign nationals that you're dealing 

with; so obviously, sir, a portion of the money that you have on 

this particular line is involved with those trade offices in 

dealing with the former employees. 

 

Now can you tell me, Mr. Minister, in this fourth quarter of 

spending by your government, what portion of that figure 

allocated in the area of trade will go to those contingent 

liabilities that we have to deal with? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- So that the House and the member 

doesn't misunderstand, when I said the 1.8 million, I said that 

1.8 million we'll be saving next year, not this year.  I also said 

that in this year, the amount of saving will be negligible 

because there are certain commitments that have been made 

because of the fact that the offices existed there. 

 

So there are basically no savings in this year.  The $1.8 million 

is the benefit of the saving next year because the offices in the 

next fiscal year will not have to be budgeted for. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, again to the minister, and I'm 

sorry this is taking so long, but I specifically asked the 

minister, of the amount allocated in the fourth quarter spending 

of your government, how much of that figure you have 

allocated there is tied up with these contingent liabilities, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am told that the total budgeted 

there for January to March is $1.1 million . . . is $1.18 million 

-- how much of that is going to be required to deal with the 

questions that you raise?  I'm not able to give you the answer to 

that one because of the lease . . . subleasing arrangements 

which are being attempted to make.  So we have to know what 

happens there out of that, what we can cover off, maybe all of 

that cost of the lease that we're committed to. 

 

And secondly, I can't tell you about the severance because I'm 

not sure that that's all completed.  But when it's completed, I 

can tell the members opposite I will provide you with that 

information in the form of correspondence. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Obviously, Mr. Minister, there will be some 

portion of what you have allocated for trade used up in some of 

these areas. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan trades a lot in order to 

survive in the world today.  Don't you agree, sir, that given this 

fairly small amount and the work that was done by the trade 

offices in garnering new trade opportunities for 

  



522 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Saskatchewan, that it would not have taken a great number of 

transactions to in fact pay for the continuing operation of these 

offices, at least in the short term?  Because you're going to have 

to pay for the subleasing of these offices probably anyway and 

you're probably going to have to live out the contractual 

arrangements of the people being severed. 

 

And, sir, would not have you have thought it more prudent, 

perhaps, to continue through to the end of your budget year 

with the offices in place, doing work on behalf of the province 

of Saskatchewan and being competitive.  Because I know, from 

visiting the Hong Kong office myself, that there were 

opportunities there that need exploring.  And if there is no one 

there, sir, those opportunities won't happen.  Would you not 

agree that perhaps it would have been wiser to continue to the 

end of your fiscal year, continuing on with those operations, 

and, I suggest, you having a net benefit to the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well obviously that was not the 

view of the government because we made a different decision.  

I am informed by the minister, as the government has been 

informed by the minister, that there were not very significant 

benefits from these trade offices on a value-for-dollar basis.  

We're obviously, as a government, going to have to explore 

other alternatives.  We're going to be using co-operative 

approaches with embassies of the federal government.  We're 

going to be looking at contractual arrangements where we will 

target certain pursuits that we will have to take.  Because there 

is no question, and I don't disagree with the member, that trade 

is very important to Saskatchewan as it is important to Canada.  

And we will just be developing more cost-effective ways in 

which to pursue that trade and develop trade for Saskatchewan 

products around the world. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, to the minister.  Mr. Minister, 

would you agree or disagree that most provinces in Canada 

have trade offices in most of those locations? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I believe Alberta, B.C. (British 

Columbia), Ontario, and Quebec have offices in those 

provinces . . . offices in different parts of the world. Yes 

indeed, that's true. 

 

But the province of Saskatchewan is not Alberta, Ontario, B.C., 

or Quebec; it is the province of Saskatchewan.  And we think 

we can do a better job by using alternative means by which to 

do the pursuit of trade in parts of the world where we think it's 

important to do that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll make one final comment 

and allow one of my colleagues to ask questions. 

 

I would suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that what you're telling 

this Assembly tonight when we look at your allocations for 

trade in the fourth quarter of this budget year, what you're 

saying is that Saskatchewan is indeed smarter than all of these 

other jurisdictions, and that we will do better in the 

international trade situation than those provinces will. 

And I would like you to confirm, Mr. Minister, when we next 

review this subject, when you present your budget, that you 

have figures to show that Saskatchewan indeed is doing better 

than all of these other jurisdictions which do have trade offices. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can assure you that when I present 

the first budget of this new government that the minister will be 

in a position to explain fully, Mr. Chairman, to the members 

opposite who may choose to ask precisely what the government 

has initiated to pursue trade around the world for Saskatchewan 

products, other than through this arrangement that was there 

before, which we decided as a policy decision was not the most 

cost-effective way in which to do it . . . but I can tell the 

member, I repeat again, that when we introduce the first budget 

of our government in the new fiscal year, that opportunity for 

asking the questions and the explanation will be made available 

to him. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I also 

direct my question to the Minister of Finance.  And I would 

just like a short response to this, Mr. Minister.  How many 

hungry children are there in Saskatchewan as we speak? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not sure that I can at this point 

in time provide that kind of detail.  I know for example that just 

the other day the federal government released some statistics 

which I don't have with me.  I don't have that with me but once 

again we'll provide that to the member since he has asked the 

question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Mr. Minister, what is the point whether 

the federal government has statistics for you or not?  Just 

previously you told my colleague here that you didn't trust any 

of the figures from the federal government.  And here you are 

now saying that they're not supplying you with figures.  There's 

a lack of consistency here. 

 

And I find it strange, Mr. Minister, that you can't answer the 

question that I just asked you.  Your battle cry has always been 

64,000 hungry children.  Can you confirm that figure now, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just to make it clear to the member 

. . . the statistics I trust; the forecast I don't want to rely on.  

And that is the difference I remind him once again. 

 

There is no doubt that the number of hungry children or people 

living at a poverty level in Saskatchewan is high.  That is 

something that has developed over the last several years.  It's of 

concern.  That's why we are developing policies to address that.  

We will announce those policies in due course. 

 

The Minister of Social Services has announced a review of all 

income-support programs because it may very well be that the 

way the system works now is inefficient and is ineffective and 

does not provide the kinds of support that are needed 

considering the needs that are there. 

 

We need to do with income-support programs the same 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

thing as we must do with all programs in government, faced 

with the fiscal situation that we inherited, and that is review 

them to see that they meet the needs within the financial ability 

of the province, but meet them more efficiently, more 

effectively, and more cost efficiently. 

 

There needs to be a major restructuring of these kinds of 

programs if the province is to be able to deal with its debt and 

deficit problem, and at the same time, deal with the needs of 

the people, such as the people the member comments on 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I did not ask for 

political rhetoric.  I asked for an answer.  And while you're 

doing all this wonderful planning and stabilizing of your plans, 

children are going hungry. 

 

Mr. Minister, specifically in this budget of yours, how much 

money is directly allocated for the hungry children? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to tell the member that 

because this is only the implementation of the former 

government's budget that the number that was in . . . the 

amount of money designated in that former budget is the 

amount of money that's in there now, and if I am correct, I 

believe it was something like 700,000 that the former 

government had budgeted.  That's exactly the number that's 

being provided because all we're doing here is putting in that 

former government's budget. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But, Mr. Minister, you are the saviours of the 

hungry.  You are the ones that are going to eliminate poverty in 

Saskatchewan.  Are your priorities no different than ours?  And 

specifically it was $740,000 that we put into it.  Now you're 

telling me . . . How much of that money is left, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me assure the member that 

indeed the priorities of this government will be different.  They 

will be different and they will be reflected when this 

government has had an opportunity to do all of the budget 

preparation and the analysis that is required to provide an 

adequate budget. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, in response to the member's question 

about the amount of dollars, it will be one quarter of what was 

budgeted because we're providing money for the final quarter. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order please.  Order, please.  Order, 

please.  Mr. Minister, there's been an official who has arrived 

since you've introduced the officials, and I'd ask that you 

introduce the official to the members of the Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just arrived, Bill Jones, associate 

deputy minister seated over here. 

 

The Chair: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could you indicate to me how long it's going 

to take for you to get your plans in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, all of the provisions 

in the operations of the government, such as income support, 

Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, the 

money that's specifically budgeted to do specific programming 

is there.  We are in the process of reviewing as has been 

announced earlier, a complete review of income-support 

programs so that when we are able to implement a new 

approach and a new program, we are able to do it appropriately 

and adequately and it will be announced in due course.  It will 

be announced by the time we are prepared and ready to 

introduce a new budget. 

 

(2130) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I'm asking on behalf of the 

hungry children of this province.  They have a right to know.  

How long do they have to wait till they get a specific response 

from you? 

 

Mr. Minister, I don't want a long, political rhetoric answer.  

Answer one month, two months, four years.  How long? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I'm responding on behalf of 

the hungry children of Saskatchewan and on behalf of this 

government.  And they will not have to wait nine and a half 

years, Mr. Speaker.  They will only have to wait until the next 

budget is introduced. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- All right, Mr. Minister, I finally got 

somewhere.  I finally got the answer out of you that the hungry 

children of Saskatchewan have to wait until next April when 

you have decided to come down with a budget.  Thank you for 

that answer, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's 

exactly what you said. 

 

How much, Mr. Minister, have you budgeted in this budget for 

the next three or four months to fight forest fires? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just for the information of the 

member, there is in the financial report which we are 

considering here, 1.6 million that is identified as fire 

suppression.  But I want to add some elaboration to that.  Here 

is why those expenditures are required. 

 

There's 0.5 million for the costs of fire fighting administration 

including full-time staff costs, training of fire-fighters, and 

equipment maintenance, which is essential to prepare for the 

1992-93 season. 

 

There is five hundred and sixty-four hundred thousand for a 

radio communications building which was not paid previously 

because it was payable to the commercial revolving fund, and it 

was not deemed to be urgently required as stipulated in the 

special warrant funding arrangement.  There was .6 million 

northern air services late fuel charges and other miscellaneous 

expenses for which late billings have been received.  That's 

what that allocation of money is for -- it's for existing 

continuing administration and for bills that have been incurred 

at the previous time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, since the minister was quoting 

from that document, I would ask him to table that document 

now. 

  



524 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Income security, Mr. Minister, 

could you indicate to me exactly what income security and the 

$569,800 is all about.  Vote 36 on page 52, ordinary 

expenditures to help your officials find it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's strict administration costs for 

the purposes of being able to carry out those responsibilities in 

the last quarter. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thought so, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman.  

I thank the minister for that answer. 

 

On community living I have a concern.  In my constituency, 

Mr. Minister, we have a lot of group homes that are sourced 

from community living in Rosthern, in Hepburn, in Hague; 

independent living in Waldheim.  Can you indicate to me the 

community living budget of almost $5 million there, whether 

that will be adequate to ensure that those facilities will continue 

to exist. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's the same amount of money as 

was allocated by the previous administration.  We're simply 

completing the fourth quarter.  It's no policy change.  If it was 

adequate to do that as was then announced, it's certainly going 

to be adequate to do that.  It's the former budget, and it's the 

same number. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So essentially, Mr. Minister, what you are 

telling me now is that you have no idea whether it's adequate or 

not. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All I can say is that if it was 

adequate for the member opposite when he was minister of 

Social Services, that I would hope that it would be adequate as 

provided here. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, I ask the minister 

whether he is not the government, whether he has not got the 

responsibility to ensure that moneys are adequate and properly 

spent. 
 

This idea of the minister saying, well this was what the former 

government did.  You have your set of priorities, you have your 

set of responsibilities.  And I say now that you are government.  

Accept that responsibility and quit pawning off everything on 

the previous administration. 
 

Mr. Minister, on article 9, line 9, Saskatchewan Works, the 

previous minister has, on numerous occasions, said in the 

media and in this Assembly during question period, that Sask 

Works is on hold.  It's on review.  There will be no more 

money spent until that review has been completed. 
 

There's $1.046 million in your budget.  Could you explain that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can tell the member that, just as 

the Minister of Social Services reported to the House during 

question period, that the Saskatchewan Works program was 

previously budgeted at $3.6 million.  It is overexpended.  It is 

now going to . . . the full allocation will be $3.8 million.  This 

is for the final quarter to provide for that funding.  Even at that 

rate, it is overexpended and money is provided to make sure 

that that's all covered. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, there's a very, very 

important project going up in the North with the Garson Lake 

road, the La Loche road, and so on.  And the community of La 

Loche is certainly depending on that.  Does this mean now that 

you are making a commitment to see that project come to 

fruition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, this doesn't mean that at all.  I 

mean if the member wants specific information on that, once 

again, I will make sure the minister knows about the member's 

question and we will provide you with the information. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's not good enough.  

The people of La Loche want to know.  Their winter livelihood 

is at stake here.  We need answers.  You're not giving us 

answers.  You're pawning it off on a minister that's not here, 

that cannot answer.  That's the fallacy of this whole process 

that we're undergoing here.  That's the problem that this side of 

the House has with this.  No one seems to be answerable for 

any of the expenditures going on.  We're not sure whether 

there's going to be enough. 

 

I ask you, Mr. Minister, the fire-fighting crews that are being 

established and have been established over the last number of 

years in Buffalo Narrows -- will that continue under this 

assessment that you've made of 1.046 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- To the extent that it's required in 

the last quarter, the answer is yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So you're prepared to, up that amount if that's 

necessary, to keep that project alive.  Is that what you're 

saying? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I remind the member that all we're 

dealing with is a supply Bill for the period January through to 

March.  All that was provided for in the proposed budget of the 

former government under that budget will be provided for with 

the funding that's being provided during the period January 

through March. 

 

If you want to know about a specific project, it's very simple.  

You can write to the minister in charge . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Indeed.  I can guarantee to the member 

opposite that if he is really interested in the answer, rather than 

simply just having a discussion here, he just needs to pursue it 

with the minister and the minister will provide the answer.  If 

he wishes to ask me, I will have a record of it made.  We will 

read, answer it, and I'll see that the minister provides him the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, what we are doing here is an 

utterly useless exercise.  Opposition is getting no satisfaction.  

There are no answers, there's no accountability.  We don't 

know what's going on.  Whether this budget is actually going to 

be able to accomplish those things that need to be done. 

 

I ask you again, Mr. Minister: line 16, payment to the 

Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, $1.8 million.  Is that the 

total expenditures that the Legal Aid Commission would be 

expending? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's right.  That's the last quarter 

commitment.  It's the total expenditure.  There's no  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

policy change.  Nothing has changed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Then, Mr. Minister, what are you guys doing 

on that side of the House?  Nothing has changed.  The world 

goes on as always.  I thought you were the elected government.  

I thought you had the big ideas.  I thought you were going to 

put this province on a different track.  And yet everything goes 

on as if we were sitting there.  Well, Mr. Minister, let's trade 

seats.  We may as well do that. 

 

That amount for Legal Aid, Mr. Minister.  Does that take into 

consideration user fees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I know that no new policies have 

been initiated since the budget was announced so that there is 

no change from the point of view of user fees that may have 

existed before.  There has been no change whatsoever. 

 

I want to tell the member opposite though that he says that 

nothing has changed.  Well nothing could change.  You don't 

make those kinds of changes in seven weeks.  If the former 

government had passed the budget as it was required to be 

passed, then we wouldn't have to go through this exercise 

today. 

 

But I can tell the member that while we are going through this 

process, the budget for the next fiscal year is being prepared.  

All of the policies and programs are being assessed so that we 

can adequately deal with all of the issues and provide the kind 

of budget which this province needs. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think we on 

this side are experiencing a mounting frustration.  No answers, 

no answers.  No answers from the man in question period the 

other day who made this statement, Mr. Chairman.  I would 

like to quote from Hansard on page 330 where the Hon. Mr. 

Tchorzewski says: "Thank you.  The question would have been 

better directed to me because Mr. Ching is the . . ." 

 

Interruption by an hon. member: "You mean you've got the 

answer?" 

 

Mr. Tchorzewski: "I most certainly do, as I always do, 

member." 

 

Well you always do.  We were expecting then that because you 

have set on this big policy here of circumventing the rules of 

this legislature so that we could not have access to your 

ministers to ask any questions directly, that indeed you might 

have the answers.  I've spent, sir, with you at least 15, 20 

minutes now and I don't think I've gotten any answers at all. 

 

I want to ask one last series of questions -- Social Assistance 

Plan.  You have under the SAP (Social Assistance Plan) 

allocated $56.237 million for the last quarter as you were 

saying.  On what client load is that based?  What's the 

case-load? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I want to tell the member that 

there's an increase in $13 million in 1991-92 unemployment.  I 

am told that the unemployment 

increased from the department's original forecast of 34,400 to 

37,000.  This has increased the SAP case-load by 550 and that's 

the nature of the increase. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, this last few . . 

. two months, in fact two months today, since you won the 

election and you've been firing and hiring -- and I'm sure that 

this will be an easy question for you to answer because you 

said everything you're going to do is going to be better than the 

last government, it will be all to save money and you're going 

to save money -- I want to ask you this question:  of all the 

people you've fired and the people that you've hired what has 

been your net saving? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can't respond to the member on all 

of what . . . in specific detail, but I can tell him this, that since 

this government has taken office, by efficiency measures which 

we have initiated -- because we said all along that there was 

waste and mismanagement that had to be addressed -- having 

only three, four months in which to deal with it, where most of 

the expenditures, discretionary ones, already have been made, 

the opportunities for that are limited, but I can tell the member 

quite precisely that the efficiency measures which we have 

implemented will save in this fiscal year $58.7 million.  And 

that's a very significant saving considering we only have one 

quarter in which to do that. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I noticed that you noticed too 

that the member was quoting from that document and I would 

ask him to table that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I write notes and I make notes and 

that was simply my notes. It was not a document. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When the 

minister answered my question -- attempted to answer -- you 

didn't give me any figures because you said you didn't know.  

Are you telling us tonight here that, the members of the 

opposition, are you telling us that you hired and fired people 

and you have no figures and you didn't know where you were 

going?  Is that what you're saying?  Because if you're doing it 

and don't have figures, then it's for no other reason than 

political purposes.  Now answer me that question very clearly.  

I want an answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me give the member opposite 

an example which will help him, I hope.  Mr. Member, the 

member from Arm River, should know that previously there 

was a president in Saskatchewan Power Corporation who got 

paid $408,000 a year.  There is now an acting chief executive 

officer, president of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, who 

gets paid $150,000 a year. 

 

That's the magnitude of the savings that are there.  But most of 

these changes, the member will know, have been made in the 

Crown sector side for which we are not discussing here.  But I 

can assure the member that when there are savings made and 

each opportunity that presents itself . . . I've already told the 

member that we've, in efficiency measures, saved $58.7 

million.  In the new year when we do our further cost-saving 

measures, I will  



526 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

be in the position to announce them further. 

 

The member will know very clearly the kind of savings that 

have been made because of fewer cabinet ministers, because of 

fewer staffs in cabinet ministers' offices, because of reductions 

in the kinds of salaries which I gave you the example of. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

that answer about $150,000 being compared to $400,000.  Who 

are you trying to kid?  Because George Hill's salary was 

$208,000; he started at $120,000.  Now I want to ask you, 

seeing you got into it then: what is the president of SaskPower, 

the temporary president of SaskPower, what will be his built-in 

percentage of profits?  Because that's where George Hill's 

money came -- 208,000 to $400,000 for percentage of profit.  

Do you not expect a profit in SaskPower?  And if you do, how 

much will you be paying him of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I really think we're 

out of order here.  We're dealing with the supply Bill, not with 

a Crown.  But since I did raise that one particular case, I want 

to assure the member that the bonuses and all those kinds of 

extra arrangements that were made to inflate salaries of 

individuals, as was the case here, no longer exist. 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask members from both sides.  We've had 

both the minister and the member from Arm River providing 

information, asking questions about Crowns.  And if we could 

remain to the supply Bill. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I thank you.  I'm really glad to hear that 

answer, Mr. Minister, that that will never happen under this 

government -- that'll be whatever salary that the person is paid 

just working for this government, that that'll be it.  So we have 

the minister on record. 

 

Now I want to ask you a question and see if you have these 

kind of answers.  The Minister of Health, she fired the deputy 

minister.  Do you know the salary that the deputy minister was 

getting at the time of the firing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I do not have the 

information that the member asks.  He can ask that of the 

Minister of Health, and I'm sure that the Minister of Health 

would be quite happy to provide it to them. 

 

I've made a note of the minister's question, the member's 

question.  I will relate it to the Minister of Health, and I can 

assure the member that the Minister of Health will respond. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, that's real good.  I appreciate that, Mr. 

Minister.  And while you're asking her that question, we'll want 

to see what the net gain is here, because they fired the deputy 

minister and they hired . . . replaced with a new deputy minister 

and a new assistant deputy.  So they fired one and replaced him 

with two.  So I'd like to know what the net loss or net gain in 

salary is here.  So also ask that question to the minister and she 

can notify me.  Because, Mr. Minister, if this goes on all over 

government, you start firing one and say the big figure is gone 

and hire two, I don't think you're going to have much of a net 

gain in . . . 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not to coin a phrase, Mr. 

Chairman, but the proof is in the pudding.  And I can tell the 

members opposite when the supplementary Estimates come, 

when the next budget comes, all of that information will be in 

the supplementary Estimates. 

 

The minister will be able, the members will be able, to ask the 

ministers and the information will be provided and I'm sure that 

the member then will be satisfied. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm sure we will be satisfied 

because we won't be 10 at night, just almost Christmas Eve, 

and we won't be pushed into that position.  We'll have time and 

you'll be giving the answers all right.  I guarantee you will be. 

 

Now maybe you can answer this question.  Maybe your 

officials can give you this answer.  How many farm 

foreclosures since November 1? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, we wouldn't know that in the 

Department of Finance, but I can tell you that through the ACS 

(Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan), because of 

the government's policy decision to freeze, there have been 

none. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I didn't ask you about ACS.  I said farm 

foreclosures since November 1.  A Deputy Premier of this 

province for two months should know exactly.  I was just a 

back-bencher over there, a legislative secretary, and I knew 

every day exactly what the update of farm foreclosures.  You 

should automatically know that.  Do your officials not know it?  

If they don't know it, I won't pursue it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I assure the member opposite, as 

the Minister of Agriculture has clearly stated in the House 

during question period, that the government is making every 

effort, co-operatively with the lending institutions and farm 

organizations, to work out an arrangement where there will not 

be any foreclosures until a long-term program is put into place.  

Because there's nothing that's needed more, I believe, than 

long-term programs where farm people in this province, the 

producers, know where they stand under long-term programs. 

 

We have got to get away from the ad hoc-ery that has existed 

in the past because it is, as the numbers will show you, and the 

hurt out there that will show you . . . ad hoc-ery has not been 

very successful in meeting the need. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know why you'd be 

asking the Minister of Agriculture for information because he 

hasn't been able to give any for three weeks here.  And you're 

not going to get a proper answer from him anyway.  He doesn't 

even know whether there was a moratorium on or whether it 

wasn't, or whether you promised one or whether you didn't.  So 

you better ask somebody more knowledgeable. 

 

Do you know this question, Mr. Minister?  Do you know when 

ACS -- maybe he told you this or maybe some of the officials 

told you -- when did ACS first put the instruction through for 

no foreclosures?  When was the 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

date that you first instructed for no foreclosures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't know when that date was.  

But I'm sure that the Minister of Agriculture can provide it to 

you and that he will since you've now asked the question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's the problem with this whole process, 

Mr. Chairman and Mr. Speaker, that's the problem.  Instead of 

us sitting here debating for days and days and talking about this 

motion and we had to have speeches around the clock and . . . 

(inaudible) . . . we could have had a couple days talking to your 

minister instead of that wasted process.  Because it was a 

wasted process that you made us stand here and debate and 

give speeches and speeches and speeches and amendments.  It 

was a wasted process.  If you had done what we asked in the 

first place, is to bring six to ten ministers in here and let us 

answer the questions, then we'd be going home knowing. 

 

Mr. Minister, I know for sure you'll be able to answer my last 

question.  There isn't a doubt about it.  There's been nothing but 

talk for the last two years about a moratorium and then we 

know for sure, regardless of what the minister has been saying 

the last three weeks, that there was a promised moratorium, so 

I'm sure that some officials some place have figured out what 

the cost of a moratorium will be to the taxpayers of this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well as the Minister of Agriculture 

has said in this House that we're looking at . . . we're working 

with . . . the Minister of Agriculture is working with the 

lending agencies and with farm organizations to work out that 

arrangement for the long term.  When they have concluded 

their analysis we'll have that information and it'll be made 

public and the member will know opposite.  But that discussion 

has not yet been completed. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've got a question 

about land bank.  How much liability have you still got in land 

bank?  My question is to the Minister of Finance.  How much 

liability do you still have in land bank? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member will find on page 16 

of the financial report, an item called investment in agricultural 

land, which is at 184.436 million.  That investment is 

recoverable from the sale of land that could take place from the 

agriculture division of the Heritage Fund where all of it went 

when the land bank was abolished by the former government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I was actually hoping you 

wouldn't find it there because that is exactly the point I want to 

make and the discussion that we want to make here.  Because 

of your personal incompetence in dealing with the kinds of 

things that your Minister of Agriculture should be standing in 

this place with his department officials and giving us the 

answer that they could provide for him . . . That's no reflection 

on the help that you've got here today, because I believe that 

they're adequate. 

 

But your Minister of Agriculture should be standing in his 

place and telling us what those Estimates should be, and 

what their money's going to be spent on.  I read it, I knew 

where it was, and it took you three or four minutes to find it 

yourself.  And I was hoping you wouldn't because then I would 

stand up and tell you exactly where it was.  And it's not only on 

one page; it's on two pages. 

 

And I would just ask another question.  How much is owing on 

the Beef Stabilization Board? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll get it for the member 

opposite.  We have a record of the question but in order for the 

. . . in the interests of time we'll be doing the work on it while 

he goes on to another question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, this is exactly the 

reason that this opposition wanted to know what it was . . . 

grievance before supply for the people and individuals in this 

province and in this Assembly . . . would understand and be 

able to deliberate about what the Queen is going to spend her 

money on.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the fundamental reason 

why we permitted this exercise to proceed to this point -- 

because we wanted to demonstrate to the people of 

Saskatchewan your incompetence in delivering the answers to 

the questions.  That, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we're proving 

here. 

 

And I'll ask you another question.  How much money did you 

guarantee to Southern Railroads?  And how many dollars are 

you going to guarantee to those extensions that they're asking 

for in their role in continuing the short-line railroads? 

 

(2200) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because of the unfortunate 

circumstances under which we have to bring in the supply Bill 

-- because there was never a budget passed, with a time that 

was limited -- I don't have that information.  But we will 

provide it to the member since he has asked.  I can assure the 

member that it'll be made available to him later. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- How much money have you already put into 

the supply for the GRIP program in crop insurance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The premiums that have been paid 

out, as I'm told, are 146 million.  There's nothing provided in 

the fourth quarter because all of the required payments have 

already been made. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, there is another -- and it's not 

146, it's $46 million on page 49 of your book -- it's another 

reason why I'm demonstrating the incompetence of the system 

that we're demonstrating here today.  That, Mr. Chairman, is 

exactly what I want to point out. 

 

The minister responsible for Crop Insurance should have been 

standing in here and able to tell us what was going on, and 

that's the same thing that I could ask you about Sask Water 

Corporation, Ag Credit Corporation or any of the others.  And 

so, Mr. Minister, I think this . . . the theme that you have 

demonstrated to the public of Saskatchewan is despicable and I 

don't think it even is a proper function of this House to 

demonstrate how this House really works because it doesn't 

work this way in a  



528 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

 normal fashion.  And you have done it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I agree, Mr. Chairman, that this 

House does not work this way in a normal fashion but this is 

not a normal situation, and therefore the things aren't normal. 

 

And I want to make sure that the member understands what the 

situation is.  The number he referred to was total for 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation ordinary 

expenditure $46 million, but the total for GRIP is $146 million 

I want the member opposite to know.  And that is what the 

figures are. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I wasn't going to get into this 

but once again the minister can't possibly know, but the 

minister sitting off to the side will know.  He just said in this 

Assembly that there is no allocation in this fourth quarter 

because all of the GRIP payments were made. 

 

Well unfortunately, I as an irrigator went in to see my Crop 

Insurance agent the other day and told that we're all going to be 

done manually and we will not be done until after the end of 

December, and therefore our GRIP payments, because we 

happen to be irrigators, won't occur until sometime in the 

quarter that we're dealing with, sir.  And that's precisely the 

kind of question that that minister could have answered, which 

you just gave to the House, which was totally erroneous and 

every irrigator out there would have been misled by the answer 

that you gave, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the member is not correct 

because the government has made an allocation to the GRIP for 

$146 million, the government's contribution therefore is in 

place.  If the member is talking about his payment of his 

premium, that's a different question altogether. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what I'm talking about is what I 

am owed as a producer, which won't occur.  That calculation . . 

. When I phoned them the other day, they said they hadn't got 

any of it in the frigging computer even; that my allocation can't 

be made. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What kind of computer? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- A frigging one.  A frigging one is one that 

jumps like this, you know.  That those calculations haven't 

even been done, Mr. Minister; that they won't be done for all of 

the irrigators in the province until in this quarter that we're 

discussing; that that minister can't answer those questions, 

because, sir, we're going through this exercise. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the supply Bill does 

not require any allocation because the budgeting has been done 

for the GRIP premiums.  That budgeting not only was done, 

but the money has already been allocated.  That's why the $146 

million is the number that I gave to the member opposite. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, my question is fairly simple, straightforward, and 

really has no politics involved in it.  On December 19, 1991, I 

have a communique here from Canada and 

Saskatchewan dealing with participation funding for 

environmental assessment review of mines.  It says: phase one, 

funding for public participation in this joint federal-provincial 

environmental assessment and review of uranium mine 

development in northern Saskatchewan was announced today.  

How much funding is the province putting into that review, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That answer to the member 

opposite is that the federal government is funding all that 

money up front, and therefore there is no requirement in this 

supply Bill to provide any funds for that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Can the minister then explain what vote 

no. 9, subvote 17 is about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's the amount that is 

outstanding and needed in the fourth quarter for various grants 

the Department of Environment gives to various organizations.  

I assume in there would be the environmental society of 

Saskatchewan, and such.  But it's not any money involving this 

panel, the uranium study panel, which is undertaking its 

review, which I understand will take up to 18 months.  The 

money for that panel in this year is being funded by the federal 

government, and therefore there's no need for any funding for 

that purpose in this supply Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, have you received any 

presentations or representations from the oil and gas industry 

concerning your taxation policies? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that in the time that I've 

been here we have received nothing that I'm aware of at the 

present time.  There have been some pre-budget submissions to 

the federal government that have been provided, but that's all. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, is the budget going to have, or 

are we required to put into the budget, some money for the 

healing lodge, for the prison that is going to come into the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not in this last quarter.  It's not that 

far advanced, I understand. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there going to be any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll know that when we have put 

together the budget for the next fiscal year.  And at that time I 

obviously will be able to state quite definitively whether there 

will be any. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will at the same time the minister be able to 

provide us in this House with some direction as to whether 

there'll be a saving for the province of Saskatchewan in relation 

to having that facility in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sure that when the budget 

comes down, Mr. Chairman, that we'll be able to provide that 

information, whether there's a saving, whether there is a better 

delivery of services, whether it meets the needs which have 

been raised quite publicly and quite legitimately with the fact 

that that kind of a facility is not available. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

Mr. Martens: -- Has the Department of Justice been told 

where it's going to be located? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I guess we'll have to wait for the 

budget when that happens.  I don't think that that's been fully 

determined. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a question to the minister.  

You have said here over and over again this evening that you 

are basing this interim supply on the previous budget, while 

presented and the budget debate passed, obviously the 

Estimates weren't passed.  But you're basing it on that. 

 

Is it true that the last time you presented a budget, Mr. 

Minister, in 1982 you made a forecast of revenue in that 

budget?  And that revenue was something like 4 to $500 

million shy of the target in the budget that followed when the 

new administration came in and forecasted the revenue?  And 

if that's true, Mr. Minister, would you say that the budget that 

was presented in the spring obviously has had some various 

significant changes made to it, because I'm sure that you'll 

recall that there might have been some in 1982. 

 

For example, not harmonization, which is a couple of hundred 

million dollars, no equity, transfusions of equity, Trans Gas for 

example, nothing from the Crown corporations because you 

say that it's not there.  And yet you're going back and saying 

that this budget on interim supply is based on that previous 

budget, but you've taken a large part out of it. 

 

So two questions: number one, was your estimate of the 

revenue different than the estimate in 1982 in the fall after the 

new administration was in.? And I believe that you know the 

answer to that -- something like $400 million.  Number two, if 

that's the case, don't you think that four or five months -- 

November, December, January, February, and March -- five 

months out of twelve, would give you sufficient time to come 

up with the justification or budget and debate and Estimates 

that would provide the public, and indeed this House, the 

answers to why you've modified the figures and had the credit 

rating changed, and other things that are here before us this 

evening? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In 

response to the member opposite, there is a significant 

difference between 1982 and 1991.  I remind the member 

opposite that in 1982 the election took place in June.  The 

former government, when it was then a new government, had 

six . . . April, I'm sorry.  The former government had six 

months in which to prepare a budget and they did bring one in 

in November.  Six months, which is the normal period of time 

in which it takes budget preparation. 

 

In 1991 there has been -- the election was in October -- six 

weeks.  That is a very significant, fundamental difference 

between 1982 and 1991.  There are some similar situations.  

The economy during that period of time fluctuates and 

changes.  And so some of the projections that are made from 

time to time or made by governments each year don't always 

come out exactly the way that they are made.  Because they are 

after all, 

Estimates, based on best information that is available at the 

time those Estimates are put together.  So there are those 

fluctuations.  And there were some in 1982.  And there are 

some in 1991. 

 

But the magnitude of the difference in 1991 in the deficit of -- 

we've now brought it down to $851 million -- to the announced 

deficit of $265 million is really what the true story is all about.  

That is a very significant spread between what the estimate was 

and what the real final number is. 

 

(2215) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, just a specific question.  What 

was the spread between your estimate in the spring of '82 and 

the estimate in the fall of 1982? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's a long ways back.  I don't 

have the information from 1982 other than what I can recall 

and what some of my officials, who were not senior people in 

the department at that time, can recall.  But it is true that the 

1981-82 budget had a projection of a modest surplus.  It is also 

true that between the April election and the budget which the 

former government then introduced in November, the former 

government made some very significant policy changes which 

made a difference including, including the removal of the 

gasoline tax so that they brought their budget in at over $200 

million in the deficit. 

 

The only change, before the former premier gets too excited, 

the only change that we have brought about here, is the 

removal of the PST, which is costing revenues, I agree, of $72 

million, but which we have already accounted for by 

cost-saving measures, so that there is no net change from any 

measures that this government has taken.  And all that we're 

implementing is measures which the former government 

implemented. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the Minister of Finance 

will need a little bit more applause to keep his spirits up once 

he's responded to this.  Please answer the question. How much 

were you out?  What was the difference in your estimate of the 

revenue and the Estimates of the revenue in the fall of the same 

year?  Could you please answer that question? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're dealing with 

this year's financial report and we're dealing with this past 

government's budget.  I don't have the budget from 1982.  

That's many years ago and I'm certainly not able to answer that 

kind of a specific question. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, would the minister . . . 

And this is the year that you lost your election, you lost your 

seat.  I'm sure it's imprinted on your mind.  You'd remember 

1982.  You were the Finance minister. Was it 3 or $400 

million, which would give the House and the public some idea.  

Was it several hundred million dollars that you were in error in 

estimating what the revenues for the province of Saskatchewan 

would be, April 1982 versus October when we brought in the 

budget? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can say to the  



530 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

former premier, the member from Estevan, that that was the 

first year of a consecutive string of deficits that had brought 

this province to a cumulative deficit of $6 billion and a debt 

situation of $14 billion. 

 

That's when that began -- because of major policy changes 

made by that government, those people when they were in the 

government, on this side of the House. 

 

The Estimates that I made as the Minister of Finance at that 

time were not significantly out other than because of the fact 

that the government made some major policy changes in that 

period of time, including the removal of the gasoline tax which 

cost many dollars, and therefore brought about in that first 

year, a deficit in excess of $200 million. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll just make the point one more 

time and maybe again if we have to. 

 

You know and we all know that you were out 3 or $400 million 

in your Estimates.  You were going into an election, you 

forecast the revenue and you were wrong.  You overestimated, 

for the sake of whatever you were going to do in the spring of 

1982, the revenue coming into the province of Saskatchewan, 

by $400 million plus.  Now that's close to half a billion dollars 

in 1982. 

 

Now you stood up and said, well, you're going to rely on this 

budget that we came in with in 1991.  But what have you done 

to the budget?  You took out harmonization. 

 

Harmonization, in total, is $400 million.  You know, you 

allocate some out and some comes in.  And there's a benefit to 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Now, you said you're going to 

base that on there, but you gutted a portion of that budget.  Yet 

you're going to go back on supply and say but this is based on 

that. 

 

Secondly you've said, well you're not going to take over $200 

million from the Crowns.  Therefore, 200 million plus another 

200 million is $400 million. 

 

Number three, for the sake of your political hide, you're saying 

I'm not interested in equity.  For example you have to borrow 

$200 million to have money put into Trans Gas so IPSCO can 

build the pipelines and so forth.  That could be 2, 3, 4, 5, $600 

million. 

 

And you don't tell the public where you're going to get that 

money.  You let the credit rating fall through the floor.  And 

you come down . . . It's a triple B, right?  You said it's a triple 

B.  You went to New York and you said I'm not taking this 

revenue, I won't take money from the Crowns, I won't take 

equity.  I'll accept 8 or $900 million deficit.  And then I'll say, 

well I guess I have no choice but to put my tail between my 

legs and come home and say the credit rating is a triple B in 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Minister, can't you see our point here?  In 1982 we brought 

in a budget, had the minister of Agriculture, the minister of 

Finance, the minister of Health, all the ministers go through 

their portfolios.  And you said that question after question, you 

said, I don't have the answer to that, but the minister will, the 

minister will.  You have five months of 

administration, five months of administration. 

 

You've got 200 million in harmonization.  You won't take 

money from the Crowns, you won't do equity.  And you've got 

a triple B credit rating, and you won't put your ministers up. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you can be out $400 million in 1982 and 

demand that we stand in our place as a new administration, 

don't you think the average person in Saskatchewan or in the 

British parliamentary system would only think it fair that you 

put your ministers forward? 

 

And if you don't, we'll say this is a sham.  This whole exercise 

that we're going through here on interim supply is nothing but a 

political exercise.  It's a sham, because you don't have the 

courage to say, I will put a budget together and stand before the 

people and put my ministers up, and defend those arguments 

point after point after point. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the people and the 

public of Saskatchewan have certainly witnessed this evening 

an historic aberration in the British parliamentary system.  The 

point about not having the answers means that we cannot know 

whether we should let the supply Bill pass or not.  Time and 

time again the minister said that the various ministers would 

have the information, but they're not here, and you can wait till 

spring. 

 

So essentially, after an election which you can call any time, 

we have in the province of Saskatchewan no budget, no 

grievance before supply, no ministers on their feet, nobody 

defending it, and the minister saying: trust me; I'll get the 

information in the spring; it will be in supplementary 

Estimates. 

 

Well that's our whole point, Mr. Chairman.  The whole point 

here tonight is that we haven't got answers.  You can't expect to 

have answers.  And no disrespect to the officials, because they 

are not professionals in agriculture and engineering and in 

health and in highways and all of those things.  These are 

Finance officials.  And with great respect to them, the minister 

is putting them in a very embarrassing situation. 

 

The first time it's ever happened in the history of Canada, that 

you'd go through a complete fiscal year and have an election 

where the budget is presented and not have a budget. 

 

And the officials are here to defend department after 

department after department, and obviously they can't.  So our 

point has been made, Mr. Chairman.  And I'll simply say this, 

that this is an exercise that will go down on the political backs 

in the history of the NDP. 

 

The New Democratic Party is the party of the people and the 

party for professionalism and the party that's going to bring 

fairness and openness, and they wouldn't even have the 

courage, with five months out of seven, to answer questions, 

come before the people, and have their 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

ministers on their feet. 

 

So I say to the minister: Mr. Minister, you'll remember this 

day.  You'll remember this day.  We all will, and the people of 

Saskatchewan will -- the fact that you would not even allow the 

information to come forward, portfolio by portfolio, minister 

by minister. 

 

And I'll just say to the hon. members in the legislature, because 

you couldn't answer the specific questions, and because you 

can't even argue the point, and because you wouldn't even 

acknowledge that you were out in your Estimates, for all the 

reasons that I've brought here, because the new government has 

the option, that, Mr. Minister, you and your colleagues should 

be ashamed of this procedure.  You should be ashamed of this 

procedure.  We don't acknowledge it.  We don't accept it, Mr. 

Chairman, and the only way that this is passing here tonight, or 

even acknowledge that it will pass here tonight, is the fact that 

you are sitting here saying that regardless of how the British 

parliamentary system works, you were above it and beyond it, 

and you will do it anyway. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the NDP Party of Saskatchewan and the public 

of Canada will remember this night in Saskatchewan politics. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I will just take a 

couple of minutes to outline what we have done here.  Because 

there was no budget this year, special warrants had to be used 

to fund government from July to October 22.  And a special 

warrant had to be used for the month of December because 

members who were elected did not become members until the 

official count and that was pretty close to the month of 

December, so there had to be a special warrant at that time. 

 

It is the intention of this government to restore parliamentary 

control and ask this House to approve funding for the fourth 

quarter.  That's what this exercise is all about: to restore 

parliamentary control and to ask the House to provide the 

supply for the fourth quarter rather than deal with special 

warrants. 

 

It is clear, Mr. Chairman, that very little can be done this year 

to turn around the established spending practices that have been 

put into place over the first three quarters of this year, 1991, 

1992.  Because of the limited time, Mr. Chairman, all we can 

do here is provide supply for the final quarter.  That's why this 

motion is here.  That's why we've had this debate.  And that's 

why we hope that members on this side of the House . . . I hope 

all the members of the House will deal with the motion so that 

the legislature can provide the supply rather than special 

warrants provide the supply, which would be a case of the 

cabinet acting in isolation from the legislature which we find 

quite distasteful. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Before I recognize the Minister of 

Finance I wonder if I might have leave just to introduce a 

guest. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- I would draw the attention of the 

members to a visitor in the Speaker's Gallery, Justin Vaive.  

Justin is the son of the Deputy Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly.  He's a grade 11 student at Dr. Martin LeBoldus 

High School in Regina.  He takes a very active interest in 

politics and I would tell the members that he will be here in this 

Chamber hopefully during the period of between Christmas 

and the New Year to attend the Saskatchewan Youth 

Parliament.  And I wonder if you might join with me in 

welcoming him here tonight. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   As 

members will know, there are three more motions that have to 

be introduced into the House and dealt with.  And I will deal 

with them one at a time.  This one is: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $954,543,200 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the last quarter of the fiscal 

year ending March 31, 1992. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Dealing 

with the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund: 

 

 Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the last quarter of the fiscal year ending March 31, 

1992, the sum of $254,145,200 be granted out of the 

Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 

I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I move 

that: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $254,145,200 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the last quarter of the fiscal 

year ending March 31, 1992.  I so move. 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

(2230) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Before the committee rises I would like to 

thank the minister and particularly his officials for being part of 

this exercise, and wish them a Merry Christmas. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to join 

the member in thanking my officials as well.  And I will have 

another opportunity to wish them a Merry Christmas, but I put 

on the record that I also join him in 

  



532 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

wishing them that as well.  I thank the members opposite for 

their comments and their questions, and thank the House for 

disposing of these resolutions. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 19, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the last quarter of 

the Fiscal Year Ending on March 31, 1992, be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly and under rule 15 and rule 51(2), I move that the Bill 

be now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, 

the Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, The Appropriation 

Bill requires the following form and I want to move that form 

at this time: 

 

 I beg to inform the Assembly that Her Honour the Lieutenant 

Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the 

resolution, recommends it to the consideration of the 

Assembly. 

 

And I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- The royal recommendation is received. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that 

Bill 18 now be reviewed in committee. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to Provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in 

Crown Employment Contracts governing Payments and 

Benefits on Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, 

to Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting those 

matters and to Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to 

Compensation for any Loss or Damage resulting from the 

Enactment or Application of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

introduce the officials.  Seated beside me is Craig Dotson of 

the Executive Council.  Seated behind Mr. 

Dotson is Mr. Darryl Bogdasavich of the Department of 

Justice.  And seated behind me is Mr. Doug Moen of the 

Department of Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I've outlined previous to 

this, I have a great deal of difficulty in accepting this Bill 

before the Assembly.  I really find it difficult to proceed with 

it.  I've talked about the things that I don't like about it.  And 

there are things in the title that just rip at the insides of justice 

and freedom of access to the courts.  And I really find it 

difficult to have this kind of a legislation proceed in this House. 

 

And so I'm going to proceed with it anyway because I know 

that in the context I can stand in the way all I like.  And I'll let 

the public decide when I tell them about what's in this Bill.  I'll 

let the public decide on whether they value their rights and 

freedoms as much as I do.  And I will discuss that with them in 

that context. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to ask a few questions in relation to the 

Bill.  And the first question that I have is, has the minister 

engaged outside legal assistance in drafting this Bill? 

 

(2245) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the Bill was drafted by 

Department of Justice officials.  During the policy development 

process we did in fact consult outside counsel. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, if I could, I'd like to ask you to 

give this Assembly the information about who that counsel 

was. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, the outside counsel that 

were consulted during the development of the policy reflected 

in the Act were Mr. Tom Waller, Mr. Bill Howe, and Mr. 

Gerry Kraus. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Could I ask the minister if he would be good 

enough to table some of the opinions that were given by the 

outside counsel that he had, to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, we will not table any 

opinions from counsel.  That is not the practice and we don't 

intend to depart from the practice at this time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, but I need to ask 

the minister to clarify for the House Mr. Dotson's position, 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Dotson is employed in the 

Executive Council of the government.  He is a special advisor. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Is the individual a political person or a civil 

servant?  Would the minister clarify that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Dotson is appointed by order in 

council. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the minister have any idea how many 

people that this law will apply to on the basis of all of those 

people who have contracts with the government, have an order 

in council or administrative assistants and out of scope people?  

Does he have any idea on that volume of people, how many 

people this Bill could apply to in some way, shape, or form? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the 

member's question, the legislation does not apply to any 

employees who are out of scope but within the classified public 

service.  It does not apply to any order in council appointments 

in the public service unless they are a party to a written 

contract.  And so far as I am aware, the numbers of people to 

whom it will apply is about 60. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, if the 

government wanted to roll back severances or deal with 

separation contracts, why did it not pass a simple two- or 

three-section Act that extinguishes separation or severances 

from former employees and substitutes recourse to common 

law practices?  And in that way you could base severances or 

whatever -- according to how long they'd been employed by the 

Crown or the Crown agency, the level of responsibility that 

they had, the size of their benefits, etc. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, with respect to the 

question asked by the hon. member, we think that is basically 

what we've done in this Bill.  There are complicated issues that 

arise however, which required it to be twelve sections instead 

of the two or three that you mentioned.  But we have tried to 

keep it basically as simple as your question suggests it should 

be. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- The government requires . . . I'm sorry, Mr. 

Chairman, to the minister -- the government requires section 6 

to obtain its objectives, and if you could turn to section 6.  But 

what I find very odd is that it includes an exclusionary clause at 

the end of that section that excludes everything, to my 

knowledge, that's in sections 7 and 8. 

 

Section 6 defines the payments and the benefits and rolling 

these back is the primary purpose of the Bill, is my 

understanding. 

 

So if you can take section 6(2) of the Bill, the government 

fulfils its aims by stating, and I quote, everything from: 

 

 All provisions in Crown employment contracts respecting: 

 

 (a) making any payments; or 

 

 (b) providing any benefits; 

 

 by the Crown or a Crown employer resulting from the 

termination or expiration of the Crown employment contract 

are void. 

 

However, if you go to section 7, there are exceptions that are 

outlined to such an extent that it appears as though the Bill 

concedes most of the payments and benefits that it attempted to 

eliminate. 

Now why would the government include section 7 with 

extensive exceptions and recourse to common law principles in 

this Bill, if what you really wanted to do was to make all 

payments and benefits listed in section 6 void? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Chairman, to the member.  As I 

understand your question, I will try to answer it; and if I didn't 

understand it correctly, you can try me again. 

 

Subsection (1) of section 6 is a definition section which defines 

the two terms "payment" and "benefit."  And the concluding 

words of subsection (1) makes it clear that the term "payment" 

as it's defined in subsection (1) does not include any payment 

that may ultimately come due under section 7.  Okay? 

 

So then in subsection (2) of section 6, the provisions respecting 

any payments or any benefits, as those terns are defined, are 

declared to be void.  And section 7 then follows through by 

providing what is the right of the Crown employee that is 

affected by the Act. 

 

I hope that answers your question. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, to the minister, if we can go 

further to section 7(3) and particularly 7(3)(a), I'm wondering if 

you can help me in this because I had some confusion. 

 

You have here that: 

 

 If a Crown employer terminates a Crown employment 

contract without cause, the Crown employer shall provide the 

Crown employee with: 

 

and I now state: 

 

 (a) written notice equal to the least of: 

 

Now there are several points beneath these.  I'm wondering if 

you can help me to understand what this really means to 

someone.  I mean one of the concerns that I've had about this is 

that it appears as though -- and you can correct me if I'm wrong 

-- that someone whose contract is coming to an end could in 

fact not be informed by government of such an end to his or her 

contract, and that indeed what may happen is toward the very 

end of the contract they may be told, I'm sorry, you don't have 

a contract any more and not be given proper kinds of notice. 

 

If you could comment on that please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I will try, Mr. Chairman, to explain the 

provisions of section (3)(a) dealing with written notice. 

 

Subsection (3) deals with two situations where notice is given 

to the employee, and (b) where the period of notice is not 

given, so a payment in lieu of notice becomes payable. 

 

First dealing with the written notice, you are correct that the 

first alternative is a notice that is equal to the remaining term of 

the contract. And that covers a situation where the employees 

employment is going to 

  



534 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

come to an end at a time thats defined in the contract. Some of 

them have provisions for renewal, an automatic renewal, and 

there are many different scenarios there. But that is fair because 

the employee knows when the contract is ending anyway. And 

thats the first alternative. 

 

The second is the period of notice provided in the contract. 

Some of these contracts contain a period of notice. Im not sure 

what percentage, but some of them do. And its defined in the 

contract as being so many months  six months or two months 

or what have you. 

 

And the third alternative is where you turn to the common law 

and say to the common law or ask the common law, look to the 

common law for the definition of what is an appropriate period 

of notice without considering the provisions of the contract, 

and if the contract is for a definite term, as if the contract were 

for an indefinite term. 

 

And then as you have observed, the written notice that is 

required is the least of those three. And I think that thats 

probably fair in light of the explanation that Ive given. Does 

that answer the question? 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Minister, in section 5(5) the onus is 

placed on the employee to file their contract with, I believe the 

Clerk of the Executive Council. And if they do not, the Crown 

may in fact make the contract void. Now I really question how 

fair this is, to place the onus on the employee as, through no 

fault of their own, they may in fact be not aware that theyre 

obliged to follow their contract. 

 

I think all of us know what its like to be in contract with 

someone and you have endless fine print, if someone were to 

come to this province from elsewhere only to discover that it 

had been up to them . . . I know that you do have in here that in 

fact the employer can be responsible as well. But I would like 

your comment please regarding why the onus is placed not on 

the Crown, or the Crown employer specifically to undertake 

the task of filing these contracts. 

 

(2300) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the 

provision is . . . I would point out with respect to the provision 

that it is not . . . in a situation like that the contract is not ipso 

facto void, if I could use that. Its not automatically void; it is 

voidable at the option of the Crown. 

 

It is intended to cover situations where there are contracts of 

which the government is unaware, of which the Crown 

employer is unaware. We dont know for a fact that there are 

such situations of course because, as I say, were not aware of 

them. But there have been a surprise or two, and this is to cover 

a situation where there is a contract out there of which we are 

not aware because it has not been drawn to the attention of the 

new government. 

 

So the effect of it is that if the Crown employee fails to file that 

contract in accordance with the Act, then the Crown has the 

right to treat that contract, to elect to treat that contract as being 

void. 

I want to say that the permanent heads will  all of them  

will be informed of the provisions of this Act and of the filing 

requirements immediately upon proclamation of the Act, so 

that the government system will be aware of the filing 

requirements, and the permanent heads will ensure that the 

other people who are caught by the definition in the Act will 

also be aware and will have an opportunity to file their 

contracts. 

 

And in the case I had mentioned  if I can just add one more 

thought to it  in the case of people who have contracts and 

the existence of those contracts are not known, they will then 

have an opportunity to produce them and to file them in 

accordance with the Act. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Mr. Chairman, I guess I still do have 

some difficulty with this. It seems like youre taking a sledge-

hammer to hit a mosquito. 

 

If I may, in section 9 which has undergone some discussion 

today, 9(1) and 9(2) when read together with the term 

application, I find the word application very ambiguous 

here. Also used in section 9, may prevent an employee from 

making a claim for loss or damages even if the Crown 

employer were to have falsely defamed him or her. 

 

Im wondering if theres a way in which you could describe to 

me, please, a word that might be less ambiguous than the term 

application. I believe that thats something that should be 

clarified and I hope that youll take it under some 

consideration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, we 

have tried hard to find a formulation that would be more clear 

to people who may read the Act as to what is meant by the term 

application and we cant find a legal term that would do any 

better that this term. 

 

The term application of an Act is a term that is often used in 

legislation and therefore is well understood. A term of art is 

one way of describing it, so that judges will know and lawyers 

I think will generally know what is meant by the term, 

application of the Act. 

 

And if you look at the Act, the application of the Act will 

include the obligation to file the contract and do the other 

things that are required under section 4 . . . pardon me, the 

obligation under section 4 is to publicly disclose the 

employment contracts. Section 6, as we discussed a few 

moments ago, talks about voiding the provisions. And section 7 

talks about how severance will be calculated under the Act. 

 

Each of those sections will be applied, if you follow me. They 

will be applied. People will file their contracts. The contracts 

will be available for public inspection. 

 

The provisions of section 6 will be applied, and similarly 

section 7 will be applied when the situation comes to the point 

where section 7 is to be applied. And it is in that connection 

that the term application is used. 

 

And therefore if there is no action or proceeding against the 

Crown; or a Crown employer; or a member or former  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

member of a Crown employer; or a member or former member 

of the Executive Council; or any officer, director, employee, or 

agent, or former such, based on any claim for loss or damage as 

a result of enacting this Bill or applying those sections. 

 

Thats a very narrow protection in our opinion and based upon 

the advice of our officials. And so we have regarded it as such. 

We wanted this particular protection to be that narrow. We 

were prepared to consider amendments to try and reinforce that 

idea, that it was only that wide and no wider. And I wanted the 

opportunity to say this tonight so that it would be on the record 

of this House that this was the intention of the government in 

enacting section 9. 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  I have a final question, Mr. Chair. Im just 

wondering, Mr. Minister, if you are prepared to place a sunset 

clause on this legislation. I made it quite clear last night, I 

believe, about my serious concerns that in fact this Act seems 

to be being brought forward to deal with many things that no 

one in this province would argue are outrageous, when in fact 

what it does not do is to protect the innocent. 

 

And Im wondering if you would consider that. I want to be on 

record since Im going to sit now and listen to you, that I do 

want to commend section 4(1) that makes contracts public. I 

think that people in the province would welcome it. 

 

But I have some concerns about this being ongoing, and its 

something that Id like to see being considered by you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, 

were prepared to consider the suggestion that you made last 

night which we have discussed with you today. We are 

particularly cognizant of the fact that section 4 and section 5 

ought to be covered by the freedom of information Act, which 

we intend to proclaim on or about April 1. 

 

Theres been a lot of work done before the change in 

government towards the implementation of that Act, and 

theres been no break in that work. It is continued. And I think 

that the original time line was for April 1, more or less, and it 

remains April 1 more or less. 

 

And I think that section 4 and 5 will be caught by that so that 

the sun could set on those clauses because they would be 

redundant. 

 

So far as section 7 and . . . well, so far as the rest of the Act is 

concerned, were prepared to give that serious consideration. 

Were sympathetic to the point that you make. And, well, we 

would have to give it some very careful consideration but we 

are prepared to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I understand the role of the 

Bill in reducing the severance. And my question is: if you want 

to reduce severance, why didnt you arbitrate it? If you wanted 

to reduce severance, why didnt you put a Bill in here to deal 

with arbitration that said: this is what you have to arbitrate for? 

 

What I really want to know is: why does it legalize unjust 

dismissal, breach of contract, 

induced breach of contract, interference with a contract, mental 

distress, loss of reputation, defamation, or any other cause of 

actions tort or equity? Why does it legalize those, what I 

believe, fundamental rights of individuals to have them appear 

before the . . . to bring them to the court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: Mr. Chairman, and to the member, with 

respect to your first point concerning arbitration, it is an 

alternative that we considered very carefully and for a long 

time. 

 

And we didnt . . . I mean it is a viable option, theres no 

question about that. The better option seemed to us to be to 

apply the common law standards which are . . . theyre 

complex but theyre well known, if you know what I mean. I 

mean the factors that go into the calculation of a severance 

entitlement are complex but they are well known among 

lawyers and judges and some consultants. And the system is 

accustomed to dealing with these kinds of cases. So while it 

was a close call and while your option of arbitration is a good 

option, we elected this rather than the arbitration model. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and to the member, the other part which is a 

substantial question I want to deal with . . . and I want to make 

it clear that we are not legalizing defamation or inducing 

breach of contract or causing a loss of reputation in the terms 

that you suggest. Now I understand the difficulty here and I 

covered this in my answer to the hon. member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, but this is an important point and I want to try and 

give it again. 

 

This section 9 is a narrow idea and I want to repeat it. First of 

all let me say this to the member from Wilkie. Let me say this. 

Section 9(1) contains a number of different ideas and they are 

all drawn from elements that have been applied in unjust 

dismissal cases in the courts over the years. 

 

(2315) 

 

If you pick up a textbook on unjust dismissal or textbook like 

the firing line, for example, or that book, Harris on unjust 

dismissal, you will find these are the heads of damages under 

which the court has from time to time awarded damages for 

what we call unjust dismissals  dismissal without just cause. 

So the reason for the inclusion of that is to make it clear that all 

of those elements which are from time to time considered, are 

included in the claims that were dealing with. 

 

Now having set up that definition, subsection (2) then says that 

you cant sue the people who are mentioned there for that loss 

or damage in two situations: as a result of the enactment of this 

Act, which means what were doing here passing this law; or as 

a result of applying the Act, as we will apply it if it is passed by 

this legislature, when sections 4, 5, 6, and 7 are applied, so that 

an employee cannot complain or cannot sue people, cannot sue 

a minister or an official or the Crown or what have you because 

section 5 was applied and a contract has been required to be 

filed, and therefore, may have breached a confidentiality 

provision in the agreement. 

 

That cannot form the subject of a cause of action, but, if a 

  



536 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

deputy minister were to fire an employee, and during that 

process defames the employee, then the employee has a cause 

of action for that defamation. 

 

If the circumstances are such that, in the process of dismissing 

an employee, there is a . . . something has happened as a result 

of which you can say that a breach of contract has been 

induced, inducing breach of contract in such circumstances that 

it amounts to a tort in law, to an actionable wrong, then the 

officials concerned are going to have to answer that claim. The 

employees claim is not taken away. We tried to draft 9 in such 

a way that it would apply only in the two narrow circumstances 

that I talked about. 

 

And were not trying to give anybody any protection against 

actionable wrongs that they may commit, including defamation 

and other such things like inducing breach of contract, 

interfering with the contract, mental distress, loss of reputation, 

defamation, and so on. 

 

And Im glad to have the opportunity to try to repeat that in this 

House, because these two answers that Ive now given will be 

important in interpreting what the intention of the legislature 

was in passing this provision, if that turns out to be the case. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I guess I could say that in 

some ways I would believe that your intentions are honourable 

and some ways I could say, well maybe theyre not. And Im 

not being disrespectful to this Assembly. But its a choice that 

people make, and legal counsel will sit on both sides. 

 

The concern that we have on this side is exactly opposite to the 

one that you were . . . not opposite to what you were describing 

 the situation is opposite. What if the union has defamation 

of character as its goal and says about a deputy minister that 

that is what I want to have that deputy minister, and I will 

defame him. 

 

But we have instances of the head of the union talking about 

scabs, and you know the incident. If that would happen from a 

union towards the deputy minister, the deputy minister then 

upon termination would have no recourse to the court because 

theyre excluded from the very fact of prosecution, because 

theyre not involved in it. Thats the problem that we see. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, I can say to the member 

without equivocation that if a defamation has occurred in the 

circumstances that he describes, an action would like. This Bill 

would not protect the particular union leader that youre talking 

about. Thats my view and its the view of my officials. 

 

The Chair:  Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje:  I want to raise a point of order, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Chair:  State your point of order. 

 

Ms. Lorje:  My point of order is I would like to know if it is 

appropriate if a member declares under section 37 that she has 

a pecuniary interest in a matter under 

consideration in the legislature whether or not she should then 

speak to the matter. It seems to me that by questioning one 

could make the case that a member is seeking to influence. And 

it would seem to me that this is . . . if indeed there is a conflict 

of interest that by questioning, even while were in committee, 

that this is certainly imprudent, shows a certain lack of caution 

and possible disrespect for this House. 

 

So I would like to know whether or not when a member 

declares a conflict under section 37, he or she is then allowed 

to speak to the matter. And if it is appropriate, I would like to 

know then what the remedy may be in the event that this may 

arise in future occasions in this House. 

 

The Chair:  Order. I thank the member from Saskatoon 

Wildwood for her point of order. I would draw members 

attention to rule 37 or our Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly; 37 states clearly that: 

 

No Member is entitled to vote upon any question in 

which he has a direct pecuniary interest, and the vote of 

any Member so interested shall be disallowed. 

 

The rule in all of our rules are silent on the question of 

members speaking or a member asking questions about the 

matter in which he or she has a direct pecuniary interest. So our 

rules are silent on that point. 

 

In terms of practice in parliaments elsewhere, refer members to 

Erskine May Parliamentary Practice Twentieth Edition. And 

although Erskine May is silent on the particular point, Erskine 

May does state that although a member with a pecuniary 

interest may be disqualified from voting, he is not restrained by 

any existing rule of the House from proposing a motion or 

amendment. 

 

Inasmuch as a member has not been precluded or disqualified 

or restrained from proposing a motion or amendment, the Chair 

assumes that its parliamentary practice, or it follows that the 

member would then also be able to speak to the motion or the 

amendment. 

 

Similarly in the House of Representatives in Australia, which 

we do refer to from time to time, the House there in 1984, and I 

refer to the House of Representatives Practice, second edition, 

where it states on page 176: 

 

In 1984 the House resolved, inter alia, that Members 

must declare any relevant interest at the beginning of a 

speech (in the House, in the committee of the whole or 

in a committee), and if proposing to vote in a division. 

 

So their practice is that relevant interest must be declared, but 

at the beginning of a speech. And therefore it follows that the 

member is in a position to make his speech. 

 

But again I go back to the Rules and Procedures of the 

Saskatchewan Assembly which state that although a member is 

not entitled to vote upon any question in which he or she has a 

direct pecuniary interest, it is silent on the question of a 

member being able to speak to any motion or amendment in 

which the member may have an interest. So I find the point of 

order not well taken.  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

Mr. Swenson:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

accept your definition that youve given to the House on clause 

9 tonight, because as I have said before in debate in this 

legislature, I think the minister is a fairly honourable man. But 

the very issue that has caused this Bill, Mr. Minister, is politics. 

It is a decision by a political body of government to change the 

way in which severance is paid to its employees whom it 

wishes to dismiss either with cause or without cause. 

 

And, sir, because politics are involved, I think one of the things 

that members of the opposition have a great deal of difficulty 

with, given your explanation of the very narrow application is 

that, sir, other members of your political party will be as 

honourable as you in maintaining that very narrow definition. 

 

There are a lot of people, I would suggest to you, sir, working 

for the Government of Saskatchewan in various capacities. And 

I pointed out to you today you have 401 under the Department 

of Justice alone that are either OC (order in council) or out of 

scope employees who must feel a little bit of trepidation about 

this particular Bill and the scope that you have outlined under 

section 9, where someone who is out to settle a score using 

many of the things available in this Act, someone who may be 

very close to Executive Council and the desire by Executive 

Council to protect that individual, would then  and, sir, I 

know how the political system works  would then the 

temptation not be to use this particular section to cover off? 

 

And, sir, as I said, I respect you as an hon. person, as the 

highest law officer in our land, but I guess what Im almost 

saying to you, sir: can you be absolutely sure in confirming to 

this Assembly that others are as honourable as you in this 

particular application and its narrowness? 

 

(2330) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I can, Mr. Chairman, I can give the 

hon. member assurance that all members of this government 

are as least as honourable as I am. I dont want to make light of 

that though. 

 

I want to say to the hon. member, I want to say to the hon. 

member that we regret having to bring this Bill to this 

legislature. And I want to tell the member from Wilkie that we 

do regret having done it. 

 

We were surprised to learn, as I said earlier in this House, we 

were surprised to find what we found, and we had to make a 

decision as to whether we didnt do anything about it or 

whether we did something about it. And members of your side 

of the House have agreed during the debate that the severance 

provisions are appropriate, as I understood the remarks of some 

of your hon. members, that the issue was not the severance 

provision. And I mean Im not saying that all members 

opposite share that view but I have heard the view expressed. 

And I . . . that corresponds with my own view of it. 

 

Some of these contracts are unconscionable. Members opposite 

know it; we know it. The question then becomes whether a 

government does something about that or 

whether it simply pays up. And there starts the policy 

discussion. And we are in apparent disagreement on it and 

thats the way it is. 

 

We intend to apply this Act rigorously. We intend to proceed 

exactly in accordance with it, and in particular we dont intend 

to expand the shield of section 9 beyond what Ive said in the 

House tonight. 

 

Now this is the third time that Ive said it. We will apply it 

strictly in accordance with its terms and the shield will apply 

only in respect of claims that are framed as being a result of the 

enactment of application of this Act. 

 

And that thats the third time Ive said it and Im glad to have 

the opportunity to say it. This is a narrow protection that does 

not allow anybody to defame anybody or to slander anyone, to 

interfere with any contract, to induce any breach, to damage 

any reputation, and so on. 

 

And I will apply it as such, my department will so interpret it to 

the government, and my colleagues will respect it. And I give 

you that assurance. 

 

Mr. Swenson:  Mr. Minister, I never intended that it would 

be directed at any member of this legislature, my comment. But 

as you know there are a lot of other people besides hon. 

members involved in Government of Saskatchewan. There are 

people that have positions of significant power that are not 

elected members of this particular legislature. People in fact 

that have the power to hire and fire individuals that work for 

the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I guess, sir, as has been outlined . . . and I know you have 

repeated it over and over again, but because it is an issue of 

politics and that many people out there I believe are perceiving 

that the only ones that are involved in this particular action are 

in some way associated with the former government in a 

political way. And I suggest to you, sir, that that is simply not 

the case in some circumstances. And if that is not the case, then 

this can apply I would suggest to you, sir, to indeed hundreds 

of individuals. Because without the clause that the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone has suggested, members of the 

opposition are not absolutely assured that this thing cannot 

continue to go on and broaden its scope because there are more 

than hon. members involved in this exercise. 

 

And, sir, I dont know if the court is going to maintain your 

absolutely narrow definition on this one because it has never 

been tried before in Canadian law. As I understand it, these 

particular rules and regulations as you have outlined in your 

Bill, they are different than anything that has been attempted 

before. And you are going on the supposition that that narrow 

definition will be applied in all circumstances. And, sir, 

because of the magnitude of the thing that were talking about, 

Im not so sure that you can ensure that to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, and to the member, of 

course somebody may get off the rails, you know. And if they 

do, they have to answer for it. The protection is only the 

protection thats afforded by the Act. And if any such person as 

you mentioned goes off the rails as I say 

  



538 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

and defames anyone or otherwise commits a tort or actionable 

wrong of any kind, then that persons going to have to answer 

for it. And this Bill will only afford the narrow protection that 

it affords that Ive described before. 

 

Were going to try and prevent that. Theres no cause to 

defame people. Theres no cause to commit actionable wrongs 

when youre trying to behave like a responsible employer, 

which is how were trying to behave. And if anyone violates 

those rules, then theyre going to have to answer for it. And 

theyll have to answer for it ultimately in a court if it comes to 

that. 

 

Mr. Martens:  I suppose, Mr. Minister, that if we here were 

the only ones that were going to define what this was really 

going to mean, then we would be able to define it. But we are 

not always going to be able to define it in the context of how 

were describing it here because some justice may in fact 

interpret it different than that one has. And thats what causes 

us a concern. Because it is so very narrow that it might deal 

with a concern that is on line with what that individual feels 

and may not in fact deal with it. Ill just leave that because 

weve had it explained to us a number of times. 

 

I want to raise a number of amendments and Ive provided 

them to the Minister of Justice as well as to the independent 

member. And I will provide them as we go along, Mr. 

Chairman. I have them here with me. Ill give them as they go 

along. And I have two of them in section 2. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I just want to respond very briefly to 

the ministers point about a judge interpreting these sections 

differently. I want to say first of all, as one of my colleagues 

has observed, thats the risk you take when you pass any law, 

that you might not find the right words to exactly express the 

idea so that a court will understand your intention and give it 

effect. 

 

But weve done the best we can. Weve worked hard on this 

clause and were satisfied, the Department of Justice is 

satisfied, that we have expressed the ideas in clear legal terms. 

So well just have to see how its treated in the courts. 

 

And if the courts dont seem to be correcting it, or interpreting 

it properly, then well have to consider whether this House 

should consider the matter again. But for now were confident 

that weve expressed the idea correctly. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

Mr. Martens:  I have two amendments here, Mr. Speaker, 

under this section. The first one deals with section 2(e)(iv)(A) 

and (B), and there are two provisions in there that talk about a 

90 per cent. Its our observation that there may in fact be some 

boards and commissions that are less than that and it would 

make the response by that agency not responsible to supply to 

the clerk of the cabinet the information as required. And thats 

the one. 

And the other one is a broader definition of the employer-

employee relationship that deals with section (g) and Im going 

to provide them to the table at this time. 

 

The Chair:  Would the member move the first amendment 

and then well deal with that and then well get to the second 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I move the first amendment 

be considered in committee. 

 

The Chair: Its been moved by the member from Morse: 

 

That section 2 of the printed Bill be amended by deleting the 

term 90% where it appears in paragraphs (e)(iv)(A) and 

(B) therein and substituting therefore the words a majority. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I want the 

member to know that we gave this proposed amendment, of 

which you were good enough to give us notice this afternoon, 

gave it long consideration and it was quite tempting to accept it 

because its a workable idea. 

 

Our problem is that we dont know what it would sweep into 

the Bill. We do know what we would be including with the 

provisions that are there where the government has 90 per cent 

of the shares or appoints 90 per cent of the board of directors. 

 

But your amendment would make more Crown employers . . . 

would widen the definition of a Crown employer and include 

more agencies or corporations. And we were uncertain, for 

example, whether we would be sweeping in Trinitel, for 

example, whether we have 51 per cent of that company. I think 

we do. But we didnt know that this afternoon, you know with 

being Saturday and all, we couldnt make the kind of inquiries 

that wed have to make. And we dont want to sweep in people 

like that, you know. Theyre not intended to be covered by this 

Bill. 

 

So while it was a very constructive suggestion for the member 

to make, we are not able to accept the amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, on section 2(G) we have an 

expansion of the items that we have placed before. Ill provide 

the Assembly with the information. Its an expansion of the 

role of the employer. As we indicated before, we believe that 

severance is a part of the disclosure that we need to take into 

consideration. And we are not going to stand in the way of that 

so what we did is we broadened the base of that to some extent. 

 

The Chair:  The question before the committee is the 

amendment proposed by the member from Morse which reads: 

 

Amend section 2 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after clause (g) therein the following 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

clause: 

 

 g.1 employer-employee relationship means any 

relationship in which the executive government of 

Saskatchewan pays or gives consideration to a 

person in return for an act or a service including: 

(i) the provision of advice of any sort; 

(ii) writing, including speech writing; 

(iii) consulting of any sort; 

(iv) polling; 

(v) the design, production of placement of 

advertising or other instruments of 

communication; or 

(vi) representation of a Minister, the Executive 

Council or other Crown employer in any 

capacity. 

 

(2345) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are not 

able to accept this amendment, Mr. Chairman, for two reasons. 

First of all it would involve a major rewrite of the Act because 

of the differences between the employment situation, the 

employment contract situation which is the subject of the Bill, 

and this kind of personal service contract which is covered by 

this definition. 

 

The other point is that when you start to apply sections 6 and 7 

of the Act to the kinds of personal services that are  Acts or 

services, I should say  that are covered by the proposed 

amendment, you really get into heavy water because in these 

contracts youre not dealing with severance pay as such. 

Youre talking about the end of a contract which may be for a 

specific term or which may be terminable by no notice or a 

notice of different lengths. And we think the situation is 

different enough that it would be hard to apply section 7 in 

particular as well as section 6 to the agreements that are 

described in this section. 

 

The other point is, and I think the substantial point with the 

amendment, is that it is a disclosure question, the requirement 

to file those contracts and to have them available for public 

inspection. And my advice is that this kind of contract that is 

described in the proposed amendment will be covered by 

freedom of information and will be public under that Act when 

its proclaimed on or about the 1st of April. So for those 

reasons, Mr. Chairman, we are not prepared to accept the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Swenson:  I hate to object again, Mr. Chairman, in this 

thing, but dont you see, Mr. Minister, that almost  and I go 

back to it again  if you had accepted this then I would have 

had some comfort that what this wasnt all about was politics, 

sir. 

 

But the very fact is that almost all of the arrangements entered 

into by your government since the day you were sworn in fit 

exactly into these categories. That by the time we get to 

whenever you feel comfortable with bringing in freedom of 

information legislation, a lot of these things will have become 

far more permanent in a different nature. And, sir, I would have 

felt far more comfortable 

with supporting your reasoning on this particular amendment 

if, along with the previous governments employees, your new 

employees had been subject to your Bill. And, sir, they are not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, if these people that have 

been helping us so far are employees and I think they are  

the outside lawyers, for example, would not be employees, I 

suppose, but the bulk of the people that have been brought into 

government are in the position of employees  then their 

contracts are covered by this Act and are subject to it and will 

have to be filed and will be a matter of public disclosure. 

 

The member keeps referring to the political nature of this. And 

I have to tell the member that we simply dont regard it as 

being a question of politics, we simply dont regard it as a 

question of politics. These people that have been the subject of 

the news so far may or may not be Tories. Some of them are, I 

suppose. Some of them have probably . . . are clearly so  for 

example, the former president of the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) Party, we know what his politics are  but it is 

more a question of responsible government than it is a question 

of politics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 4 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment to 

clause 4(6)(a). This deals with the contract and its availability 

to have everyone in Saskatchewan come to Regina or provide a 

copy of the contract on an individual basis into Regina to the 

clerk of cabinet. And its I think a hardship for those outlying 

areas, especially in the North where contracts could in fact 

have difficulty in coming to this. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman can I see a copy of the 

amendment that is being made? This is the amendment about 

the fees to be charged. This is the amendment thats been . . . 

this is the motion thats been handed to me. Could I ask the 

hon. member whether this is the amendment that he wants to 

propose? 

 

The Chair:  It might help . . . the Chair has the amendment 

by the member from Morse, is to: 

 

Amend section 4 of the printed Bill by adding 

immediately after the words fee prescribed in the 

regulations where they appear in clause 4(b) thereof 

the following words: 

 

but such a fee is not to exceed the actual cost of 

providing a photocopy of the contract. 

 

I just might say thats the amendment in the order that it was 

given to me, before me, so thats the amendment thats before 

the committee at this point. 

  



540 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  This is a proposed amendment to 

clause 4(b) dealing with the fees to be charged. And the 

proposal is that the fee not exceed the actual cost of providing a 

photocopy of the contract. 

 

And this is a suggestion again that we considered rather 

carefully. And our problem is that we dont know how we 

could actually . . . how we could calculate the actual cost of 

providing a photocopy of the contract. So we . . . That is a 

contentious issue and we can estimate, you know, like 25 cents 

a page or 50 cents a page, but theyre grabbing figures out of 

the air and theres no way to really prove that you can produce 

a figure that is the actual cost of providing a photocopy. 

 

I can say to the hon. member that the fee to be prescribed will 

be a modest fee and will be geared to what we would estimate 

to be the cost of producing the copy, but we dont think it 

appropriate to actually write into the law that it will not exceed 

a cost that we dont feel that were able to precisely calculate. 

So accordingly and with some regret we cannot accept this 

proposed amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Mr. Martens:  I have an amendment here to section 4(a)(5), 

and it deals with the Crown employer and a definition of the 

. . . pursuant to section 4. 

 

The Chair:  The question before the committee is the 

motion by the member from Morse to: 

 

Amend section 4 of the printed Bill by: 

 

(a) deleting the words purpose by the permanent head 

where they appear in clause (5)(b) therein and substituting 

therefore the following words: purpose by the permanent 

head; or; and 

 

(b) adding immediately after clause (5)(b)thereof the 

following: (c) the Minister responsible for the specific 

Crown employer, in which case the Minister shall ensure the 

application is forthwith delivered to the appropriate 

permanent head. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, we regard the proposed 

amendment as an improvement to the Bill and were prepared 

to accept it. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Now, Mr. Chairman, section 4(6)(a) is the 

one I gave you earlier  . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. It 

deals with photocopying and bringing these . . . 

 

An Hon. Member:  That one we did. 

 

Mr. Martens:  That one we did? Well get her here. Mr. 

Chairman, we want to: 

 

Amend section 4 of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

after the words to examine the contract where they appear 

in clause (6)(a) thereof the words, at the discretion of the 

applicant. 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We are 

prepared to accept this amendment. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 4 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 5 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I have generally had a whole 

lot of problems with this clause 9 and I have given the minister 

a copy of this, and I would like him to consider that there be a 

removal of certain words that he uses in this amendment. They 

deal with things that are . . . in the words of the individual that 

represents Thunder Creek, were dealing in a political world. 

And we deal in that political world and we deal with it . . . and 

I believe in a political world and I have been a part of it. 

However, when that confrontation between two political 

entities that are at odds with one another face each other, then 

we have rules in this Assembly that dictate to us to the extent to 

which we can go. 

 

I respect the observations that you have made. However, I 

dont feel that I have to agree with them. And I have provided 

this motion to the Chair and to you, and I would like to have 

you consider it. 

 

(2400) 

 

The Chair:  The motion before the committee is the 

proposed amendment, with the motion moved by the member 

for Morse to: 

 

Amend section 9 of the printed Bill by deleting 

subsection (1) thereof and substituting the following: 

 

(1) in this section claim for loss or damage means any 

claim in damages or debt in a cause of action in 

contract, tort or equity arising from or incidental to the 

termination or expiration of a Crown Employment 

Contract, but does not include any claim in damages or 

debt for unjust dismissal, mental distress, loss of 

reputation or defamation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  The member knows, Mr. Chairman, 

that we have been considering this clause over the day and 

weve been trying various formulations to make our intention 

more clear. And I have dealt with the governments 

interpretation of section 9 three times in the House tonight to 

put on the record very clearly what is the intention, and that is 

the policy that the Bill is trying to reflect. And accordingly, 

were not able to accept the proposed amendment. 

 

Amendment negatived on division. 

 

Clause 9 agreed to on division. 

 

Clause 10 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 agreed to. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

Clause 13 

 

Ms. Haverstock:  Yes, Mr. Chair, I would like to have 

consideration of the House to amend section 13 of the printed 

Bill to include the following, which of course arises from the 

discussions with the hon. minister: 

 

(a) By renumbering the section as subsection 13(1); and  

 

(b) By adding the following subsection after subsection (1) 

to include the following as: 

 

(2) This Act shall remain only in force for one year from 

the date of assent, but the lapse of this Act shall not 

revive any right of action or right to compensation 

extinguished by the application of this Act. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to 

say to you and to the member that the remarks that I made 

earlier still hold, that we are prepared to give consideration to 

the members suggestion, and serious consideration to it. 

 

As I said, we think that the freedom of information Act will 

subsume some of the Act, two sections in particular, sections 4 

and 5. And we will certainly consider our situation under the 

other sections as the situation develops as time goes on. But for 

tonight we are not prepared to accept the amendment to Section 

13. 

 

Amendment negatived. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to on division. 

 

Mr. Martens:  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the officials 

and you for your willingness to participate in the discussion, 

and I want to thank particularly your officials for the work that 

they have done in preparing this. I was on legislative review 

committee for a long time and we got to meet these gentlemen 

in a regular pattern and I respect their observations. Today I 

may not agree with them but we will wait to see what happens 

with this legislation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  I thank the member, Mr. Chairman, on 

behalf of the officials, and Id like to add my own thanks to 

these officials as well as others who are not in the room tonight 

who really labored mightily over this particular Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair:  Before I ask the minister to report the Bill, 

might I just compliment members on both sides for their co-

operation that theyve shown the Chair in committee in these 

last few days. Thank you very much. I ask the minister to 

report the Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Chairman, I move that we report 

the Bill with amendments. 

 

The division bells rang from 12:08 a.m. until 12:12 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Wiens Lautermilch 

Simard Calvert 

Lingenfelter Hamilton 

Teichrob Johnson 

Koskie Trew 

Shillington Scott 

Anguish McPherson 

Goulet Kujawa 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Mitchell Harper 

Cunningham Renaud 

Hagel Langford 

Bradley Jess 

Lorje  

 27 

 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd DAutremont 

 8 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

(0015) 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 18  An Act to provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe Provisions in 

Crown Employment Contracts governing Payments and 

Benefits on Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, 

to Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting those 

matters and to Extinguish any Right of Action and Right to 

Compensation for any Loss or Damage resulting from the 

Enactment or Application of this Act 

 

The Speaker:  When shall the amendments be read a first 

and second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, by leave, now. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Speaker:  When shall the Bill be read a third time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell:  Mr. Speaker, with leave, now. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 

the member for Saskatoon Fairview, that by leave of the 

Assembly:  



542 Saskatchewan Hansard December 21, 1991 

That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and a time set by Mr. 

Speaker upon request of the government; and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 

possible, by registered mail of such date and time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 12:21 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 1  An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities 

Act 

Bill No. 5  An Act to amend The Liquor Consumption 

Tax Act 

Bill No. 6  An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provision) Act 

Bill No. 7  An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly 

and Executive Council Act 

Bill No. 8  An Act respecting the Tabling of Documents 

and Certain Consequential and other 

Amendments to Other Acts resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

Bill No. 14  An Act to amend The Mortgage Protection Act 

Bill No. 15  An Act to amend The Municipal Board Act 

Bill No. 11  An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue 

Sharing Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 12  An Act to amend The Assessment 

Management Agency Act 

Bill No. 13  An Act respecting Certain Payments to the 

Meewasin Valley Authority, the Wakamow 

Valley Authority and the Wascana Centre 

Authority 

Bill No. 16  An Act to establish the Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Holding Corporation 

Bill No. 17  An Act to amend The Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications Act 

Bill No. 3  An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

Bill No. 4  An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

Bill No. 2  An Act to amend The Medical Profession Act, 

1981 

Bill No. 18  An Act to provide for the Public Disclosure of 

Crown Employment Contracts, to Prescribe 

Provisions in Crown Employment Contracts 

governing Payments and Benefits on 

Termination or Expiration of those Contracts, to 

Void Provisions in those Contracts respecting 

those matters and to Extinguish any Right of 

Action and Right to Compensation for any Loss 

or Damage resulting from the Enactment or 

Application of this Act 

 

Her Honour:  In Her Majestys name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

 

Bill No. 19  An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public 

Service for the last quarter of the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 

1992 

 

Her Honour:  In Her Majestys name I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 12:25 a.m. 

 

The Speaker:  Will the members be seated, please. Before 

we accept a motion of adjournment, I do want to take this 

opportunity on behalf of all the members to thank the pages for 

their work in this session and also to thank the Clerks and the 

legislative staff. I think theyve worked very diligently for us 

and I ask the members to express their appreciation. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  

 

The Speaker:  I know this is unusual but I do want to take 

this opportunity to thank all the members for I think their 

diligence in attempting to improve the decorum of the House. 

 

Ive heard many people outside the House and inside the House 

express that opinion, and I think the honour and the privilege 

and the congratulations goes to each and every one of you in 

assisting myself in this first session and in helping to improve 

the decorum, and for that I congratulate all of you. 

 

And before we adjourn, may I take this opportunity to wish all 

of you a blessed Christmas and a joyous New year. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter:  Mr. Speaker, I too want to join you 

in thanking the staff, the Clerks, pages, and others who work in 

the building for being, I guess, tolerant and patient with the 

members of the Legislative Assembly. 

 

I want to say as well that I agree whole-heartedly that the 

decorum in the House I think has improved, I think in large 

part because of the many new members who have come here 

with the idea of making it a more successful working 

relationship. I think also credit has to be given to the new 

opposition and the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

I think this idea of new co-operation in the Assembly will work 

well, basically for the members of the Assembly, but more 

importantly for the people of the province. 

 

In closing, I too want to wish all members of the Legislative 

Assembly and their families, the people who work there, a very 

merry Christmas and look forward to seeing you some time 

early in the New Year. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 

the Government House Leader and yourself, Mr. 

  



December 21, 1991 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

Speaker, in thanking the legislative staff, the Clerk, the pages, 

and all those that work in the Assembly, wish them a very 

merry Christmas and a safe holiday season. 

 

I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on the decorum in the 

Assembly. I too have heard comments and bouquets coming to 

the Speakers chair as a result of your rulings on both sides to 

keep the place a little bit more orderly. And I say that very 

sincerely and we look forward to that sort of decorum in the 

future. 

 

And to all members in the Legislative Assembly, and 

particularly to all the new ones, I wish them a very merry 

Christmas and a safe holiday season and we look forward to the 

New Year. Merry Christmas, everybody. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 12:30 a.m. 

 


