




















































Hansard: July 30, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1841 

 July 30, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

present the following petition to the Assembly: 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

That back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to 

the Canadian economy; 

 

that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy 

for such disorders; 

 

that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low 

cost, conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent 

with the true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

that the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in 

patient disability. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent 

from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed 

for any other medical treatment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

A few of the names on this petition, Mr. Speaker: Theresa 

Hitchens from Oxbow, Angela Delalleau from Wauchope, Bob 

Jones from Estevan, Betty Bayliss from Carnduff.  Mr. 

Speaker, I present these petitions. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well 

petitions with regards to the same issue.  I'll just read the last 

little paragraph to emphasize the importance of these 

people's needs and wishes.  It says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And I'll just note that we have names on here from Lumsden, 

Regina, and Swift Current.  For the Regina members you might 

want to note a couple of the addresses so that you know that it's 

in your constituency.  We have Campbell Street, Lincoln Drive 

-- well it's from all over the city basically -- Montague Street.  

Just full of names from all over here.  There's Rose Avenue.  

There's, well, Dalgliesh Drive.  Just about from all over the 

whole city, Mr. Speaker.  And I'd be pleased to present these 

now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions to 

present as well, with respect to chiropractic care in the 

province.  They are from particularly the rural areas of 

Saskatchewan, might be of interest to the Minister of Rural 

Development, a number of petition-signers from Canora.  Also 

it might be of interest to the member from Weyburn.  We have 

a large number of people from the Weyburn and district that 

have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

here from the chiropractors . . . people who want the 

chiropractor care under the health care in Saskatchewan, and 

they come from Regina, Swift Current, Herbert, Stewart 

Valley, Elrose, Mankota, Shaunavon, Tompkins.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I present these to the Table here today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

a number of petitions with names from the Broadview area, 

Spy Hill, Esterhazy, Tantallon, Whitewood, Ogema, Griffin, 

Weyburn, Midale, and a number of other locations in the 

province again expressing their concerns over chiropractic 

services. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have two 

more petitions and they're right full of names.  The only part 

I'm going to repeat is what I call a very serious part of this, that 

the government is acting to destroy these principles as they 

apply to chiropractor patients. 

 

They're from all over Saskatchewan.  These are kind of . . . 

There are a lot from Regina, North Battleford, Meadow Lake, 

Battlefords.  There's some from Southey, White City, and of 

course there's a lot always on here from Churchill Downs.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's a pleasure to present these petitions. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too am going to 

present petitions from people across southern Saskatchewan, 

and it has to do with chiropractic care, and they're asking the 

government, the NDP (New  



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

Democratic Party) government, to reverse its stand.  These 

people are coming from places like Estevan, Redvers, Bienfait, 

Carnduff, Stoughton, Oxbow, various places, Lampman, 

Craven, and various addresses in the city of Regina, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I would ask the Clerk to please table these. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I today have two different 

petitions to table with the Assembly.  One is to deal with the 

livestock cash advance and the other is to deal with the 

FeedGAP program.  Because both of these have been read into 

the record previously, Mr. Speaker, I will not go through the 

entire preamble.  But needless to say that in both cases the 

petitioners are quite upset with the government over their 

announced policy decisions and the havoc that will occur in the 

livestock industry through both of these measures. 

 

These people on both petitions are from Swift Current and area, 

and I with pleasure, Mr. Speaker, table them in the Assembly 

today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the livestock cash advance program; 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the FeedGAP program; 

 

 And of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse it's decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 

members of the Assembly, I'm very pleased and proud to 

introduce my wife, who's visiting us here today, seated in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker, in the front row. 

 

And I'm sure that all members of the Assembly would like to 

join with me in welcoming my wife here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed my 

privilege to introduce to you and through you to members of 

the Assembly, two very dear friends of mine from Assiniboia, 

Earl and Bronwyn Willer, who are in your gallery, and two of 

their friends who are visiting from Texas. 

 

Would you warmly welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Liquor Licensing Commission Appointments 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, all 

through this session we have seen mounting evidence that there 

is massive patronage by the government opposite. 

 

People are being fired, Mr. Speaker, because their blood isn't 

red enough and people are being hired because of it. 

 

Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we saw the Minister 

of Education laugh at the fact that the president of The 

Battlefords NDP association was appointed a member of the 

North West Regional College board. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question to the 

minister responsible for the liquor licensing board.  Mr. 

Minister, can you tell me if any of the five new board members 

you appointed on Monday have any affiliation with the NDP -- 

any support for the NDP either through membership or 

financial support?  Would you answer that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as was pointed out 

yesterday, something like 55 per cent of the people in 

Saskatchewan supported the NDP, and I suspect that number's 

rising all the time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Certainly I can assure that that is 

not a criteria for being appointed to Liquor Licensing 

Commission. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, that 

type of flippant answer doesn't square with what your Premier 

and your Minister of Justice have said in this Chamber 

previously. 

 

Mr. Minister, your colleague, the Minister of Education, said 

that by pure coincidence, by pure coincidence, the president of 

The Battlefords NDP association was appointed.  By the 

miracle of pure chance, the number one political officer in The 

Battlefords for your party was chosen -- one out of tens of 

thousands of possible people.  Now you're claiming that you 

have no knowledge of the political affiliations of the five new 

Liquor Board members. 

 

Let's assume that you're being honest, Mr. Minister.  Would 

you consider it a coincidence if any of your board members 

were NDP supporters, as did the Minister of Education? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

that the member opposite . . . would be a coincidence that one 

NDP person should be chosen to the board.  I would contend 

that there are thousands upon thousands of NDP members, and 

the chances of them 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

being chosen are rather high. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To the same 

minister.  Mr. Minister, you and your Premier and your party 

promised the people of Saskatchewan in last fall's election that 

the NDP government would be patronage free.  No more 

appointments, according to your democratic policy paper.  

Your Minister of Labour has pledged in this Chamber, there 

would be no political appointments, no NDP patronage in your 

administration. 

 

Unfortunately it seems, Mr. Minister, this isn't the case.  You 

and your cabinet colleagues refuse to come clean with what is a 

known fact out there.  Mr. Minister, you know full well that all 

five of the people that you appointed to your board are 

financial contributors to the NDP -- all five. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you would like to get your foot out of 

your mouth, explain to the people of this province that that isn't 

by coincidence.  Explain that this is another betrayal of the 

trust that people gave you last fall as soon as the member from 

Riversdale was sworn in. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I remind the member that he's gone on for 

over a minute in asking his question.  I want him to put his 

question directly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Would the minister 

explain this betrayal of trust by you and your Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this was a . . . I have 

no difficulty whatsoever in defending appointments to the 

Liquor Licensing Commission.  I think we've done an excellent 

job at appointing competent people. 

 

I would like to point out to the members opposite that we have 

done gender parity in our boards; we have appointed aboriginal 

people to our boards; we have cut the size and the expense of 

our boards; we have appointed competent people. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Question to the same minister, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Minister, Joan Josephson . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Must be hurting them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well the noise is coming from both sides of 

the House.  I don't know who's hurting, but I think the floor is 

to the member from Thunder Creek. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, Joan Josephson, 108 bucks; 

Violet Kyliuk, 136; Diana Stinka, 158; Ray 

Hamilton, 330; Flora Waller -- wife of Tom Waller, of the 

NDP law firm, Olive Waller & Waller -- 708. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I'm sure they're all fine people, but they are 

all NDP supporters.  All five, Mr. Minister, you appointed to 

your board. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would remind members again 

that please no interference when the member is asking his 

question.  And the member also is a veteran member; he knows 

he should be directing his question through the Speaker.  And I 

want to remind him to put his question and direct his question 

through the Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the minister responsible for the liquor licensing 

board.  Mr. Minister, the odds of that happening by chance I 

say are fairly astronomical.  Please don't continue to embarrass 

yourself by pretending that this is some amazing coincidence 

that happened.  Instead perhaps you should begin explaining to 

the people of this province and the public what your procedure 

on political patronage is.  Can you tell this Assembly what the 

criteria is for receiving an NDP political appointment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, as I have pointed out, 

the criteria for being selected to a board is competence.  It's on 

a regional basis.  It's based on gender parity which we have 

done a much better job than any former government has done.  

We've done a much better job at appointing aboriginal people 

to boards.  And those, Mr. Speaker, are the criteria that we use. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, despite your denials it appears 

that a financial contribution to the NDP Party helps an 

individual's chances considerably.  The donations range in this 

particular board's case from 108 to 708. 

 

Now two questions for you, Mr. Minister.  Was the cut-off at 

$100, or was there an NDP fair tendering policy in place for 

Liquor Licensing Commission board appointments? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- If members don't want to have their questions 

answered, that's fine with me.  I'll simply call a recess until I 

get order in the House.  I'm just simply not going to put up with 

this nonsense. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I would again point 

out that the boards by and large are much smaller than the 

boards that we inherited, that the remuneration in many cases 

has been lowered, and that people were appointed on the basis 

of competence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, that wasn't the question -- about 

the size of the board.  I asked: at what level of financial 

contribution do you qualify, and do you have a fair tendering 

policy for these NDP appointments?  What 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

costs do we have attached to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order. Before the minister gets 

up, I've been following these questions very closely.  I think the 

member opposite knows that ministers are not responsible for 

answering for the political status of any members.  And if he 

gets back to the minister's responsibility, I will leave it in order, 

but I think the member knows that he's out of order with his 

questioning. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm simply asking 

the minister responsible for the liquor licensing board, the 

member who takes the names forward to cabinet for OC (order 

in council), about criteria for those eligible.  And I would 

simply like the minister to explain the eligibility criteria.  And 

obviously from the evidence, Mr. Speaker, it has something to 

do with the level of dollars expended.  I just want to know what 

the criteria is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only reiterate 

what I've said before.  The criteria is competence.  It was based 

on gender parity because we wanted some women on boards 

and in commissions which in the past have been neglected.  We 

wanted some aboriginals to be part of our society and take part 

in our boards and commissions, and we put some of them on 

the boards.  And we based it on competence. 

 

Although the members opposite may have been in the habit of 

checking political contributions, I have not, and am not, and 

will not be doing that sort of thing.  I don't have the time to run 

around the province deciding who contributed money to what 

party. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  One final question 

on this topic.  I'll go to the Minister of Justice.  Mr. Minister, 

given your responses on political patronage in this House 

earlier in the session, and the obvious high road that you have 

assigned to yourself and your government on this issue, Mr. 

Minister, do you agree with the minister responsible for the 

Liquor Board who appears has a financial criteria attached to 

attaining board membership on boards and commissions?  Do 

you agree with that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I don't know how 

many times the member opposite needs to have this question 

answered.  The criteria for appointment to any of the boards 

and commissions of this government have been competence 

first of all.  The minister has explained the other factors that are 

applied and they are applied.  And we are proud, we're proud of 

the boards and commissions that we've appointed up to this 

point.  We're very proud of that. 

 

Now as has also been explained, it's pretty hard to find a group 

of five people or eight people in Saskatchewan to appoint to a 

board, some of whom have not supported the NDP.  I also want 

to tell the member without fear of contradiction that no one on 

this side of the House has checked the contributions of anyone 

who is being 

considered for appointment to any board or commission.  That 

is a fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Status of Proposed Pasta Plant 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is for the Minister of Economic Development.  Mr. 

Speaker, this government's sorry record of economic failure 

continues to unravel as more and more people discover that this 

government cannot be trusted to keep its word, or honour a 

contract.  We now add Saska Pasta to the list of broken 

contracts which include the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) deal, GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) contracts 

with thousands of farm families, Promavia, the upgrader, and 

agreements with public servants. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you now tell the House why you are, as a 

proponent of the Saska Pasta project says, and I quote: playing 

all sorts of games to try and control this project politically.  Is 

this just another example of your government's partisan effort 

to destroy everything ever done by the previous 

administration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

It is actually the Crown Investments Corporation which have 

been negotiating most recently.  This project . . . Nobody has 

told Saska Pasta that the project won't go.  The criteria, which 

applies to all investments, is there must be an adequate level of 

private investment.  As soon as the owners of Saska Pasta 

demonstrate that that is available at the required level, the 

project will proceed. They were told that when we met with 

them yesterday and they accepted that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

government doesn't care if it slanders business because it 

doesn't want them here anyway.  Mr. Minister, your 

deal-making record is already dismal.  We can only assume 

that your Social Services expert, Mr. Stobbe, who went with 

you on your New York City junket, must have made the 

recommendation to scrap this project.  That's the level of 

competency people are beginning to and continue to expect 

from this government -- Social Services people deciding on 

economic development projects. 

 

Mr. Minister, will the minister outline why he is changing the 

rules for Saska Pasta after a contract had been agreed to?  Why 

is this government now stalling on this project and demanding 

even more equity from the proponent?  Why are you changing 

the rules . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  One question at a time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this government's 

record for deal making doesn't include Joytec, doesn't include 

GigaText, High R Door, nor is our record going to include such 

shameful shemozzles.  We require people . . . we require a 

level of private investment; Saska Pasta know that.  The rules 

have not changed.  When they 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

demonstrate that there is a level of private investment, we are 

prepared to proceed.  And they were told that yesterday.  I have 

no idea where the member's getting his facts from because they 

certainly don't square with reality. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, what your record does include is 

AECL.  It includes breaking contracts with farmers on GRIP.  

It includes the cancellation of the . . . soon-to-be cancellation of 

Promavia projects, includes trouble with the upgrader at 

Lloydminster.  That's what your record involves, Mr. Speaker.  

That's what his record involves. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this minister is stonewalling.  This minister's 

stonewalling is only surpassed by his inability to help create 

jobs; 18,000 more people are out of work today than they were 

last year at this time, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Does the member have a question?  Well I 

would like you to put your question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, will you please inform this House 

how long you plan to stall and politically manipulate this 

project, and will he tell us and the people of Swift Current 

when will they finally have an answer?  Or is he hoping the 

proponents of Saska Pasta will walk away from this deal which 

no one could not expect them to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Against all temptations, I'm going to 

try to treat the member's question seriously.  I say to the 

member from Kindersley, a group met with the people from 

Saska Pasta yesterday.  It was a cordial meeting according to 

both sides.  It was pointed out by the officials of Crown 

Investments Corporation that from the beginning there had 

been a criteria that they needed some private investment.  They 

had not demonstrated it was available.  They assured the 

officials from Crown Investments Corporation that that could 

be demonstrated, and they were invited to do so.  The rules 

have not changed for Saska Pasta. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  One of the options . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  If the Government House 

Leader wishes to answer the next question, I think he has the 

opportunity to do so. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I agree with you.  If the 

minister would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- If the member has a question, I will recognize 

him, but I do not expect him to comment on my decisions. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, sir.  Mr. Minister, maybe when you're 

sitting there contemplating an answer, as one of the options you 

might like to contemplate is telling the truth.  That might be 

one of the options you would like to 

consider, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, the minister says he's investigating other 

possibilities for establishing a pasta plant, which includes the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and other private sector interests.  

Mr. Minister, will you tell us, will you identify, who else the 

government is negotiating with?  And if it is only the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, will he tell the House whether he 

has already guaranteed the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool that this 

project will fail?  Will he give us that assurance, Mr. Speaker, 

that he is doing everything he can in his power with Saska 

Pasta to make this project a success? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, I have been telling the 

truth.  I know members opposite have great trouble recognizing 

that when they see it, but I have been telling the truth from the 

beginning -- from the beginning, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 

all of the development projects in which we are engaged, 

unlike the nonsense in which you people engaged. 

 

We require a degree of private investment.  We think that's a 

sound principle.  We think that gives the taxpayers some 

assurance that they won't be left holding the bag, as they were 

on GigaText, Joytec, High R Doors, and the list goes on and on 

and on. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Farm Foreclosures in Drought Regions 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

today is to the Minister of Agriculture.  I know that there's no 

one that's qualified to answer for agriculture, but whoever 

thinks they are can answer my question, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture knows that the farmers throughout 

the province are desperate, and they're definitely more 

desperate in the drought zones of this province, which is about 

half of my area and to the south-east of me and also the 

north-east part of this province, Mr. Speaker, are in desperate 

need.  And the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association 

of Rural Municipalities), Mr. Speaker, told the government to 

focus on reality.  And I want to make his quote, Mr. Speaker.  

He says, quit the politics and meet the need. 

 

My question is: will the Minister of Agriculture tell this House 

how many notices of foreclosure are currently in place and how 

many are new ones that are coming in now?  And I'd like to 

have a specific answer from someone, is, Mr. Speaker, is: how 

many of these are in the drought area of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we certainly are 

aware that there are drought areas in the province.  The 

member opposite might be interested to know that the first crop 

report coming out, the first estimate places the Saskatchewan 

crop at 102 per cent of normal.  So it's not totally across the 

province as he would have us believe. 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

There are drought areas and there are debt problems. 

 

I know that the member opposite knows full well that the 

foreclosures are not related to this year's drought, that you 

rarely have crop to sell at this time of the year, from this crop.  

And the drought . . . the debt problems that are current have 

built up over the past 10 years and are what are causing 

problems with people with debt, and the inadequacies of last 

year's GRIP and lack of third line of defence from the federal 

government, and not this year's drought, that's causing these 

farmers to lose their land at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Another question.  That answer from that 

minister has to be the most arrogant answer I've ever heard on 

behalf of farmers ever heard in this House.  If I understand him 

properly, Mr. Speaker, he said that it's not really important 

right now because they're not selling wheat, whether there's 

drought or whether they're having foreclosures in those areas or 

not. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how many foreclosures are going 

on in this province in the past and today in the drought areas of 

this province?  That's my question.  Now give me the answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I again would 

reiterate that it is not this year's drought but last year's federal 

lack of response to our income shortfall that's causing the debt 

problems for the farmers.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is the plain 

truth.  And if the member opposite would quit playing politics . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I believe the member 

from Thunder Creek asked seven questions in the House today 

and I think he should let other people have an opportunity to 

ask questions and to answer those questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I think, 

speaking of political games, if the members opposite would get 

on with the business of this House and we could get our 

leaseback Bill through the House, we would be able to help 

some of those farmers who are now losing their land. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, seeing that this minister did 

not answer any of my questions, I will now go to the House 

Leader for my next question. 

 

I had a conversation, and so has many members of our caucus, 

with the House Leader in a suggestion like this.  This House 

has been at an impasse for months over the GRIP Bill because 

you'll do nothing for the farmers that need the 1991.  But now 

that there's been a little bit of rain, Mr. Minister, in this 

province in quite a few areas, the 1992 GRIP may not be too 

bad for them.  But what, Mr. Minister, are the people that have 

crop failure going to do? 

And I asked you, Mr. Minister, specifically if you would take it 

to your caucus and and say, accept the Minister of Agriculture, 

federal Minister of Agriculture's new policy, his new plan for 

Saskatchewan to help the drought people of Saskatchewan and 

the 1992 GRIP would maybe . . . would be a saw-off.  Did you 

take that . . . my question, Mr. Minister, did you take that to 

your caucus and get a decision?  Answer me that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member opposite that indeed what we're trying to do is to 

get the federal government, who have now . . . understand that 

there is a problem in Saskatchewan in terms of disaster and 

lack of money, to try to increase from 39 million, a measly $39 

million -- when last year they promised $500 million and have 

yet to deliver 1 cent of that -- that $39 million is not going to be 

enough. 

 

And what I can't understand is how the members opposite, 

when we moved a motion in this House to get the $500 million, 

everyone of them, including the member from Estevan, the 

former premier, was not in favour of the motion to get $500 

million for the farmers of Saskatchewan, and voted against the 

motion.  And today they sanctimoniously ask, where's the 

money, having voted against the very motion that would have 

got $500 million for the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As all your 

ministers answer, it doesn't answer my question. 

 

Mr. Minister, did you take it to your caucus and to your cabinet 

to discuss, to consider the offer from the federal government to 

help the farmers in the drought areas which would help all 

people in Saskatchewan?  Did you take that to your cabinet and 

discuss it or did you not?  Or are you just putting it aside 

because it's the Tory government that asked the question and or 

made the offer? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say that 

one of the main issues on the agenda of the NDP caucus and 

the government caucus in Saskatchewan in the past months has 

been the agricultural problem in large part created by the lack 

of money from the federal government that was promised and 

committed. 

 

I want to make one point to you.  The member opposite knows 

that the federal government has asked the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, the farmers of Canada, to pay back $41 million 

in overpayment in western grain stabilization.  You know that.  

Farmers have to pay back $41 million to western grain 

stabilization. 

 

The federal government's response is they're going to $39 

million -- $2 million less than they took back last month. 

 

Now I say to the members opposite, where are you when it 

comes to supporting the plea from farmers, the Wheat Pool, 

and farm organizations for $500 million?  Will you today make 

a commitment to support us if we put a motion on the Table to 

ask the federal government for the 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

$500 million?  Will you support us? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 

some guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

want to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

the Assembly two visitors from The Netherlands.  They're 

seated in your gallery. 

 

They are Bert Broekema and Tjakko Wezeman and they are 

accompanied here today by Mrs. Lynn Scott from the city of 

Regina.  And I know that all members will want to join with 

me, Mr. Speaker, when I say: 

 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Dutch.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 84 -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality 

Act, 1984 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

The Urban Municipality Amendment Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act respecting Fire Prevention and 

Certain Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

a Bill respecting Fire Prevention and Certain Consequential 

Amendments resulting from the enactment of this Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, we yesterday obtained from the 

Clerks' office a copy of a notice of motion by the government 

signalling its intent to move a motion tomorrow to reintroduce 

the GRIP legislation. 

 

I have two points of order on this notice of motion, Mr. 

Speaker.  First, Mr. Speaker, your ruling stated that the Bill 

was suspended, and I quote, "for at least . . . two weeks."  You 

did not say, sir, that the Bill was suspended for two weeks and 

the reason you gave for not being definitive was that you 

wanted to allow room for further effort at compromise. 
 

I suggest to you that because the suspension of the Bill 

was open-ended and not precise, no move can be made to 

reintroduce the Bill without a further ruling from Mr. Speaker 

stating that he has decided enough time has elapsed and an 

independent motion be entertained to determine the will of the 

Assembly.  Failing a ruling from the Speaker, there is no limit 

on the suspension, and that the ground . . . the notice of motion 

is out of order. 

 

While it may be argued that this is a matter of interpretation, 

the only officer that has the authority to make such an 

interpretation is the Speaker.  And you must make a definitive 

statement either that you intend the suspension to last precisely 

two weeks or that the open-ended nature of your ruling was 

intentional and therefore operative. 

 

If it was unintentional or inintentional, then the notice of 

motion cannot have been made until after the Speaker has ruled 

that the process should proceed.  That much at least is not 

subject, I believe, to interpretation. 

 

If the Speaker states that he erred in using the language, "at 

least two weeks", and that he actually meant precisely two 

weeks, then I argue that the notice of motion remains out of 

order on the face of it because two weeks had not elapsed prior 

to the notice of motion being made. 

 

Particularly in these confused, unprecedented, and unusual 

times, it is the belief of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that these 

are highly improper proceedings and that the process must be 

viewed as a single unit. 

 

The purpose of the government is to steal a day's march on the 

expiry of the two weeks simply to accommodate its weekend.  

The manner in which notice was given, I believe, is slightly 

conspiratorial and without warning to any member of either 

side of this Assembly, of this House.  And it simply reinforces 

our belief, Mr. Speaker, that the government must have some 

dishonourable motive in mind. 

 

It is not proper, Mr. Speaker, to set in motion the process to 

unsuspend the Bill before the two weeks suspension has 

actually expired.  Now, Mr. Speaker, in this case as in others, 

we all, as members of this House, know that absolute authority 

in this Assembly is in the hands of yourself.  And I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) have indicated that to you. 

 

Now even though that, Mr. Speaker, has indicated to you that 

that support is partisan, I expect Mr. Speaker is very mindful 

that he has charted new territory.  And the ruling on my point 

of order will form an integral part of that new territory that Mr. 

Speaker has charted. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think I've heard sufficient 

about the point of order that the member is raising.  I do want 

to consult with my Clerk for a minute.  I ask the Assembly to 

bear with me. 

 

(1445) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to speak to the point 

of order. 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Well before I recognize the Government 

House Leader, in order for it to be a point of order, I rule that 

the Assembly must have been breached. I don't find any rule in 

our rules and procedure that has been breached.  Therefore 

there cannot be a point of order. 

 

But further to the member's statement, the member, if he goes 

to my ruling on July 16 and on June 29, it clearly indicates that 

the vote on the GRIP Bill is thus suspended until I am informed 

that both the government and the official opposition are ready 

to proceed with the Bill or until the House itself makes a 

decision on the disposition of the Bill. 

 

Therefore the member is in error when he says that the Speaker 

must make a ruling to unsuspend the Bill.  The Speaker does 

not have to make a ruling.  The Speaker left it up to the 

members to make that decision, and that is the way it ought to 

be.  The Speaker has no part in making that decision. 

 

On the second question that the member raises, that the time 

has not elapsed, I wish to remind the member there is 

absolutely nothing in our rules that prevents someone to give 

notice of a motion whether it is 48 hours or 5 days or 10 days.  

All our rules say is that we must give at least 48 hours notice.  

Since today is the end of the two weeks, notice was given 

yesterday for the motion to take effect tomorrow.  That is at 

least two weeks. 

 

So on both grounds I find that there is no point of order and 

will proceed from there. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of 

order.  I wish to address and have stricken from the record 

remarks that were made yesterday about me without foundation 

by the member from Arm River.  And although I have 

approached this member about this, I feel it necessary to have 

official action taken to strike these remarks. 

 

Yesterday the member from Arm River indicated that I had 

sent out a copy or copies of the Hansard to people in Loreburn 

with the objective of, and I quote: causing some disturbance in 

his constituency.  There is no truth to these comments made by 

the member from Arm River about my having circulated 

Hansard in his area. 

 

I ask the member to substantiate his claim and provide the 

names of the people to whom I had allegedly supplied 

Hansard.  I checked with one of these individuals who told me 

that it was he who had indeed obtained the verbatim of the 

member's comments and distributed it to other individuals . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I believe that I have 

heard sufficient from the member and I think, again, there is 

nothing in the rules that . . . none of the rules have been 

breached. 

 

I think the member knows that when a member speaks in this 

House, we must take that member at his word or her word.  

Your point . . . it's really a point of debate and the Speaker 

really can't rule on that.  It's not a point of order. 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- There is no point of order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Okay, point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is, is that when 

members give misinformation about another member, there is a 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member is getting into 

debate.  I have already ruled that it's not a point of order.  

Order, order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Pension Benefits 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Pension Benefits Act 1992.  This 

Bill represents just one of many initiatives our government is 

undertaking to provide a fair deal to the workers of 

Saskatchewan, a deal which is appropriate for the 1990s. 

 

In March I established a review panel to solicit public input and 

to make recommendations for changes to this Act.  This panel 

consulted with the persons and organizations affected by 

pension reform and this legislation, Mr. Speaker, reflects the 

review panel's report. 

 

The last major amendment to The Pension Benefits Act was in 

1981.  There have been significant developments in the pension 

field since then as a result of which our pension benefits 

standards legislation in Saskatchewan is outdated and is in need 

of amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill proposes a number of changes.  It will 

improve pension plan standards for plan members without 

imposing undue costs on employers.  It will promote the 

establishment of new plans by accommodating non-traditional 

arrangements with respect to governance and solvency. 

 

It will set out the duties and responsibilities of plan 

administrators for the effective management of pension plans.  

And it will move, wherever possible, towards national pension 

standards to minimize the complexities and costs for 

employers. 

 

On this latter point, Mr. Speaker, almost three-quarters of the 

pension plans with Saskatchewan members operate in more 

than one jurisdiction.  Uniform national standards are important 

to cost-effective administration and the fair and equal treatment 

of plan members. 

 

This legislation will also offer employees some significant 

improvements.  More employees will participate in 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

pension plans as a result of these amendments.  Part-time 

employees will be entitled to become members of their 

employers' pension plans on meeting certain conditions tied to 

hours worked and to earnings. 

 

More employees will receive a pension benefit, Mr. Speaker.  

Currently a plan member is entitled to a pension benefit on 

termination of employment when the member's age plus 

service total 45.  We are proposing that a pension vest with the 

member after two years of service. 

 

Employees will have greater control over their pensions.  On 

termination of membership prior to retirement, employees will 

be able to transfer their pension funds to the retirement vehicle 

of their choosing.  This control extends beyond retirement as 

we will be introducing more flexible retirement income 

arrangements, such as life income funds, as an alternative to 

life annuities. 

 

Survivor benefits will be enhanced.  The current Act is silent 

on pre-retirement survivor benefits.  Our amendments not only 

provide such benefits, but improves the post-retirement death 

benefit from 50 per cent to 60 per cent of the deceased person's 

pension. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there has to be a balance between the cost to the 

employer and adequate benefits for the member.  Therefore 

those provisions which are most costly, such as the 

enhancements to vesting, are to be applied to benefits accrued 

on and after January 1, 1994. 

 

This legislation also addresses one of the most frustrating 

issues surrounding pension plans, and that is the splitting of 

pension credits on marital breakdown.  We will be providing 

clear guidance to the courts on the valuation of pension 

benefits.  And as a result, plan members and their spouses will 

be treated consistently and fairly and the cost of separation and 

divorce proceedings will be accordingly reduced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 83, The 

Pension Benefits Act, 1992. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've been 

listening with interest to the member from . . . the minister and 

his introduction of An Act respecting Pension Benefits.  I know 

that there are many people across the province, people have 

approached me who have . . . people themselves who have 

already become eligible to receive their pension -- have retired.  

A number of people are certainly interested in the Bill before 

this Assembly.  I think there are a number of things we must 

take note of. 

 

Notably, I think, one of the things that most employees that I 

have talked to or that have approached me like and have asked 

for, have been asking for, the fact that they have control of 

their plan and that when they retire they can take and invest 

their plan.  And rather than just leaving it as straight annuity, 

look at investing it in a RRIF (registered retirement income 

fund), and I think that is something that is positive. 

 

I'm not exactly sure what the minister talks about when he talks 

about marital relationships, and it's something that I think we'll 

have to look at a little more closely.  And if it's a 

way of setting out some guidelines that make it much simpler 

for the courts to address the problems that arise in marital 

break-ups, especially when pension plans are involved, I think 

that would be appropriate.  And certainly we will follow the 

process that the minister and the department have laid down.  

And if we feel that we should have some amendments or 

strengthen this process, we certainly will be willing to do that 

as we get into committee. 

 

The one thing, and I'm not sure and we'll get into this more as 

we get further into debate, is the fact that the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan is an area that we must raise especially the . . . 

some 48,000 individuals who were on the pension plan for the 

first time in their lives.  The minister talked about working 

towards national plans rather than a group of small, individual 

pension plans right across this province or right across Canada.  

And I believe there's some merit in looking at a national 

program so that everyone at least have the same avenue and 

access to a pension plan. 

 

We also, I think, must address the problem that small 

businesses have and people working in small businesses, 

especially on minimum wage -- the fact that many of these 

individuals do not have access, who aren't involved in any kind 

of a pension plan. 

 

There are a number of questions here, Mr. Speaker, and as we 

get further into the discussion and the debate on the Bill, we'll 

be bringing forward.  But at this time I would adjourn the 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Motions for Interim Supply 

 

The Chair: -- I'll ask the Minister of Finance to introduce his 

officials and move the resolution. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to 

introduce my officials who are with us here today, Mr. John 

Wright who's the deputy minister of Finance; Mr. Craig Dotson 

who's the associate deputy minister; Mr. Roy Hynd who is a 

senior analyst in the treasury board branch, seated behind me, 

and that's the total extent of my support staff who are here 

today.  Glenn Laxdal, senior analyst sitting behind the rail.  I 

usually introduce them when they get in front, we'll dispense 

with that.  Can I proceed, Mr. Chairman? 

 

Mr. Chairman, as is the usual custom, I am pleased today to 

move a motion to deal with an interim supply Bill which is 

required for the month of August.  And after moving it, I will 

want to provide some explanation and I also want to provide 

some information to the members opposite so they can have it 

in writing. 

 

And I therefore move: 

 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $371,537,300 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

Just a brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of the 

House.  This interim supply Bill is the usual scheduled 

one-twelfth, but there are also some extra monies provided in 

seasonal areas such as fire fighting and highway construction.  

As well extra monies are provided to fulfil commitments and 

meet the payments schedules. 

 

I want to point out to the legislature that the Legislative 

Assembly approved the report of the Standing Committee on 

Estimates which met on Thursday, July 23.  And the remaining 

Estimates of the Legislative Assembly and the Provincial 

Auditor -- less the first and second interim supply and special 

warrants -- are included in this Appropriation Bill.  So that is 

for . . . the full appropriation will be provided there because the 

Assembly has so ordered because of approving of the 

Committee on Estimates which met on the date which I had 

specified. 

 

I also want to point out for the members, and I think I'll provide 

this to both the Liberal member and to the Finance critic, if I 

can get a Clerk, and this is an explanation of where there is a 

request for interim supply funds in excess of the usual 

one-twelfth.  The areas that are provided for are in Agriculture 

and Food, and the amount that is provided is $12.814 million.  

What this is for is to cover for the Canadian crop drought 

assistance program.  The additional funding is requested as the 

entire $13,947,400, almost a $14 million payment to the federal 

government is required to be made in August in accordance 

with the Canada-Saskatchewan crop drought assistance 

agreement.  This is a requirement because of arrangements that 

were made in 1988, I believe, and now we have to pay the 

federal government this money on an annual basis which 

restricts that amount of money which we have available for 

something else for I think a period of five years.  That's the 

only amount that is in excess of the one-twelfth in Agriculture 

and Food. 

 

In Highways and Transportation there is $4.752 million in 

excess of the amount of one-twelfth and that is the usual rural 

surface transportation capital, $2.1 million more because of the 

activity that takes place during peak period of summer months.  

The same thing in maintenance for Highways and 

Transportation, peak periods are during the summer months 

when most of that maintenance takes place. 

 

In the legislation, I have already explained that in my initial 

comments.  We're providing the full amount as required and 

ordered by the legislature.  So in order to make sure that it 

provides the total of 5.282 million, we have to provide in this 

case above the one-twelfth, 2.168 million. 

 

In Natural Resources there is 2.62 million in excess of the 

one-twelfth, and that is forest fire operations in northern air 

services for forest fires because there are certain historic cash 

flow trends indicated which will . . . it is thought were a part of 

this kind of money. 

 

The Provincial Auditor, once again we're providing the full 

amount to the Provincial Auditor as ordered by the legislature 

and that's why there's more than one-twelfth here. 

 

Rural Development, there is $1.122 million requested in 

excess of the one-twelfth and they include three areas.  Grants 

for rural development capital, $878,300 more than one-twelfth 

is requested as the province funds rural municipalities on the 

quarterly basis and the second instalment of course is now 

coming due.  Lands branch, 155,900 more than one-twelfth is 

requested because the community pastures operate only from 

spring until fall.  And the ferry services, and everybody knows 

ferry services don't run when the rivers are frozen.  So it's once 

again this is the time of the year. 

 

In the Seniors' Secretariat -- and I'll be finished when I 

conclude that one -- there is 211,000 in addition provided, and 

that's because of additional funding of 211,000 necessary to 

provide operating grants to qualifying seniors' activity centres.  

And once more that's based on previous experience where it is 

found that 80 per cent of the grants are paid by the end of 

August. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank the 

minister for that explanation. 

 

Mr. Minister, I can't say it's a pleasure to see your officials 

back in here again.  This is -- what? -- third, fourth time.  I 

don't know.  I'm losing count.  It seems to me, Mr. Minister, 

that you are probably going to set a record for the number of 

times that this will happen.  And I suggest to you, sir, that 

perhaps a little more forethought in the planning process prior 

to the House coming in would have negated some of this 

monthly exercise that we have to go through and hold you 

accountable for the expenditures of your government without a 

budget being passed. 

 

And I know, Mr. Minister, that that's tough for you to accept, 

given the criticism that you always had of the former 

government about not doing things on time and that sort of 

thing.  But be as it may, that's where we are.  And I guess we're 

going to have to check with you now, because of all of the 

policy shifts that have occurred since we last met in this 

committee and all the things that have sort have changed, to see 

how they've impacted on the province's spending. 

 

Mr. Minister, there are a number of areas where we've had 

indications that something different is happening out there.  

The Minister of Highways says that he's not going to plough 

the roads up now, that he's going to look at alternatives.  So I 

think we're going to have to explore that.  It's very obvious, Mr. 

Minister, that in the area of agriculture that there are many 

things brewing on the horizon that we need to discuss.  There 

are federal offers to the province on some funding 

arrangements that might be necessary. 

 

We've seen a wide strip of drought occur in northern 

Saskatchewan now that obviously will be impacting on a 

number of departments that will be needing money from the 

Finance department in order to handle the very serious problem 

that stretches all the way from Meadow Lake to Tisdale, across 

our province. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Minister, there has been the government's 

initiative in going into the money markets inside the province 

with the Saskatchewan savings bond.  And we're going to want 

to know about some costs 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

associated with that, and did they impact on your budgetary 

process.  There's the whole question of interest rates and what's 

happened there since we last met.  You kept telling us that you 

were doing better and better because the federal government 

had such a firm control on fiscal matters in this country, and 

that you are continuing to benefit because of that. 

 

And obviously your Minister of Indian and Native Affairs has 

signified that there's a signing of an agreement in that particular 

area.  We need to know about the impacts on the treasury in the 

coming month there.  Your minister responsible for the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan has . . . there has been a shift in 

attitude with the pension plan since we last met, Mr. Minister.  

And we need to know if those 54,000 pension subscribers are 

now going to get back to where they were, getting on with life 

and what that means with the provincial treasury. 

 

So I think, Mr. Minister, as you can see, there is a lot for us to 

discuss because of these policy shifts that have occurred in the 

last month.  And we need to know how these shifts are going to 

affect things in the future because I'm sure that we'll have this 

opportunity to get together in another month's time and see 

how well we're doing.  And unfortunately, we're expending 

very large chunks of the provincial budget here without the 

budget being passed.  I believe we've only got three Estimates 

passed in the House, maybe only two.  And it's very difficult to 

understand exactly what is going to happen because we haven't 

had an opportunity to see those Estimates. 

 

So perhaps, Mr. Minister, I'll start out with some easy ones.  

I'm sure it's an area that you're going to want to talk about to 

us.  And I would like to know what the recent offering of the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds, exactly what you think you 

achieved.  Perhaps you could give us some comparison costs of 

how that borrowing would be against other borrowings.  Were 

there opportunities in the money markets that were cheaper 

than the 7 per cent paid to Saskatchewan subscribers?  What 

kind of terms would have been attached to those cheaper rates?  

Has the Government of Saskatchewan, in its own words, sort of 

mortgaged some of the future for the present? 

 

How do you feel about it, Mr. Minister, and would you sort of 

fill in that financial information as you go through your 

delivery. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 

member asks very appropriate questions on this.  How do I feel 

about it?  We feel very good about the success of the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds. 

 

Quite frankly the amount that was achieved was beyond what I 

would have expected, although I'm not surprised because 

everywhere I go I hear people from this province tell me that it 

is important in their opinion that they be given an opportunity 

to help rebuild Saskatchewan.  And therefore, although 

borrowing through Saskatchewan savings bonds doesn't reduce 

the amount of borrowing, we have a certain borrowing amount 

that is established in the budget and that target will be reached.  

And as far as I know, that will not be exceeded because it's a 

very important part of the budget in getting our credit ratings 

back to where we think they need to go. 

But the important element here is that we are internalizing the 

borrowing.  And as much to the extent that we can do that 

under reasonable terms, I think we should do that.  I don't think 

the member from Thunder Creek will disagree, for the money 

that was borrowed through the Saskatchewan savings bonds 

only through agencies and people in Saskatchewan.  What that 

will mean is that the interest paid on the money -- some $60 

million or less, but around there -- will all be paid back in 

Saskatchewan and will circulate in the Saskatchewan economy, 

rather than that kind of money being paid to people who buy 

the bonds in another continent or south of the border or in 

eastern Canada.  That is, I think, a very important aspect of this 

approach that is being taken here.  I want to admit it's not 

different than what the former government did.  They had 

SaskPower bonds and other kinds of bonds. But never in the 

history of this province -- with Saskatchewan growth bonds or 

Power bonds -- have the people responded the way they 

responded to this one. 

 

And admittedly, part of it was because of a commitment to the 

province.  I think there's no doubt about that.  And also part of 

it because they looked  upon it as a good investment and it 

should be a good investment for a Saskatchewan citizen. 

 

And with that I want to mention to the members opposite that 

the terms of the rate that was established are very good terms 

because you have to . . . it's a five-year instrument we're using 

here.  It's a five-year savings bond.  It can be renewed every 

year.  It can be passed onto somebody else during that period. 

 

And at the time when the interest rate was set -- and you have 

to set it at some time -- we set it at 7 per cent on the advice of 

outside advisors, RBC Dominion Securities and Richardson 

Greenshields. They recommended that that's what the rate 

should be. 

 

(1515) 

 

Other five-year instruments to which you could compare this 

makes the rate very, very good from the purposes of the overall 

Saskatchewan taxpayer. Because a five-year . . . the other one 

is the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. The issuing 

five-year debt on June 11, when we set the rate of 1992, would 

have cost 8.75 per cent.  So by setting it at 7 per cent, we 

actually did pretty well. 

 

Now I don't know, I think I've addressed all of the questions 

that the member asked opposite.  Finally I just want to say that 

I think it's a good way to raise money providing that the 

interest rate that is being charged is comparable.  We don't 

want to get carried away with it, providing that it's a safe 

investment for the citizens of Saskatchewan.  It is.  It's 

guaranteed by the province.  And it's also good because it 

enhances the Saskatchewan economy because a lot of . . . well 

all of the interest will be paid back to the people of 

Saskatchewan and will work in Saskatchewan rather than work 

somewhere else. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 

information.  There is some criticism I've seen in the media and 

from people in the investment community that 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

you were more interested in a political fix than a financial one 

and that the actual cost to the province will be more significant 

in the future than might have been possible had you been going 

for straight interest savings, rather than sort of your 

longer-term view that you've presented to the province. 

 

Would you care to comment on some of that criticism? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sure, I would love to comment on 

that, Mr. Chairman, because there's no validity to that at all.  

First of all, let me make a correction.  I said interest of $60 

million.  It's more like $40 million of interest paid back, and I 

just want to put the record straight on that, and I've done that. 

 

The rate that was established was 7 per cent.  Some major 

people who are in this work on an ongoing basis were 

consulted.  RBC Dominion Securities and Richardson 

Greenshields -- we made sure we had more than one source -- 

recommended that that's what the rate should be.  So these are 

major financial institutions that said this is the right way and 

the right time, and here is the level of the interest. 

 

Also they compare favourably to Alberta and Manitoba savings 

bonds established about the same time or a little earlier because 

they were at seven and a quarter per cent.  In Saskatchewan we 

set it at 7 per cent.  So I think by any measurement, it was a 

good deal for everybody concerned: the treasury, the public, 

and all those who invested in the bonds. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, what would have been the 

average, say, one-year investment rate for the average 

subscriber in Saskatchewan the time you went to market.  That 

would be a combination of, say, banks, trust companies, credit 

unions.  What would have been the average return on yield for 

you or I to have gone and invested money through those 

particular institutions at the time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You got to be careful here, Mr. 

Chairman, that one compares apples to apples and not apples to 

oranges.  And I know that the member's probably referring to a 

certain article in the Leader-Post that I read with some care as 

well.  I don't have it with me either, but I have a good memory 

on these kinds of things. 

 

On a five-year instrument, which is what this was, all of the 

other options would have been at eight and three-quarter per 

cent pretty well.  We were at seven.  On a one-year basis, 

which is what Mr. Eisler wrote about, it was at around six and 

three-quarters.  Now I'll verify that when my other official gets 

here, who's on his way from the department; it takes about five 

minutes.  But that's what it would have been.  But you can't 

compare the one-year to the five-year and be accurate in the 

analysis or the comparison that one makes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, would you say that your 

instrument, as you call it, is more generous to subscribers in its 

portability and its ability to transfer and that than you would 

find anywhere in the private sector? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to 

the question is that we made a change in this one as opposed to 

the ones that were done by the previous government.  I'm not 

saying this in a critical sense.  What was in the . . . in the case 

of previous savings bonds, whether SaskPower or others, is that 

you could do this on a semi-annual basis.  You could exchange 

them. 

 

We said in this one you could do it on an annual basis and not 

semi-annually.  In exchange for that we increased or enhanced 

the portability of the bonds and we thought that that was a 

pretty good exchange.  So getting away from the semi-annually 

when you could turn it in to the annual so you have your . . . 

you're locked in for the whole year.  But in exchange for that 

we felt it was important that there be an opportunity for the 

member from Thunder Creek or the Minister of Finance, who 

may have bought bonds, to be able to have more portability in 

selling it off to somebody else, if that was so the wish. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm a farmer.  I couldn't 

afford those things.  But anyway, would you care to explain to 

the Assembly why you thought that was an important criteria, 

why your department thought that was an important criteria. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Two reasons: one, it was more 

attractive for the individual who might want to invest; and 

secondly, because it was far more . . . or far less costly in the 

administration side from the point of view of the government, 

which obviously is the taxpayers.  Those two reasons. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I can understand why the 

attractability, because it goes along with the political ability of 

certain things.  Would you care to elaborate on this cost 

differential between semi-annual and annual?  I think that's 

important that we understand this clearly. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the answer is simply this: that 

if you do it on a semi-annual basis, you're going to have higher 

transaction costs because there'll be greater volume so you will 

have to a higher staff over a longer period of time, higher 

systems costs.  On an annual basis, your transactions costs are 

lower because you're not doing it twice in the year; you're just 

doing it one time.  And that's where the basic savings are. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister, could you provide those 

figures to us?  They don't have to be today, but you'll assure us 

that we can get those? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No problem at all.  In fact, I have 

Mr. Jones, who is known to the member opposite, who is on his 

way.  And if he's got them with him on paper that we can give 

you, we'll give it to you today.  If not, then I'll give them to you 

tomorrow.  I'm sure we can probably get them ready by 

tomorrow.  But yes indeed, there's no reason why we wouldn't 

want to do that. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you say that you used RBC and 

Richardson Greenshields, obviously two investment houses 

that have been used in the past by the province of 

Saskatchewan to a great deal.  For the kind of advice that they 

provided to you on this instrument, what kind of costs are we 

looking at? 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again, as soon as our other 

official gets here, I'll have that for the member.  I could make 

an estimate, but I'd rather be . . . rather than making an 

estimate, I'll give him an accurate answer. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, there is another area that we 

have seen significant policy shifting occur.  And looking 

through the information provided on departments with different 

expenditures more than one-twelfth, I find it strange that 

Health isn't here.  Health was here in a fairly big way, I think, 

when we last met. 

 

Since we last met we've had the document, the wellness model 

document by your Health minister, leaked to the public, and it 

has a large number of ramifications in it.  I'm sure there have 

been a lot of concerned calls from the public as to how that 

affects their particular institution or area, and certainly how the 

funding requirements will be met. 

 

There has obviously been presented to the Saskatchewan public 

some very major policy directions in health care.  And I'm 

wondering why, given all of this, that we don't see anything on 

health here.  Summer-time seems to be an area that requires 

expenditures.  Would you care to elaborate on the whole health 

area? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the reason 

that health is remaining with the one-twelfth is because they 

don't require any additional funding from the normal budget 

provisions that were provided to the Department of Health. 

 

The wellness approach and the wellness model that is in the 

process of being developed -- but which people all over 

Saskatchewan are talking about and it's a very important and 

useful debate -- that is something that will have an impact in 

the future.  Because rather than imposing something like this, it 

is the desire of this government to consult with the people of 

the province, the people in the . . . the care deliverers and the 

public, the users, and others.  Because it is, in our view, an 

important way to move. 

 

The document that the member opposite speaks of, he knows 

very well that is not the wellness document; that was a working 

paper that I understand was in the Department of Health.  The 

paper which will be the wellness paper is . . . which will be the 

framework for a discussion of the wellness approach is 

something that the Minister of Health will be releasing in due 

course when the appropriate time, in the view of the 

government and the minister, comes.  So there is no need for 

any additional monies in this interim supply other than the 

usual one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it would appear from 

some of the information obtained from within areas of 

government, it would almost take a special warrant to handle 

the Minister of Health's mailing costs alone, as she tries to get 

herself out of the bind that she finds herself in.  I don't know 

what the expenditures were on that volume of written material, 

but I suspect that it was significant.  Does that budgetary 

expenditure come out of the Department of Health for all of 

this mailing that the minister is now doing, or does that come 

from another area? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well any correspondence or any 

other publications that come out of the Department of Health 

under the Minister of Health's name comes out of the 

Department of Health general administration.  Obviously there 

is nothing unusual in the amount of correspondence that's going 

out because the Department of Health is not requesting 

anything in excess of one-twelfth.  They're living within the 

budget that was provided for them. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I suppose, Mr. Minister, the appropriate place 

for us to ask about those things would be in the minister's 

Estimates.  I am sure it is something we'd like to ask her.  That 

volume of paper we hope didn't necessitate the cutting back of 

a few beds here or there, or laying off of some nurses, or 

anything like that.  It's very environmentally dangerous to the 

forest too, because you've got to produce all of that paper that 

the minister has to now mail out.  But we'll leave that for the 

moment, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is another area that I'm sure some of my 

colleagues will have comments on, but I think it's important for 

us to discuss and that is the whole area of agriculture.  And I 

can see that in your Agriculture and Food budget you have 

indicated to us that you have to have more than one-twelfth 

because of some prior agreements between the federal and 

provincial governments that go back some five years ago. 

 

And I'm wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department is 

preparing any contingency plans in case of a signing between 

the province and the federal government on a contingency that 

would involve the very large drought area that is in the 

province of Saskatchewan? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no, there are no 

contingency plans that are being prepared because there is 

nothing concrete around which we could be preparing such 

plans.  We have a budget plan that's in place.  We think it's 

very important.  The House and the members of this 

legislature, as does the public, knows the kind of financial 

situation that this province faces.  It is not something that we 

can, or anybody should take lightly.  When we set a budget, it 

is important that we try as hard as possible to stick within that 

budget.  That is something that I think is crucial here. 

 

But even if that were not the case, we would not be dealing 

with contingency plans and looking at additional monies until 

we knew what we were working with.  And at this point in 

time, we don't know what we're working with, if in fact 

anything to be working with other than the debate that's been 

taking place across the airways and through the media. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I would think that with a 

fairly concrete offer from the federal government -- X number 

of dollars -- someone in your department would have taken 

notice of that and said, this is the ramification:  with those 

amount of federal dollars in place, what would the bigger 

picture look like? 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

I mean, Mr. Minister, since we last met your budget has been 

affected in many ways.  We have discussed already that there 

has been different policy shifts within your administration in 

the last month.  We've acknowledged that interest rates are 

continuing to drop.  You have just told the Assembly about the 

wonderful response on your financial instrument, the 

Saskatchewan savings bond, and how you have immeasurably 

enhanced the position of the province by this smart piece of 

business. 

 

Now we've got interest rates dropping.  You've pulled off what 

you think is a good piece of business with the savings bonds.  

We've had other policy shifts.  You obviously must have a 

ledger that looks slightly different than you did a while ago.  

And if that ledger is looking more positive, Mr. Minister, I 

would think that you'd be thinking about the potential problem 

that exists. 

 

The drought isn't going to go away as much as you or I would 

wish it, and I would think a prudent Finance minister would be 

saying, boys, what if this happened, or what if that happened, 

or how much money do I need from the federal government to 

make certainly things happen.  Now that there is a concrete 

proposal, what analysis have you done to say, yes, it's tracking 

with the dropping of the interest rates, or it's not tracking.  I 

mean, how does it fit in with the overall game plans, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't speak for the 

Department of Agriculture or for the Minister of Agriculture, 

so I don't know what follow-up, if any, there has been taking 

place on what the federal minister has said about the $39 

million, which is $460 million short of the $500 million in third 

line of defence, which the federal government made a 

commitment to in an agreement signed by the Province of 

Saskatchewan and the federal government last year, or is it 

1990. 

 

Now when you have that kind of a spread, surely, Mr. 

Chairman, it's not unusual for the Department of Finance, or 

the Minister of Finance to say, I don't deal in if's.  I deal in 

knowing what is the real thing.  If we tried to budget on the 

basis of if's we would have a budget that I would be the first to 

have to admit is an unbelievable budget.  We're trying to deal 

as best we can with the realities and the facts that are before us. 

 

That is not to say that throughout the course of a whole year 

some things may not change which were unanticipated and 

unexpected.  But I can assure the House and the member for 

Thunder Creek, and you, Mr. Chairman, that if that happens I 

will stand up if the House is still sitting and report to the 

House.  If the House isn't sitting I will report through the usual 

press conference so that the public will know as well. 

 

It is too early in the fiscal year, even though we're now into a 

third interim supply Bill, it is still too early in the fiscal year as 

things go to know precisely or even closely how the 

expenditures and the revenues are going to come out at the end.  

There's always some variations from both of those throughout 

the whole year. 

 

As I indicated in the budget speech, we will have a midterm 

report for the first time in the history of this 

province in November in which we will give an update of 

where we are financially, where we may have to make some 

amendments if we have to make any.  If there is an 

arrangement with the federal government on the issue we're 

talking about and the federal government provides the required 

money that we believe they should provide, we will report on 

that at that time.  But at this point in time, I really have nothing 

I can add because it is just too early in the fiscal year. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it saddens me that you 

haven't been keeping track of the Minister of Agriculture, 

because I think that's one of the biggest problems that your 

government has, is that the Minister of Agriculture tends to 

free-lance a lot.  That gets everyone else in the soup, so to 

speak.  Maybe as the Minister of Finance, who will ultimately 

have to bear the responsibility for the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose, that a little closer leash in certain things 

might help out a little bit as far as your planning process. 

 

Mr. Minister, I remind you that yes, this is the third interim 

supply Bill but we had two special warrants before that, so in 

effect we are on our fifth . . . either our fifth special warrant or 

our fifth interim supply Bill, however you want to word it.  

And we're darn near at half-way through a 12-month period of 

time, and we aren't a whole ways down the road.  Maybe an 

interim financial statement at the end of August would be more 

appropriate than one in November, given the way things are 

going. 

 

But anyway, Mr. Minister, back to some specifics.  I don't take 

your analogy well at all.  We aren't talking about $500 million 

here.  There is a specific offer, as I understand it, on the table 

from the federal government -- a very, very specific offer right 

down to the dollars and cents.  And I would think, Mr. 

Minister, that given an offer that specific that your people 

would be doing some type of analysis, if nothing else to cover 

your political backside if you didn't wish to cover the economic 

agenda. 

 

So I think it's appropriate, Mr. Minister, that you give us an 

indication of where the province would fit in that scheme, and 

you can be as partisan as you wish in it.  But I think it's 

incumbent that you give to the Saskatchewan public, and 

particularly those that are faced with a very devastating 

situation, where their Minister of Finance and his department 

officials are as far as placing them because they are in a very 

difficult time.  And I think they need some kind of assurance 

that you at least are doing your homework. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, for the purpose of 

the interim supply, there is no provision for anything that may 

come out of this.  The analysis that the member asks for is very 

straightforward.  The federal government has said they are 

talking about $39 million that the federal government wants to 

put in.  But they are saying but the province should put in $23 

million. 

 

That would mean that if that was accepted, the province would 

have to, and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would have to, find 

$23 million in addition to the budget which is already before 

the House. 

 

We have to either find some form of new tax increases to 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

raise that money, we would have to find some expenditure 

reductions -- and I'd be prepared to listen to where they might 

be -- or we'd have to borrow more money.  I mean those are 

clearly the options.  That's a pretty straightforward analysis. 

 

What the Minister of Agriculture has said to the House and 

what the Premier has said to the House, is that we're not 

agreeing to this although we are prepared to discuss with the 

federal people, the federal government, what might be the 

direction in which this should take.  That's where the thing is at 

right now. 

 

Now the member said, if I wish to be partisan.  I don't wish to 

be partisan.  I'm quite capable of being partisan if the need 

arises as I think most members of the House will know.  But I 

have no desire of being partisan in this issue or most issues that 

we're dealing with.  My desire is to be responsible because I 

think that's what this province needs more than anything else 

right now -- a responsible management of the public purse, 

accountability about how the taxpayers' dollars is being spent, 

openness in decision making.  All of those things I think that 

this government is achieving, and we're going to continue to 

work on that into the months and years ahead. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, those are good words, but 

words and deeds are two entirely different matters.  And 

unfortunately the words don't match the deeds.  I mean, Mr. 

Minister, we've seen a clear indication that partisanship from 

your government is high on the agenda.  Otherwise we 

wouldn't have had the rules of this Assembly change 

unilaterally and rammed down our throats.  So obviously 

partisanship was somewhere high up on the agenda in the 

recent times. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have an item on here that requests 

more than one-twelfth in the Department of Agriculture and 

Food.  Are you absolutely sure, Mr. Minister, that there are no 

negotiations going on between say, the department officials in 

Agriculture and the federal people to say, look at, we'll work 

out something, basis this payment that we owe back to '88, if 

you do something in '92 because this is a very large sum of 

money. 

 

I know you said you don't keep track of him very closely but, 

you know, isn't it a possibility that that is a very good 

negotiating point, that the crop drought assistance program 

from 1988 could be mitigated in some way and we work in 

something for '92? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Clearly if there was a negotiation, 

and I suspect there will be some . . . in fact I know there will be 

some discussions, we'd be prepared to consider anything.  If the 

federal government wants to forgive the 13 million . . . I 

shouldn't say the word "forgive" because it really was a 

considerable amount of off-loading by the federal government 

onto the provincial taxpayer, is why we're paying the 13 

million, almost 14 million, for five years. 

 

If the federal government in those discussions offers that up as 

something as part of those discussions, we'd be more than 

prepared to look at it, as we were prepared to look at anything.  

We're reasonable; we're not 

entrenched. 

 

The only thing that I want to make it very clear that we are 

going to be very firm on is the budget target.  I don't think 

there's an option there.  There's not an option there for all of the 

reasons which have been discussed in this House many times 

before.  We have credit ratings which has dropped and I hate to 

even talk about credit ratings because I don't like to be 

dependent on New York credit rating agencies or New York 

financiers.  It's something that goes against the grain, all the 

kind of things that make me proud to be a citizen of 

Saskatchewan.  But we face that reality. 

 

Our budget target is firm.  Where some adjustments in the 

budget are made or will be made or have been made, they are 

being made within the context of the budget, and funding has 

to be found within the budget which is already there and 

redirect it from other expenditures.  That's the rule of thumb 

which, as the Minister of Finance, I'm trying to apply to all of 

the departments.  Because it is important in order for us to 

rebuild Saskatchewan and get the finances under control, is to 

set budgets and stick with them. 

 

Well there may be exceptions in extreme emergencies.  If the 

whole North broke out in a forest fire, we couldn't do anything 

about that.  We'd have to fight the forest fire.  Fortunately 

there's been enough rain up there this year that that's not the 

case.  I just hope it continues to rain. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But you see, Mr. Minister, you're not being 

straight with the folks about the goods.  We have had changes 

here even since we last met in this exercise. 

 

Your interest rates have continued to drop.  The interest rates 

that you pay on various things have continued to drop.  You 

have admitted in this Assembly that you did very well on the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds; on a half a billion dollars, you 

did very well. 

 

But your response to me is that I'm not willing to try and 

negotiate about this nearly $14 million that we owe the feds 

from a past program.  I'm not willing to negotiate anything with 

the offer that's on the table -- I won't even have my officials 

look at the federal offer on the table.  And that above all, my 

budget number is more important to me than perhaps thousands 

of families in this province who have the potential to be 

devastated by drought. 

 

And I don't care about you, Mr. Farmer at Star City.  I don't 

care about you, Mr. Farmer at Meadow Lake.  I don't care 

about you because my budget number is sacrosanct.  And even 

though I'm making some gains in certain areas through 

circumstances beyond my control, I don't care.  You can simply 

dry up and blow away because my budget number is the most 

important thing in the world right now. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I find that kind of an unfeeling response to 

people that may be, and some already are, in a very desperate 

situation.  And I'd like you to comment on that. 

 

(1545) 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I have said 

consistently, and the same thing as the Minister of Agriculture 

and the Premier and others have said, that we are prepared to 

discuss with the federal government the proposal which they 

have made.  And that's where we're at now. 

 

For the purposes of the interim supply, there is no money that 

is required for those purposes because there is no agreement of 

any kind.  We simply have a proposal by Mr. McKnight in the 

form of a letter in which he makes no reference to forgiveness 

or delay of the drought payments, which the member opposite 

suggests may be one of the things we should talk about.  There 

were no details or specifics. 

 

Clearly, what one of the things that clearly comes out of that is 

that it would be an additional cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers, 

both farmers and the province overall taxpayer, of $53 million.  

That's what that offer of Mr. McKnight's of $39 million means 

to the Saskatchewan taxpayer as a whole.  Surely that's 

something that needs to be discussed with the federal 

government before we agree to it. 

 

But for the purpose of interim supply, it's not relevant because 

nothing will be required, if anything is required, in the month 

of August for which this interim supply Bill is being provided. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I don't subscribe to that, Mr. Minister.  

You're here with an interim supply Bill that says in the 

Department of Agriculture and Food you're over the 

one-twelfth by nearly $14 million; that's a lot of money.  And 

I'm saying to you, sir, that that very well could be an item that 

is on a negotiating agenda.  But you insist on telling this 

Assembly that there's nothing going on, that not one official in 

your department has lifted a pen and even analysed the federal 

offer, and yet you're going to write them a cheque for 14 

million bucks. 

 

And I don't accept that, Mr. Minister.  You have people in 

planning, and you have people in research.  You have people 

that do contingency planning all the time.  You have people 

that borrow in marks and switch them to francs and switch 

them to American dollars and switch them back into Canadian 

funds so that you come out ahead of the game.  And they're 

doing that months in advance.  So don't stand here, Mr. 

Minister, and tell me that there's nothing going on in your 

department, there's nothing going on in government as far as 

analysis and looking at various alternatives. 

 

At the bottom line, Mr. Minister, we had a phone call from an 

RM (rural municipality) councillor in an RM north of Star City 

who said there's been 5,000 acres worked down in one RM 

division.  An RM division, if you have forgotten since your 

days as the member from Humboldt, is six miles by six miles.  

Now that's a lot of crop, Mr. Minister, in one RM division.  I 

suspect that indicates significant hurt.  So don't tell me that 

there isn't a problem and that somebody in your department 

hasn't been thinking about it.  If they haven't, then I suggest 

you maybe go look for some people that will.  That is a 

significant problem, Mr. Minister. 

Would you please tell the Assembly what analysis and 

planning you people have done in regards to this situation. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, clearly the 

negotiations and discussions that will take place will be taking 

place with the Minister of Agriculture and the Department of 

Agriculture, and that's where it's at now. 

 

As far as . . . I know that there has been some correspondence.  

I believe there has been some correspondence between the 

provincial minister and the federal minister, but that's the 

extent to which any discussions have taken place. 

 

We've indicated to the federal government we're prepared to 

talk.  We're prepared to negotiate.  The Minister of Agriculture 

will be doing those negotiations.  Obviously when he feels it is 

necessary, he will consult with his colleagues in the cabinet of 

which I am part as the Minister of Finance.  But until he is 

ready to do that, all I can say is that that's where the 

responsibility for this will lie. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  And what day in August 

are you going to write a cheque to the federal government for 

$13,979,400? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Normally that's done in the third 

week. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Normally that's at the end of the third week.  

Would the minister care to be a little more specific so that this 

House kind of knows where we might have a negotiating time 

line involved? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We don't have that kind of 

information.  If the member wants, I'll provide him that 

information.  I don't know if there is a precise date but the 

general area is the third week.  If there is a precise date, we'll 

find out and I'll let you know. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I think, Mr. Minister, given this amount 

of money that you're going to pay out of this interim supply 

Bill before you have a budget passed in this province, of $14 

million nearly, to the federal government -- and your Minister 

of Agriculture is off doing something, we hope, in regards to 

the federal offer -- that we should have some continuing 

follow-up on this item from yourself because you're the 

minister that writes the cheques here.  In all due respect to the 

minister from Rosetown-Elrose, I don't know as he writes 

cheques this big to the federal government. 

 

So I would think that you would want to keep the Assembly 

informed as this cheque date gets closer and closer, what the 

process and the negotiations are, and maybe some of the data 

that your department is putting forward to . . . All I'm asking, 

Mr. Minister, is some simple analysis that I'm sure someone in 

your department has done. 

 

Given the federal offer of nearly 40 million bucks and given 

the structure that is in place, what would be the overall 

financial commitment of the province of Saskatchewan if all of 

the present criteria are in place and that commitment would 

lever X amount of dollars?  Can 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

the minister just at least give us that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I've already 

answered that.  The federal government talks about their $39 

million.  The total cost of a province would be $53 million -- 

23 million of that which the provincial government will have to 

put up. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, you said the total cost would be 

$53 million, of which the government would put up 23.  How 

does that square? 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Pardon me? 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- You said the total cost to the province would 

be $53 million, of which your share would be 23.  How does 

that work? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's a combination of treasury and 

the farmers. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- But, Mr. Minister, I must have missed 

something here.  I understand the agreement says that the 

farmers don't put any money up, that it's done out of the future 

cash returns from the program which can go as far as 

November 1993, Mr. Minister.  Is that correct?  Do I 

understand that correctly? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I'm getting into a 

debate which really should belong with the Minister of 

Agriculture who will have the particulars on this.  But in 

general terms, I can respond in some ways.  The way it works 

-- and I think the member knows this -- is the costs are at 33 

per cent farmers, 25 per cent the province, and 42 per cent 

federal government. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- No, no.  Mr. Minister, that's not the question I 

asked.  We're back to the analysis now on the federal offer, the 

recent federal offer that we're talking about now.  And I asked 

you a clear question in that regard.  Are the contributions from 

the farmer to be paid up front, or can they be deferred to a later 

date? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the offer by the 

federal government, to the extent that it's a legitimate offer, is 

that the federal government will put up $39 million.  The 

province of Saskatchewan will put up $23 million.  They're 

forgetting the $500 million of third line of defence which was 

committed to two years ago.  So in our opinion there is a lot of 

room here to talk to the federal government about. 
 

Now when it comes to the farmers, because the system is under 

the GRIP program, normally the farmers would have to pay 33 

per cent.  That's the way the GRIP formula works.  The 

member knows that.  That's all I can say on that.  That's the 

kind of offer that's there, Mr. Chairman. 
 

The Minister of Agriculture will be discussing with the federal 

government what that is all about.  And until those discussions 

start, there's nothing more I can add.  I can only continue to say 

what has been said here in the House during question period 

which I have said all ready.  We're prepared to talk to the 

federal government.  We're going to remind them about their 

commitment.  We're going to ask them all kinds of questions 

about what kind of 

arrangements can be there.  We're quite open.  But those 

discussions are only beginning or about to begin. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- But you see, Mr. Minister, that's the problem 

that we have here.  As I said, we had a phone call from an RM 

councillor, and in one division, 5,000 acres worked down.  

Now, Mr. Minister, the crop's all ready black; it's summer 

fallow.  It's done.  It's toast, okay?  And you're only starting to 

talk. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Minister, we find some difficulty that the 

reaction time is so small when your Minister of Agriculture and 

your Premier trundled off to Ottawa with a whole bunch of 

folks in tow last fall and said we're going to come back with the 

dough, you know; we're making a commitment. 

 

I was in the Agridome that day when I saw the premier-elect 

stand up and say, boys we're going to go to Ottawa, and we're 

coming home with the money.  And, Mr. Minister, I haven't 

seen any money, and I haven't seen anybody paying any 

attention to the problem.  And that's the problem, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now back to what we were discussing, because we've got a 

cheque going to the federal government on approximately 

August 20 for 14 million bucks.  And the feds have an offer on 

the table, as we understand now, of about $39 million, and it 

involves 23 million from the province.  And it also involves a 

whole bunch of Saskatchewan farmers, that my quick 

arithmetic here says, stand to benefit about two-thirds of a 

hundred million dollars. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, this is the five . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Well the minister says that at some point in time the farmer 

will have to pay his share, and I agree with that.  But you see, 

Mr. Minister, at present those people with those 5,000 acres 

worked down in that one RM, that one division, are out 40 

bucks an acre, Mr. Minister.  And you know what, Mr. 

Minister, their share of the federal offer, even though they 

might have to pay something after harvest, is a lot more than 

they're going to get right now.  And that's our problem, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And we need you to put that in more perspective for us about 

how these people are going to deal with that.  Because you're 

going to write a cheque to the feds here pretty darn quick for 14 

million bucks, and we want to know what this negotiation and 

this process is about.  Because you, sir, will write the cheques; 

it won't be the minister from Rosetown-Elrose. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this has got nothing 

to do with interim supply.  And you may want to make some 

judgement on that, but I simply want to respond to the member 

this way.  The offer of the federal government only came on 

Friday.  The provincial government responded on Monday 

indicating that we were prepared to discuss with the federal 

government what their offer was.  The $14 million, which is in 

the interim supply for August, is there that has to be paid 

because of an agreement signed between the former 

government and the federal government. 

 

The discussions on the federal proposal will be taking 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

place as soon as the federal government is ready.  If there's any 

delay, it won't be because of the Minister of Agriculture of 

Saskatchewan.  We have indicated that very clearly, that we're 

ready to discuss with the federal government their offer.  And 

we stand ready to do that. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to pursue this line of question with respect to helping out 

farmers.  The federal offer is consistent with '91-92 GRIP, 

which you're familiar with, and you seem to be so afraid of.  

And in the letter that went to all the Saskatchewan farmers, the 

minister points out that they're prepared to really help farmers 

pick up an additional coverage after harvest. 

 

And I think it's important to point out, Mr. Minister, that -- and 

you would be familiar coming from the Hudson Bay area -- 

what that would mean to a person.  And in the letter -- and I'll 

just quote so that you know -- it says: 

 

 On the timing, the assistance will be based on the '92 yield of 

each individual producer.  This feature, coupled with the 

need to fix a maximum program budget related to the 

premium savings identified under point one, requires all yield 

information to be collected prior to issuing the payments. 

 

And here's the important part: 

 

 Yield measuring could take until December or later, 

depending on the timing of harvest, the number of individuals 

who might qualify, the speed of the yield verification, etc.  

As a result, payments will not be made until well after 

harvest, likely January 23 or later. 

 

Then it goes on and says, you can sign up late. 

 

 A deadline is essential to facilitate identifying those potential 

participants and collecting yields.  A deadline of, say, 

November 1 should allow producers sufficient time to have 

harvested their crops or have a reasonable idea that their yield 

will be low enough to potentially qualify for assistance. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, given that fact, which I think you'd 

acknowledge is a pretty interesting offer from any government, 

to say, you've got your harvest, you found out in Star City or in 

Tisdale, or in Hudson Bay, Nipawin, Meadow Lake, Prince 

Albert, that you had a drought or you've had a frost, you've had 

serious production problems.  After the harvest you can go 

apply and get in on this relationship which you talk about, Mr. 

Minister, that's in the letter: producers pay one-third, province 

pays 25 per cent, and Canada 41 per cent.  The farmer knows 

that he's got a crop failure.  He can apply, he doesn't have to 

pay any premiums at all, and he can pick up an additional 

potential $40 an acre. 

 

Don't you think, Mr. Minister, that you could seriously look at 

a federal offer that allows somebody, in essence, to collect fire 

insurance on their home, only after they've 

had a fire, and they don't have to pay a premium up until that 

point.  But if you've had a fire, then you can go get insurance 

and fire insurance will pay for the house.  Farmers are telling 

us in the north-east, the deep south-central, the north-west, that 

this is an offer that you can't afford to turn down because it 

gives you the real possibility of protecting yourself and not 

paying any premiums. 

 

If you can get access to that kind of money, only costing you 

$23 million, don't you think, Mr. Minister, that you could 

seriously consider it? 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order.  Order.  I'm going to suggest 

that the committee may want to recess so that members can 

continue their discussion. 

 

Member from Quill Lakes . . . Before the Minister of Finance 

rises to answer, I want to ask members to come to order.  If you 

want to ask questions, I ask you to stand in your place and be 

recognized, and we'll recognize you, and you can put questions 

to the minister.  I cannot tolerate, as a Chair, members 

continuing to interrupt those who put questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have 

said since this discussion began that the federal government has 

indicated that they think they have an offer -- I shouldn't say . . 

. I should not be unfair -- that they have an offer. 

 

We have said to the federal government, we are prepared to 

discuss it.  We responded as early as Monday after the federal 

government indicated their offer on Friday.  I think that that's 

pretty expeditious.  And that's where this thing is now. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, who will be able to respond to the 

specifics of this, is leading these discussions with the federal 

government.  Surely the member from Estevan wouldn't 

suggest that we should just jump every time the federal 

government says something or makes an offer.  That would be 

quite irresponsible.  We want to talk to the federal government 

to see what kind of a deal we can get from the federal 

government which has a major responsibility here.  That's 

where we're at. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's fair enough, Mr. Minister.  You've just 

said time and time again -- and I've been listening -- where you 

will not move from your target.  But when you've got an 

opportunity to protect people and you can lever money to a 

very large extent, then we want to know and farmers want to 

know whether you're going to seriously consider it. 

 

I want to read you a little bit more of the offer so that you know 

what farmers are talking about.  This is in the letter that goes to 

the farmers from the federal minister, Bill McKnight -- the 

federal government, that is: 

 

 We are prepared to contribute about $40 million towards a 

Yield Protection Plan which would provide increased yield 

coverage for Saskatchewan farmers for 1992/93.  This 

contribution represents the funds saved on the federal share 

of your premiums because of 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

Saskatchewan's changes to the program. 

 

So the federal government has said that it saved $40 million 

because the NDP government in Saskatchewan changed the 

program.  They are prepared to put up that $40 million, 

regardless of the fact that you changed the program, to help 

farmers after harvest. 

 

 This offer is being made with two conditions. 

 

 First, the Saskatchewan government must share the cost of 

providing additional yield protection for producers, in exactly 

the same way as other provinces do. 

 

So all he's asking, Mr. Minister, is, you saved the federal 

government 40 million because you changed the program.  He 

says, I'll put it back in the kitty.  But I'll even do it after harvest 

so only those that have a drought can get in on it.  And I have a 

condition -- that you co-operate just like other provinces do. 

 

 Second, the province must work with the federal government 

and other provinces to design a program which ensures this 

situation does not arise again next year. 

 

So all he's asking you is: one, on the money that you have 

saved the federal government, he says, I'll put it in, we can do it 

after harvest; number two, I just ask you to co-operate like 

other provinces.  And the second thing is, would you just 

negotiate for a better GRIP program in the future with other 

provinces? 

 

Now it goes on to say, and I think this is interesting because 

you've mentioned it: "The Third Line of Defence Process:" 

 

 When special farm income situations have arisen in the past, 

the Third Line of Defence process has helped federal and 

provincial governments and your producer representatives to 

identify them, and to design solutions.  For instance, through 

the Third Line of Defence process, we identified the need to 

provide farmers with transitional assistance -- through (and I 

point this out, Mr. Minister) through the Farm Support and 

Adjustment Measures (FSAM I and II) -- while GRIP and the 

Net Income Stabilization Account (NISA) were starting up. 

 

 Between 1990 and 1992, Mr. Minister, over $500 million was 

delivered directly to Saskatchewan producers by this process 

through FSAM I (farm support adjustment measures) and 

FSAM II. 

 

Third line of defence up to 1992, over 500 million to 

Saskatchewan farmers . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  Why is the member for 

Regina Rosemont on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to rise on a point of order 

in regards to the line of questioning.  The Minister of Finance 

has already indicated that there is no allocation of supply 

indicated in this Bill in terms of previous 

questions relating to payments for GRIP or for third line of 

defence or any matters like that.  And I'd ask for your ruling, 

sir, to indicate that supply is for those sums designated in the 

motion, as opposed to talking about everything else under the 

sun. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to respond to the point 

of order raised by the member from Regina Rosemont.  As the 

member knows, there is a substantial over amount of dollars 

that the minister is asking for in this interim supply, and when 

we get to discussing agriculture as an important aspect in this 

province and I don't believe the member has a point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- Members must realize that this is not the 

appropriate place to get into detailed questions on the operation 

of specific departmental programs. 

 

The purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of government departments and programs on an 

interim basis, while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of Estimates at a later 

time.  And for this reason, members must reserve their detailed 

questions on Estimates and government financial policy for the 

regular review of the main Estimates. 

 

Those are rulings that have been made consistently in this 

House over the years when the matter has been raised whether 

or not questions about detailed programs are in fact in order. 

 

And so I remind members of those rulings and ask them to bear 

those rulings in mind and to make their questions appropriate 

to the matter of interim supply and not get into an examination 

of detailed government . . . or detailed examination of 

government programs because members will have that right 

and opportunity to do that during Estimates and also in other 

venues. 

 

So I find the point of order well taken. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We don't need the 

detailed specifics.  We want the overall general approach to an 

offer that could mean hundreds of millions of dollars.  Mr. 

Chairman, Mr. Minister, in your analysis that you've sent over 

here, Agriculture and Food requests $12,814,400 more than the 

one-twelfth.  That's maybe a detail, maybe it isn't, but it's quite 

a bit of money, $12 million plus. 

 

The Canadian crop drought assistance program needs another 

$13,979,400 in payments.  Now that's quite a bit, Mr. 

Chairman, and that's made out to Crop Insurance.  So just in a 

general sense, Mr. Chairman, we want to know what the 

minister and the Minister of Agriculture have in mind for crop 

insurance generally, because we have some big policy 

decisions to be made by that minister and the cabinet and the 

NDP here with respect to agriculture that could affect 

one-twelfth as we . . . One bit of crop insurance is 13 million.  

Well the minister says, no.  You handed it to me, and it says 

here, Agriculture and Food requests 12 million more than the 

one-twelfth. 

 

So I'm asking about general policy in agriculture because the 

federal government has offered $500 million now in 



1860 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

third line of defence for Saskatchewan, and we've already 

received it.  It's made another offer.  And if you say you're 

negotiating and, Mr. Chairman, it's just negotiating, if it costs 

you $23 million to help farmers kick this into gear, we want to 

know whether you'll take that seriously because it will affect 

not only the overall budget, but it will affect your Estimates, 

because this could be consummated in July or August, and we 

want to know. 

 

I've read this general line of the approach by the federal 

government because it could mean hundreds of millions of 

dollars.  We don't need to know the detail.  It's not about detail, 

it's about your approach in a philosophical sense about how 

Crop Insurance and the Saskatchewan government could 

contribute so you could kick into a gear a program for farmers 

in Saskatchewan financed mostly by the federal government. 

 

Could the minister answer that in general terms, given the fact 

that we've already received $500 million from the federal 

government, and they've got an offer now on the table that 

would give us much more. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the Associate Minister of Finance on his 

feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I wanted to raise a point of order with 

you, Mr. Chairman.  It struck me that the member from 

Rosemont raised the point of order; you made a ruling.  The 

member from Estevan has carried on as if no ruling were ever 

made.  This is precisely the line of questioning which he was in 

before the ruling was made.  It strikes me that he is blatantly 

ignoring your ruling. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I heard the Leader of the Opposition try 

to confine his remarks to the question of one-twelfth, but then 

followed it up by asking the minister to generally comment on 

policy.  The question remains that, is this the appropriate place 

to be examining government programs and policy?  And I 

would again say that it is not; that the purpose of interim 

supply is to determine whether the one-twelfth that the 

government is asking for is an appropriate sum -- whether there 

should be more, whether there should be less. 

 

It's the Leader of the Opposition, indeed all members have the 

right to in other settings in this House, in Estimates and 

otherwise, to ask the minister and other ministers about policy 

questions.  And therefore I find that the point of order by the 

Associate Minister of Finance is appropriate. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I just want to get this straight so that we 

understand what's happening here.  You're saying that we can't 

talk about policy in interim supply, and we can't talk about 

specifics in interim supply . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm 

just asking for clarification. 

 

So if I can't talk about what the one-twelfth might impact . . . 

It's one-twelfth of what, Mr. Chairman?  One-twelfth of a crop 

insurance policy that could influence a lot of lives in 

Saskatchewan.  I'm just asking.  I'm not on specifics.  I said, 

one-twelfth of agricultural policy . . . one-twelfth of what you 

might do in a relationship that could cost 

hundreds of millions of dollars. 

 

Now not necessarily you agree or not, but we could get in a 

conversation of your general approach to what it might be.  We 

have, Mr. Chairman, the Agriculture and Food requests here, 

according to the minister, is $12 million out because of crop 

insurance. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where does it say that? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well it says here, Agriculture and Food 

requests, $12,814,400 million more than the one-twelfth for 

Canadian crop drought assistance program.  Now that's drought 

and drought assistance.  And Agriculture and Crop Insurance 

are significant expenditures. 

 

And we're asking, one-twelfth of a policy . . . I mean, it's 

one-twelfth of what?  We need to know generally where you're 

going with one-twelfth. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- . . . question related to the interim 

supply Bill, and I want to straighten out the member from 

Estevan's confusion.  He has totally confused himself or 

deliberately has done so by not understanding what's here.  He 

takes a word, and then into that word he reads all kinds of 

things that don't exist. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that for Crop 

Insurance the request is for one-twelfth of the amount that is 

been budgeted in this budget.  The item . . . and therefore there 

was no information provided to the members opposite because 

there was nothing in excess of one-twelfth.  The item that the 

member refers to is in the Department of Agriculture and Food.  

It has nothing to do with Crop Insurance.  It has everything to 

do and it only has something to do with an agreement which he 

signed, as the minister of Agriculture, two or three years ago 

with the federal government, 1988, committing the provincial 

government to pay the federal government $14 million a year 

for five years. 

 

No relationship to Crop Insurance whatsoever, Mr. Chairman, 

every relationship with an agreement that he signed as the 

minister of Agriculture requires us to pay the federal 

government.  The two are not even related. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, by the time we get to Estimates, 

you know that this money will already be spent.  And I say to 

the minister and I say to the chairman: Mr. Chairman, if I could 

just have a point, is that I believe that we have a right to 

grievance before supply.  And grievance before supply is 

asking questions about what the government has in mind before 

it spends the money. 

 

We haven't passed the budget, Mr. Chairman.  And grievance 

before supply is saying, what's your policy?  General policy 

outlines?  I don't need to know all your specifics about 

highways and health care and the wellness program, and I don't 

expect you to know.  But your general approach to health and 

highways and agriculture, as Minister of Finance, is pretty 

important before . . . So we can discuss grievance before 

supply.  Maybe we'll find out you don't know what you're 

doing, or you have no flexibility to negotiate at all.  And that's 

fairly relevant. 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1861 

So I'm just asking the minister then, in the light of the fact that 

he's going to pay Agriculture an extra $12 million . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . from Agriculture.  Agriculture's 

going to be paid . . . is going to pay the federal government 

another $12 million.  Can he foresee, in a general sense, Crop 

Insurance participating in a program that comes out after 

harvest to help farmers that have been hurt because of drought 

and frost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, no, not in this 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, just so that the farmers 

know that when you are putting together your plan for 

Saskatchewan, this is one-twelfth of what's coming down, 

you're saying it is not under consideration.  There's no financial 

consideration for it.  It's not under consideration, and it's set 

there, and we're not going to consider it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that's not what I 

said.  The member wants to put wrong interpretations on what I 

said.  I said that in this interim supply Bill there is no 

consideration.  There is no provision because there is no kind 

of an agreement. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, obviously if you make the 

decision to participate, it's going to affect one-twelfth of 

whatever happens.  Are you seriously going to give this 

consideration?  Would you acknowledge in the event that you 

participate in this that it's going to have an impact?  And could 

you tell farmers that you were seriously considering it and that 

it will affect your overall budget?  Can you acknowledge that 

to the farmers of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, just trying to 

keep in keeping with your ruling because I want to stay within 

keeping of the ruling, within this interim supply Bill there will 

be no impact.  This interim supply Bill very clearly spells out 

the amount of monies being provided to each of the 

departments.  We're prepared to stand by that.  There will be 

nothing that will change. 

 

If at some future time there is some change, we'll discuss it at 

the appropriate time, and there will be such a report to the 

legislature, and one of those times might be the Estimates 

themselves.  But right now we're considering interim supply, 

and the things that the member talks about are not relevant to 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you are prepared to talk 

about the bonds, the savings bonds the Saskatchewan people 

participated in, in some detail and the effect that that might 

have on a twelfth? 

 

You're prepared to talk about lower interest rates and the effect 

that that has on the Estimates.  But you're not prepared to talk 

about a big number in the province of Saskatchewan which is 

agriculture, drought, federal offers, and how it might affect 

your interim supply. 
 

You say no, it has no effect.  How can you go on and talk about 

lower interest rates, about bonds, about combinations of 

changes in the economy -- and freely talk about them in 

specifics -- and yet you're not 

prepared to talk about agriculture even in a general sense when 

it could cost you money.  It could cost the farmers money.  And 

there's a big impact, potentially large impact that you just found 

out here from the Canadian crop drought assistance program -- 

a $12 million impact in one-twelfth?  Why can't you talk about 

agriculture if you can talk about those other issues? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, strictly 

speaking by the rules of this House, I suppose one could say 

that it is not appropriate to talk about those other issues, but I 

think you can defend it this way.  The Saskatchewan savings 

bonds are a past event.  They have taken place; it's a fait 

accompli.  What the member wants to talk about is a 

hypothetical situation for which there is nothing that's been 

transpired and has nothing to do with this interim supply Bill.  

Therefore it's out of order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well here's a couple of past events, and maybe 

you could get into this.  We tried it the last time we were in 

these Estimates, and you said you could go get the information.  

And you would, last time we were here. 

 

You said on June 23 that the gross revenue insurance plan by 

the federal government would cost Saskatchewan 2 to 300 

million extra dollars and that would have to come from the 

taxpayers.  It says, quote: 

 

 Saskatchewan does not have the $200 million to $300 million 

extra we would be at risk for by going back to 1991 GRIP. 

 

That's in the past.  Now that's past.  And it is relevant, and it's 

significant here.  Now your own estimate for Crop Insurance -- 

you have and I hear -- is $108.604, and you've got one-twelfth 

in there for interim supply.  At least the last time around was 

$9 million.  All right.  You have an estimate of 300 million it 

could cost you in '91 GRIP, and you said this one's going to 

cost you 108.  You're only $200 million out.  Have you squared 

that circle yet with Crop Insurance, Agriculture, and other 

people because you put out the release? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this is interim 

supply.  The budget for Crop Insurance is clearly spelled out in 

the budget.  We're asking for one-twelfth.  That's there.  The 

amount budgeted for the GRIP program is also in the budget, 

and that's there.  And we're asking for one-twelfth in Crop 

Insurance and nothing more and nothing less. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Okay, we've made no progress since from the 

last time you were here.  You said you would go get the 

information that would specific . . . Crop Insurance designed it, 

but you said it came out of Finance, and it was on your 

letter-head. 

 

So again, I stand here with two Estimates at what it might cost.  

And this is in the past.  And it's general.  And it could make 

quite a difference to one-twelfth.  So you see why we're a little 

worried about your one-twelfth is that your Estimates range by 

2 to 300 per cent -- 2 to 300 per cent on the variations. 

 

Now on top of that, and I'm sure the Chairman understands, we 

have a federal offer that would allow you 



1862 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

to adjust these numbers.  And if you adjusted those numbers to 

the federal offer, which you say you're negotiating, I'm sure the 

people in the Legislative Assembly would like to know what 

you might have for a number.  So both of these are in the past, 

and there is a 300 per cent variation.  You've got a new third 

number in there now that could affect the one-twelfth.  You're 

out by $12 million from the last time you were here. 

 

Couldn't you give us a little bit more information on how you 

might negotiate for the farmers and what it might cost you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, relevant to interim 

supply, the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, the total to be voted 

is $108.647.  One-twelfth allocation for that is $9.054.  That's 

what's being requested in this interim supply Bill which is 

before the House today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, clearly, when we started this 

process, we're into the fifth one of these.  We've had two 

special warrants, and this is the third interim supply Bill.  And 

when the Leader of the Opposition says grievance before 

supply, I think the questions that we're asking in this committee 

are very valid.  We have some very serious concerns from 

Saskatchewan people.  We've got people facing devastation in 

the farm sector, and this minister wants to hide behind the 

narrowness of this thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have before me today a document, the Farm & 

Food Report out of Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food.  It 

was issued today, so I suspect it's part of the twelfth that you're 

looking for in ag and food.  And just to give you a flavour of 

the difference between your government and some of the 

questions we're asking, I'm going to read this into the record.  

This one talks about chickens.  It says: 

 

 One of the most common fatal diseases of young broiler 

chickens may be easily diagnosed by a producer: typically, 

the dead bird is found on its back. 

 

 But that's the only simple aspect of the disease.  Even its 

name may present confusion.  It may be called acute death 

syndrome, ADS, sudden death syndrome, SDS, heart attack, 

flip-over disease, (or, Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, maybe this 

applies to your department) or dead in good condition. 

 

Or dead in good condition.  Mr. Minister, this is what your 

department is putting out with the one-twelfth that you're 

asking us to okay in this legislature.  Mr. Minister, a dead 

chicken is a dead chicken.  I don't know how you get to be a 

dead chicken in good condition. 

 

Now you're asking us, you're asking us as an opposition to 

okay a minister's expenditure that's doing this kind of garbage 

when we've got municipal divisions with 5,000 acres of crop 

worked down in them already. 

 

(1630) 

 

You have been given an offer, and all we're trying to find out, 

Mr. Minister -- given the fact that you're going to pay 

the federal government $14 million on or about August 20 of 

this year as part of this Appropriation Bill -- some of the 

negotiations, some of the studies that you've done, some of the 

positioning that economically this province will have to get 

into.  And I say to you, Mr. Minister, that is important to 

Saskatchewan people -- not whether a dead chicken is in good 

condition or not.  And your minister is spending the taxpayers' 

money on this kind of garbage. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, let's talk about something serious. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to talk 

about something serious.  And I want to talk about this serious 

topic.  And that is the need for this legislature to do some 

serious business. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think, Mr. Chairman, it is clear -- 

and I think the members opposite understand -- that the public 

of Saskatchewan is tired and fed up with the kind of display 

which the member from Thunder Creek has just shown in this 

House, the purpose of which has got nothing to do with interim 

supply.  It's got nothing to do with interim supply, got nothing 

to do with dealing with the issues that are before this legislature 

which is the people's business.  It's got everything to do with 

wasting the time of this House, which the opposition has done 

since May 7 when this legislature budget was introduced. 

 

Now I'm not going to speculate about the reasons, Mr. 

Chairman, and I'm not going to make any accusations.  I could 

say that because the opposition does not work hard enough to 

do their research.  I'm not going to say that.  That's for the 

public to judge.  I'm not going to say it's got something to do 

with some members of the opposition who simply want to 

waste time in this House for no good reason. 

 

All I'm saying, Mr. Chairman, is once again the member's 

comments and the member's question is out of order because 

it's not relevant to interim supply. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, something else that is 

deadly serious that is covered in this Appropriation Bill, 

because it is paid on a monthly basis, is the question of legal 

costs for the Government of Saskatchewan.  You were 

involved in a legal proceeding against Saskatchewan farm 

families over this issue.  You're asking for one-twelfth for the 

Department of Justice in those legal proceedings.  Would you 

tell the Assembly what the costs are? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I can tell the 

legislature that we're providing one-twelfth of . . . as is the 

interim supply requirement.  As to the specific costs of any 

particular program or expenditure, the Minister of Justice will 

have to respond. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well you see, Mr. Minister, that's the 

problem.  We don't have a budget passed.  We keep coming 

back in here on a monthly basis.  Your government makes 

policy shifts all the time.  You make policy shifts which 

obviously influence the spending.  We don't have any 

Estimates passed, and yet you want to hide behind . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . .  Well we got one or 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1863 

two.  We got two. 

 

You want to hide behind the narrowness of this procedure all 

the time.  I mean, Mr. Minister, theoretically we're going to go 

through 12 of these things between special warrants and 

interim supply.  And at the end of the day we won't be able to 

ask any questions because, well you got to ask this guy; you 

got to ask that guy.  What's problem with coming through with 

some answers?  This House has been in session for four 

months, Mr. Minister. 

 

I mean you're expecting us to approve money in this interim 

supply, one-twelfth of the Minister of Justice, so that you can 

go and fight farm families in court.  And you say that we have 

to grant you this money because the Minister of Justice isn't 

here for us to ask; therefore we're going to grant you this 

money so you can turn around and do that.  And I don't think 

that's appropriate, Mr. Minister, considering that we're five 

months down the road and we don't have a budget when you 

promised this Assembly that wasn't going to be the case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the member just 

exposed what really he's up to.  The point of the matter is that 

the Department of Justice Estimates have already been before 

this committee, and the members opposite did not ask this 

question.  They had . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They'll be back. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I agree with the member from 

Estevan who says that the Estimates of Justice will be back.  

Absolutely, and he should be making sure that he asks this 

question when that department is here since he and his 

colleagues failed to do so, even though this was the paramount 

issue in their mind when the Department of Justice was here 

just a few days ago. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would on your 

one-twelfth give us a little bit of information on your sales tax 

increases in terms of you've added a point to sales tax, which is 

about a 15, 16 per cent increase.  How many items did you 

raise the sales tax on, and how many items did you reduce it or 

take it off of when you decided not to harmonize with the 

GST?  Could you give us the number of items that you raised 

the taxes on and the number you reduced it on? 

 

The Chair: -- I find the question is not in order.  The member 

is putting a question which can be put during Estimates.  The 

member has a right to expect an answer during Estimates.  But 

it's not a question that the Chair deems appropriate for 

consideration of interim supply. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm just trying to get at the 

general attitude towards the one-twelfth here.  The Minister of 

Finance has increased taxes.  And we talked about that the last 

time he was before it and there was no problem.  How did you 

degenerate the money?  And he says well, it was important for 

us to raise sales tax but not harmonize. 

 

Now that's part of . . . it's part of his whole budget and this is 

the interim supply for that and I'm asking, just asking how 

much money did you raise or do you forecast to raise through 

the sales tax increase which was about a 15 or 16 

per cent increase?  How much money do you expect to raise 

from that?  And it must be reflected here in the one-twelfth . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . and the minister says that budget 

Estimates aren't in here, so that he doesn't know how much 

money's in here.  So if he hasn't got any tax revenue in here, 

could he explain where the money comes from then. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I will answer this 

question keeping in mind the ruling.  This Bill does not deal 

with revenues or tax revenues or tax provision.  In this 

legislature we have had for several days all of the questions 

which the member just asked answered when we considered 

the amendments to the E&H (education and health) tax Bill. 

 

So those questions have been addressed.  And this is simply a 

repetition and a delaying tactic by the member from Estevan.  

The question is out of order, Mr. Chairman, because we're 

dealing here with supply which is for expenditures.  We're not 

dealing with revenue or Bills pertaining to revenue. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, the minister has put forward a 

budget.  Now we're into a second interim supply or third 

interim supply, and your numbers are different than your 

budget. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No, they're not. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well they are.  You've got different numbers 

now than you did a month ago.  You've got more . . . You've 

got changes in interest rates, you've got changes in the savings 

bond, you've got changes in drought, you've got changes in 

economic conditions, and they're different. 

 

And we're asking you: has it affected . . . or what's the effect of 

your sales tax increases on your Estimates?  This is an interim 

supply, and we have grievance before supply.  Where's your 

money coming from?  Has your estimate of what your 16 per 

cent increase in sales tax had . . . has it changed at all?  Do you 

have any information that would help us be more confident that 

your one-twelfth or your two-twelfths or your three-twelfths 

are any more accurate than they were three months ago? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  At present we are not dealing with the 

Estimates.  We are debating a resolution as it pertains to an 

interim supply Bill, an appropriation.  We are not voting 

individual departmental Estimates. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, what a bunch of 

chickens.  This is absolutely ludicrous.  The Minister of 

Finance could bring these things in every month from now to 

infinity and not answer a question in this House under that type 

of ruling.  We could have taxes going up, taxes going down, 

interest rates going up, interest rates going down -- all sorts of 

things happening.  And the minister expects us not to ask 

questions? 

 

I mean, Mr. Chairman, theoretically we may be, I don't know, 

December before we get to his Estimates.  And so you expect 

the taxpayer to go through this.  The minister wants a charade, 

and I don't find that acceptable. 



1864 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

I've reviewed Hansard over the years; other interim supply 

Bills went on for days and days and weeks and weeks and 

weeks. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I just want to caution the 

member to not reflect on the ruling of the Chair.  If the member 

has a question with respect to interim supply, he should put the 

question, but not reflect on the actions or the rulings of the 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, already in this House today we 

have established that you are in a different fiscal regime than 

we were a month ago.  You talked at great length about the 

gains made with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan offering.  You 

have talked about lower interest rates.  Those, sir, are gains for 

the province of Saskatchewan.  I suspect that your officials are 

doing things in the international money markets to accentuate 

those gains. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, we're just asking you some very general 

questions about a certain area.  If you have gains and you have 

people in trouble, we want to know how you might match the 

gains that you've made to the people that are in trouble.  And 

it's very pertinent because we are expending very large sums of 

money in this twelfth, in the whole area of agriculture. 

 

We are going to write cheques as large as nearly $14 million.  

And what we want to know from you is the gains that you've 

made.  We want you to put those in the light of the problem 

that we've identified to you, and say to this Assembly, that 

given these gains, this is what our contingency plan is.  Could 

you do that, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

member is very clear and very simple.  There was a budget that 

has been presented to this Assembly.  The one-twelfth request 

is within the framework of that budget -- no changes from the 

framework of the budget.  If the member wants to debate and 

ask questions about the overall budget and any changes that 

may be happening because of other changes, the place we will 

do that is when we consider the Estimates for the Department 

of Finance.  And I will be more than happy to provide all of the 

information that is available. 

 

I was pleased to see that the member from Thunder Creek 

provided myself, as he did, as others critics have, with a whole 

list of questions that they want answered.  That's very helpful.  

I can tell the member from Thunder Creek now that we will 

provide an answer from the Department of Finance to that list 

of questions.  But we will do that when the Estimates are 

considered, where we can talk about the whole framework of 

the budget. 

 

We can't do that when all we're talking about here is interim 

supply, which is one-twelfth of that budget.  And there is no 

change, which the member talks about.  The member says 

there's some change.  There is no change.  Any proposal here is 

within the framework of the original budget. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you've already 

acknowledged that from month to month the conditions 

change.  You've said that here and you've said it before.  Well 

is it true, Mr. Minister, that you've changed your policies with 

respect to highways over the last month and rural roads?  Have 

you changed that policy, Mr. Minister, from budget day? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The only change that is a deviation 

from the one-twelfth has been outlined with information that 

has been provided, and that is additional money that's provided 

for highways' maintenance and transportation and rural surface 

transportation.  There is no other . . . that's not a deviation from 

the budget; that is only a deviation from the normal one-twelfth 

which is provided in the interim supply Bill. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well it's a deviation in the one-twelfth, then it's 

a deviation in the budget.  It's a deviation.  It's changed since 

your budget and it's changed here.  You've just acknowledged 

it's changed here.  Why did you flag it?  It's changed.  You've 

acknowledged that the highway budget and the highway policy 

is changed as a result of the policy decision made by the 

Minister of Highways.  And that can affect your budget; that 

can affect the twelfth. 

 

The same applies to Indian and Native Affairs.  There's been a 

policy decision made on Indian and Native Affairs since you 

brought the budget down and since your first interim supply.  

The minister acknowledged that.  There's been a significant 

policy change in Indian negotiations in the last two months.  

Will he acknowledge that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, no, there have 

been no changes.  This budget for the Department of Highways 

and this interim supply is for one-twelfth of what was 

originally budgeted.  If there is a change in policy, the Minister 

of Highways will speak to the change in policy and not the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

But as the Minister of Finance I'm saying this: that the budget 

provided to the Department of Highways on May 7 is the 

budget that is still there, and we're only asking for one-twelfth 

of that budget, other than the additional amount which is for 

capital and surface transportation because it's seasonal work, 

and because of maintenance of highways and transportation 

because that's seasonal work as well.  There is no change other 

than that. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- So you're saying, Mr. Minister, that there is no 

change in expenditures in Highways as a result of your policy 

decision in this season, because you've said this is only because 

of seasonal changes. 

 

Therefore what the minister said in Highways means absolutely 

nothing in terms of changes here, in terms of the financial 

contribution to rural communities.  It means zero.  What he just 

said in terms, we're going to change our mind; we're going to 

protect some roads; we're going to do some of these things -- 

means absolutely nothing, or it means somebody else is going 

to get cut back. 

 

Is that what you're saying?  So that we know now he's going to 

start picking riding and roads and changing 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1865 

roads.  This one-twelfth that you've acknowledged here is only 

for seasonal stuff and nothing to do with the fact that he said 

he's going to loosen up and protect rural highways.  Is that the 

fact? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, no, Mr. Chairman.  I do 

not agree with anything that the member from Estevan has said. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You never do. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm simply saying very clearly . . .  

Well I never do.  And are you surprised?  The people of 

Saskatchewan don't either. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, all I'm saying is that the Department of 

Highways was provided a budget.  The Department of 

Highways will be able to answer specific questions about that 

budget when they get to their Estimates, if the opposition ever 

gets around to them in this Assembly. 

 

Within the framework of that budget we are providing 

one-twelfth for the one month, plus an additional amount 

which is -- the members have opposite so I won't repeat it -- for 

surface transportation and maintenance.  But that's still within 

the framework of the budget without any change on the 

expenditure. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's fair enough, Mr. Minister.  Just so we 

can tell the people across Saskatchewan when they talk to the 

Minister of Highways, and they're certainly going to get this 

information, there is no more money in this change of policy.  

All it is is window dressing.  No more money.  Because you've 

just said it is not change, and any changes here are just because 

of seasonal operations, not because of changes in policy, that 

we're going to protect rural roads. 

 

Now that's a significant policy statement.  And I gather, Mr. 

Minister, on this one-twelfth you're saying the same thing in 

agriculture.  Despite all the talk and all the protection and all 

the rest of it, we are not going to give farmers any more 

assistance because on this one-twelfth that reflects exactly what 

we said it did, nothing to do with 1991 GRIP or the offer that's 

coming from the federal government. 

 

So your transportation policy and your agriculture policy, 

despite the rhetoric, is hollow: no support and no changes.  I'm 

glad you've cleared that up for us, Mr. Minister, because we 

know that if you're sticking with this and that's your tune, that 

all the rhetoric to those rural people or anybody else means 

absolutely nothing because you're not going to change this 

number, and therefore you're going to have to rob Peter to pay 

Paul, and we knew that's what it was all about anyway. 

 

You were going to take some money from some place else, and 

you are not going to make sure that you supply the same 

number for highways across Saskatchewan, so that in fact 

you're going to have to support that minister's highways or cut 

into that NDP minister's piggy bank, take from somebody else.  

You've got thousands of farmers that you're suing.  You're 

going to have to make sure that you go get their money and go 

get their land to keep your budget exactly as it is on the twelfth. 

And if we go through this in September and October and 

November as a result of drought or frost or highways being 

ripped up, you'll say the same thing: no more money for people 

regardless of any policy decisions that are made whether it's for 

Indians, native affairs, food banks, growing people on welfare, 

any of that.  This twelfth is staying the same. 

 

And all the rhetoric we hear from the opposition . . . or the 

government and the people opposite means nothing because 

you're not going to change your mind.  It's one-twelfth, period.  

I'm glad, Mr. Minister, that you've made that clear because 

your example on highways is the perfect example we need to 

take any place across the province. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, on your Highways and 

Transportation allocation over one-twelfth.  I see you have for 

maintenance of highways and transportation 2.7 million 

requested because the majority of the activity is performed 

during the peak period of summer.  Your Minister of Highways 

indicated in his budget that he was going to rip up a thousand 

kilometres of pavement.  I suspect that he would have to do 

that in the summer.  It would be very difficult to do that in the 

winter-time in this province. 

 

Can you tell us, Mr. Minister, given that the Minister of 

Highways says he isn't going to rip up that thousand kilometres 

of pavement now, if there isn't a mistake in the amount of 

money that's allocated here, because he's got a lot of ripping 

that he's not going to do now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the amount that's been 

appropriated here or being requested here is the amount that's 

been requested by the Department of Highways to do their 

normal surface transportation capital which is in the budget, 

and the normal maintenance which is also in the budget, which 

was allocated or announced at least in the budget speech on 

May 7. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, at some point in there, the 

costs must have been worked into the budget for the ripping of 

a thousand kilometres.  A ripper is a thing on the back of a cat 

or a grader that goes along, you know, and it rips big trenches.  

And that's what you'd have to do to the pavement.  And that 

would cost money, Mr. Minister.  And I suspect that that was 

built into the budget, this ripping. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if you're not going . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member for 

Thunder Creek is asking a question.  We should give him the 

courtesy of listening to him put his question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- So, Mr. Minister, what I'm saying to you is, 

as part of this maintenance override here, we will be out by a 

thousand kilometres.  Now, Mr. Minister, a thousand 

kilometres is significant.  And you can't be asking us for extra 

money past your one-twelfth when we're out a thousand 

kilometres of ripping.  That just doesn't square, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now you've got to explain that to the House how you can 



1866 Saskatchewan Hansard July 30, 1992 

be out that thousand kilometres of ripping and still want to 

include that in an overage of one-twelfth.  You've got to do 

that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

wants to look on page 54 of the budget.  There's an item here, 

subvote 16: "Maintenance of Highways and Transportation 

Facilities" budgeted for '92-93 -- $82,200,300.  The 

Department of Highways is going to manage within that 

allocation for maintenance.  Because when you have a budget, 

Mr. Chairman, of some $5 billion of expenditures, surely it is 

not asking too much of the departments to manage 

expenditures within their allocations.  Sometimes they may 

have to spend less here and some more there. 

 

But the Department of Highways has indicated that they are 

prepared to live within that allocation because they simply 

asked for the one-twelfth, plus what is a normal requirement 

because of the peak seasons, peak work that is done during the 

summer seasons for capital and for maintenance.  Nothing is 

changed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, I'm only asking you to 

acknowledge two things, okay?  You've outlined the total 

maintenance and repair budget for the Department of 

Highways.  And as part of that maintenance repair, that 

80-some million, included in there was a thousand kilometres 

of ripping, okay? 

 

Now the fact that a thousand kilometres of ripping isn't 

occurring any more -- okay? -- means that you've got a 

different emphasis.  Therefore, as part of this 2.7 million that is 

over must be partially attached to ripping, because we've both 

agreed that we can't rip in the winter-time.  Okay?  That means 

in this province there's only April, May, June, July, August, 

September, October when you can reasonably rip probably.  

Okay?  And I would guess, Mr. Minister, that that will occur in 

the months that we're referring to in this over one-twelfth 

expenditure. 

 

So I want you to tell me what portion of that $2.7 million that's 

over the one-twelfth is now . . . should be taken out that was 

associated with ripping. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, just so that the 

record does not give a wrong impression because of the 

exaggerated words the member opposite is using, there was 

never talk of ripping up any pavement.  There was some talk of 

some roads being converted over time. 

 

The Minister of Highways has announced a change in that 

policy.  But at the same time the member well knows the 

Minister of Highways said that they would be able to 

accommodate that within the existing budget, so there is no 

change to the budget.  We're providing one-twelfth of the 

budget which was provided for the department initially on 

budget day. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, in all due respect, the 

Minister of Highways is not the tooth fairy.  He does not take 

his wand and go like this and the 1,000 kilometres instantly 

turn into gravel.  You've got a problem.  It's hard.  Pavement's 

hard, Mr. Minister.  You have to rip it up to get it back to a 

gravel road. 

Your Minister of Highways had a thousand kilometres 

reversion back to gravel as part of his budgetary process.  And 

he's changed his mind now, and he said that isn't going to 

happen.  Okay?  And you were going to do it this summer 

because you can't do it in the winter-time because you can't rip 

it up. 

 

Now somebody, Mr. Minister, was going to have to physically 

rip that up and grind it up and push the pavement off and put 

new gravel on, and there's all sorts of things associated with 

ripping up highways, Mr. Minister.  Part of this maintenance 

budget that is over the one-twelfth had to be tied to that.  And I 

want to know what portion of that was tied to ripping.  Now 

you should be able to figure out . . . you got a thousand 

kilometres, and you got X number of kilometres total, you 

know.  You must be able to do the arithmetic to tell us what 

portion of that was associated with it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, maybe the former 

government ran government like a tooth fairy, and that's why 

we have the insurmountable debt that we've got.  But the 

present Minister of Agriculture is going to run his department 

like a good manager and a good policy maker.  And therefore, 

Mr. Chairman, the budget for the Department of Highways will 

be managed. 

 

Now I wish the member for Thunder Creek would stop 

exaggerating and putting wrong information in the House.  

Because there was no question, there was never any talk of 

ripping up any roads.  There was talk of conversion of roads 

over an extended period of time.  The minister has indicated . . 

. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Read your budget. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I have read the budget.  In fact I 

wrote the budget.  So I think I know a little more about it than 

the member from Estevan who probably hasn't read the budget.  

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the budget for maintenance is intact, 

and we are providing here one-twelfth for that budget. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Okay, Mr. Minister.  I'll take you at your 

word.  This magical conversion that was going to occur on the 

road to somewhere, this magical conversion was done over a 

period of time.  But there was going to be some done this year.  

The Minister of Highways was very definitive that some of this 

conversion was going to happen this year -- some of this 

ripping.  Okay. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The road to Beechy. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- The road to Beechy, my colleague says, was 

going to happen this year.  And then the people out there said, 

Mr. Minister, we don't like that.  And we're going to write you 

letters, and we're going to put pressure on you, and we want 

you to change.  We want you to change.  And the minister said, 

I've seen the light, and I am not going to rip up the road to 

Beechy any more.  Okay. 

 

Now you have saved as part of this maintenance budget the 

ripping of the road to Beechy.  And we want you to tell us 

about that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again it's 



July 30, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1867 

a question . . . if the member opposite wants to deal with 

specifics, he's going to have to, according to the rules of this 

committee, deal with it during the Estimates of the Department 

of Highways.  But because it is almost 5 o'clock, Mr. 

Chairman, I just simply want to say that I think because of the 

nature of the debate here that I would want to move: 

 

 That the consideration of this supply resolution be postponed 

until later this day. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't believe that that is a 

legitimate motion that the member has put forward.  He has to 

ask for leave of this Assembly in order to place that type of 

motion.  And I think, Mr. Chairman, you should review that 

procedure. 

 

The Chair: -- I've asked for the motion and once I see it then 

I'll determine whether the motion is in order. 

 

Order, order.  I find the motion by the Minister of Finance to be 

in order, and I would refer members to Beauchesne, 952.  

Therefore the motion or the question before the committee is 

moved: 

 

 That the consideration of the supply resolution be postponed 

until later this day. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


