




















































Hansard: July 06, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1243 

 July 6, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to 

introduce a new person who is here, who has not been on the 

committee before, Mr. Murray Schafer, who's the director of 

the education and health tax branch. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I believe that before the supper break the 

minister committed to bring back some information.  One was 

to do with the gross domestic product that was involved in 

exports, as far as Saskatchewan went.  And the other one was 

the numbers to deal with consumer spending, both in the 

province of Saskatchewan and Canada-wide during 1991. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let me respond to the member.  

Indeed I had indicated I would have some information on the 

exports. 

 

About one-third of what Saskatchewan produces is sold outside 

of the province -- a third.  Two-thirds of that one-third goes 

into the international market-place.  That's the situation there. 

 

The retail trade, I can provide the information and indicate that 

. . . in fact I think we've got enough copies I can send it over.  

But it indicates that all of the changes in retail sales in Canada, 

they vary from 10 per cent drop in P.E.I. (Prince Edward 

Island) to 6.9, as I've been saying, 7 per cent in Saskatchewan, 

1991 over 1990.  And then there's 7 per cent in Quebec, 7.5 per 

cent in Ontario, 3 per cent in British Columbia, and it goes on.  

So there are some different kind of numbers there. 

 

It's important to note that in each particular province there will 

be different factors.  For example, in Ontario where the drop 

was seven and a half per cent, that was attributed almost 

exclusively to the recession and the kind of impact it has had in 

Ontario, which is very much different than the kind of impact 

the recession has had in Saskatchewan.  Our problem has not 

been recession.  Our problem has been low prices for 

commodities and agriculture products and so on.  But rather 

than going through it all, I'll just make it available to the 

member opposite for his information, if I can have a page. 

 

Also there was a request for the education and health tax 

exemption for farm supplies, farm inputs.  We also have that 

here, and we'll provide that as well.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, on the, say, one-third 

of Saskatchewan's gross domestic product that is involved in 

export, what kind of a number would you attach to that.  And 

you can be within a million or two. I don't need it down to the 

last cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- $7 billion. 

Mr. Swenson: -- $7 million?  Gross sales? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay, the latest number I have here 

is exports to other Canadian provinces and abroad in 1989 was 

$7 billion. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Billion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, with a B. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You had me worried for a minute there, 

Minister, that 7 million was the number. 

 

Of that $7 billion, then, I think it would be safe to assume that 

the bulk of that would be made up in probably half a dozen 

different commodities -- potash, grain, red meat, oil, gas, that 

type of thing.  I think you would agree, Mr. Minister, that $7 

billion is a lot of money; $7 billion is something this province 

can't do without; that these also would be some of our largest 

employers in the province.  And I think, Mr. Minister, from 

your comments earlier on, that would it not be safe to say, Mr. 

Minister, that any one of those major areas, whether they be 

potash or oil and gas, uranium, would have benefitted from 

harmonization?  Would that be a fair assessment of those types 

of industries? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, of course, each of those -- the 

potash industry, for example -- would have got substantial 

rebates.  But collectively, over all, the economy as a whole 

would have had a negative impact, as I've been saying all 

afternoon. 

 

It's a question of how you will establish your taxation system.  

Potash, for example, probably compares very well in the 

taxation system, regime, in the province of Saskatchewan as 

compared to other jurisdictions which the potash industry in 

Saskatchewan competes with.  The United States, for example, 

it competes very well because their production is extremely 

expensive.  To get potash in the New Mexico mines, everybody 

knows from time to time they have actually had to shut down 

because they couldn't compete.  So in each individual case, yes, 

the corporations would have got a gain.  No one will question 

that.  But from the point of view of the impact on the economy 

as a whole for the province of Saskatchewan, it would have 

been negative. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well you see, Mr. Minister, that's the point 

that we are trying to drive home to you: that our economy, as 

you mentioned, is different than a lot of other economies in 

Canada in particular.  A lot of other economies, like Ontario, 

are heavily based on manufacturing and consumer spending. 

 

When I look at this sheet that you've sent across to me, it shows 

me that in Canada in 1991 the consumer spending was off 

approximately 7 per cent, if I average these numbers out 

correctly, all across the country; that harmonization was not a 

fact in any other province in Canada except the province of 

Quebec. 

 

So therefore, if consumer spending was off for all of the 

various reasons in all the various jurisdictions at the same level 

Canada-wide, then it is absolutely unfair to say that 



1244 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

harmonization was the cause of it being down 6.9 per cent in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore, if we had known for instance in 1990 that with the 

introduction of the GST (goods and services tax) and a general 

recession in central Canada that consumer spending was going 

to be off in this province to that degree, I suppose there are 

certain things that could have been done to mitigate it.  But the 

simple fact of the matter was, Mr. Finance Minister, that 

Canadians as a whole were very pessimistic, very sceptical of 

the direction that their economic indicators were showing to 

them.  And they were saying, I'm going to keep my money at 

home; I'm not going to be the kind of consumer that I've 

probably been for the last quarter of a century.  And they hung 

onto their money. 

 

So on one hand you have a Canada-wide phenomenon that had 

nothing to do with harmonization.  And you have an economy, 

and I would put these numbers on the very conservative side, 

you have an economy that will founder without its export and 

value added sectors being strong. 

 

And what we've been saying to you all through this debate is 

that our economy as a whole would have more potential to 

grow with harmonization than without it.  And that some of the 

tax measures that you and your government have implemented 

are every bit as harsh because the bottom line is almost 

identical with the money you're taking out of people's pockets.  

But we're not getting that surge, that boost that should happen 

to an economy that has a low unemployment rate, has low 

interest rates, has zero inflation, and yet we don't see anything 

happening. 

 

And I suggest to you, sir, the reason we don't see anything 

happening is that our businesses cannot be competitive with 

some of the other jurisdictions because of the tax regime that 

they have around their neck.  And that if you're going to 

achieve those 2,000 jobs you're projecting in your budget, 

you're going to have to have a way of freeing that up. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, given the fact that fully one-third of our 

economy here is totally dependent on exports, totally 

dependent on a favourable environment here to create jobs and 

employment and pay taxes and royalties, would you not 

consider perhaps that it would be an equal trade-off to have the 

consumer in our society spending a little, more with as much 

mitigation as possible in order to see our economy grow, rather 

than stagnating it through overtaxation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think in the 

tax measures which we have introduced in this budget we have 

taken that into consideration.  We have tried to balance the tax 

burden as equitably as we possibly can so that the corporate 

sector pays its fair share, so that the consumer doesn't have to 

pay all of the increase in the tax.  We think that that's only fair.  

And that does not mean that we do not need to continue to 

review and revise the tax structure in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Of course we do. 

 

We have to look at how we can make businesses more 

competitive.  That's why we made the provision in this 

budget for a 1 per cent reduction in the small business 

corporate income tax rate.  That's why we made a provision in 

this budget for a three-year phasing out of the E&H (education 

and health) tax on the agents used in manufacturing and 

processing.  That's part of the strategy that's in place.  The tax 

structure is continuously under review to address the problem, 

exactly the problem, that the member from Thunder Creek 

raises. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, how much tax would the 

federal government collect on our behalf at the border, as 

they're doing with other provinces, under full harmonization?  

If we had stayed under full harmonization what would have 

been the level of tax collected on behalf of the province of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Right at the present time, under the 

education and health tax system, we are losing about a million 

dollars a year, which in the scheme of things is a significant 

amount of money, but out of $5 billion not that significant.  

Under full harmonization it would have been something like $6 

million.  We have, through urging by the provinces, convinced 

Ottawa to start collecting the tobacco and the liquor taxes at the 

border.  There is at the next agenda, on the agenda at the next 

ministers of Finance meeting, some proposals that will be 

brought forward, in this case sponsored by Manitoba. 

 

But work has been been done, along with other provinces, by 

Saskatchewan, where there will hopefully be a federal 

government consideration of collecting the tax on all of those 

items which are common in the sales tax system across all of 

Canada which will achieve the same kind of thing as 

harmonization would have achieved, because Saskatchewan's 

small base of items on which E&H tax is applied and therefore 

literally all of the items that Saskatchewan has, would fall 

under that umbrella. 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- You see, Mr. Minister, as was pointed out 

before supper, every time that we discuss a different topic here 

with harmonization it's as the Leader of the Opposition said, it's 

another GigaText a year, in your words.  I mean we get five 

million bucks because you saved in the administration and your 

own department and then it's another six million at the border.  

And then there's some over here on the child taxing. 

 

I mean the point is, Minister, when you get adding it all up as 

the former government did in looking at ways in keeping our 

economy viable, in the face of a recession in Canada which 

drove off consumer spending 7 per cent, the options get 

narrower and narrower and narrower, because our economy is 

so dependent in one particular area, and that is exporting of 

commodities.  Those things were all taken into consideration of 

what was the fairest means to keep the economy rolling, what 

would encourage small business, what would encourage big 

business, what would employ people beyond specific projects.  

And as I said, it's 5 million here and it's 6 million there and it's 

35 here and it's 65 over there and it's 62 there, and it all adds up 

and basically comes out, I believe, at the end of the day, better 

than what we have 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1245 

right now. 

 

Mr. Minister, you keep telling us the election's over with; it's 

time to get on.  The Premier said today, oh go home and get 

your ball glove and bring it along and play ball.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, I suggest it's time for you to start listening to some of 

the people around this province. 

 

And I was glad you brought up the Federation of Independent 

Business people today because they did say harmonization; 

they just said do it at 5 per cent and not 7.  Just about 

everybody and anybody in this province that has anything to do 

with the business community says harmonization makes sense 

over the long haul.  We can argue about the rates of 

implementation and how much money we pick out of people's 

pockets, but the fact is that in the end it makes more sense. 

 

Mr. Minister, the province of Manitoba just made an 

announcement as to the agreement that they have with the 

federal government.  Do you anticipate the province of 

Saskatchewan having exactly the same agreement in the near 

future? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, I do not anticipate that.  We 

hope to have a better agreement.  That's why we're not rushing 

into it.  Manitoba's arrangement is for the collection of alcohol . 

. . tax on alcohol and liquor.  We hope to have alcohol and 

liquor, and if we can convince the federal government -- and all 

the other provinces, it appears to me, are prepared to help us in 

trying to do that -- we will have a better agreement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, a week or so ago in the paper there was an 

announcement of a survey that was done concerning 

cross-border shopping throughout western Canada.  If I'm 

correct I believe Saskatchewan had the highest per capita 

cross-border shopping of either Manitoba, Saskatchewan, or 

Alberta.  Is this correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll be pleased to 

answer that question.  Saskatchewan had -- this is for 1991 -- 

1.02 trips per capita, Manitoba had 1.95 trips per capita, 

Alberta had .44 trips per capita.  I'm just doing the provinces on 

each side of us. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I know that 

down in our area, Souris-Cannington, Estevan, along the border 

in the south-east corner of Saskatchewan, cross-border 

shopping is a major problem.  And that problem is directly 

related to taxes.  People are shopping not just across the border 

into North Dakota, but also across the border into Manitoba. 

 

The fact that cross-border shopping is a problem is not just 

isolated though in our area.  In fact if you were down in Minot 

or Bismarck or Fargo you would see buses -- bus loads of 

people coming out of Saskatoon and P.A. (Prince Albert), and 

many other places across this province. 

 

Some neighbours of mine wanted to go to California a year 

ago.  They drove down to Minot to stay overnight because their 

plane left early in the morning.  Friday night they could not get 

a hotel room in Minot.  Every one of them was full of 

Canadians.  Those Canadians come from 

this province and from Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Minister, our taxation policies is driving those people 

across the line.  And with the changes that you're proposing to 

the E&H tax, is only going to make that situation worse.  Quite 

a number of businesses are failing right along the border.  Now 

the alcohol industry along the border is the most evident one 

where failures are taking place. 

 

In Gainsborough, the hotel there is only hanging on because 

they have a good restaurant.  In Carievale, the hotel is in 

receivership and is being operated or leased out by the credit 

union.  Carnduff, they have a good restaurant also there.  But 

the interesting point about Carnduff is that for a while the 

liquor store closed, because they were not selling any liquor 

because of the taxation on the liquor in this province as 

compared to Sherwood, North Dakota.  Oxbow had a hotel 

close. Frobisher's had a hotel close. Glen Ewen's had a hotel 

close.  All these are the communities right along the border.  

And that can only be attributed to taxation. 

 

Your change in the taxation from 7 to 8 per cent is a fourteen 

per cent increase -- fourteen and a half, my colleague says -- 

increase in that taxation rate.  That is a very significant and 

severe increase.  How are these businesses to make up for that 

extra cost when these people that would normally purchase 

their supplies are purchasing them across the border in North 

Dakota, or they're purchasing them across the border in 

Manitoba? 

 

There's a number of businesses right along the Manitoba 

border, particularly in Melita, that cater almost exclusively to 

Saskatchewan residents.  You go into these businesses to buy a 

washing machine or whatever you wish to buy there, and they 

ship it to you.  They deliver to your door because then you 

don't have to pay the Manitoba taxes.  And you're supposed to 

be a nice person and send the taxes to the province of 

Saskatchewan, but very, very seldom that ever happens.  I've 

met one person that actually did that -- surprised me. 

 

But very little of that tax money is then collected by the 

province of Saskatchewan that is being spent by Saskatchewan 

consumers to buy their necessities.  They purchase them in 

Brandon and they deliver into our area. 

 

The businesses in Regina don't deliver into our area so people 

buy in Manitoba, avoid paying the E&H tax, get home 

delivery, and we lose the business. 

 

When people purchase their goods across the line in North 

Dakota, Mr. Minister, if that purchase exceeds a $25 amount 

they are rebated their state sales tax.  You can apply for it up to 

once a year and get all of the state tax you paid back.  The 

Manitoba government in a recent news release announced that 

they are going to allow their tourists to be rebated any 

purchases they make, tax purchases they make in the province 

of Manitoba, not only on consumer purchases but also on hotel 

rooms that they spend in that province.  The border problems 

are a problem with the Manitoba border, the U.S. (United 

States) border, the Alberta border as my colleague from Wilkie 

pointed out.  The only one we don't seem to have a problem 

with is the Northwest Territories. 



1246 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

I've mentioned the alcohol and beer.  Beer prices are just 

astronomically different between North Dakota and 

Saskatchewan.  You can purchase 24 beer in the local hotels in 

my area for anywheres from 30 to 32, $33.  You can bring 24 

beer back across the border, legally, for about $18 Canadian.  

So there's very few people that when they want to take beer to 

their homes along the border buy Canadian beer to do so.  They 

run across to Sherwood, North Dakota and buy it there.  They 

run across at Northgate, they run across at North Portal. 

 

But they're not buying the beer in Saskatchewan.  They're not 

paying their taxes in Saskatchewan.  They're paying the federal 

government's excise taxes and the small amount of tax that the 

province charges at the border.  But we're losing that business.  

We're not getting the taxes that would be paid, the business 

taxes.  We would not get the money that would be paid for 

income tax to those employees. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you considering any method to relieve that 

burden on our border communities, to alleviate that tax 

inequity, that difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, some of the 

measures that need to be taken are already in the process of 

being developed.  The federal government has agreed to collect 

the tax on liquor and tobacco at the border, the same time as 

they collect the GST.  This Act makes no impact on that at all 

because it will have no impact on alcohol prices. 

 

The whole question of doing away with harmonization of the 

PST (provincial sales tax) has had a significant impact because, 

for example, on a lot of items such as clothing and reading 

material and restaurant meals, the GST actually provided a 100 

per cent increase in taxation.  It was really making it less 

competitive.  So by the removing of that harmonized PST 

we've made a significant difference to the communities that the 

member opposite talks about. 

 

I mean it's a very interesting comparison to compare North 

Dakota to Saskatchewan.  North Dakota may have lower taxes, 

but North Dakota does not have a health care system.  North 

Dakota may have lower taxes, but it doesn't have an income 

security system like we have in Saskatchewan or in Canada. 

 

So those kind of comparisons I think are like apples and 

oranges.  Is that what the member is advocating, that we 

develop the same kind of policies that they've had in North 

Dakota where their population is something like 500,000 

people now, with vast areas in which there is nobody living in 

any more?  That's not the way that this province was built.  

This province was built differently.  We have social safety nets.  

We have a medicare program that is suffering on some difficult 

times but it's going to work, and it's going to be restored to 

meet the needs of the 1990s.  Surely the member is not 

advocating that we begin to look at the North Dakota model in 

order to develop the tax regime, and therefore the programs and 

the policies in Saskatchewan, similar to those from North 

Dakota. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's interesting 

that you bring up the case of health care in a comparison 

between Saskatchewan and North Dakota because the people 

that cross-border shop from this province can have both.  They 

have the cheaper taxes because they buy across the border, and 

yet they can still take advantage of our health care, our social 

programs, our education system. 

 

But what is being lost in the mean time is all of those 

businesses and all of those jobs along the border.  You talk 

about having vast open spaces in North Dakota with no people 

there.  Well that's what you're going to have as far as 

communities are concerned along the border.  Because the 

people that are living there have the opportunities to take 

advantage of those lower taxes in North Dakota or in Manitoba 

and still take advantage of our health care system.  And that's 

what the problem is, and that's what my concern is, is what's 

going to happen to my communities along the border when you 

jack up the taxes to 8 per cent on E&H sales tax, and what 

about 9 per cent and 10 per cent?  When you increase those 

taxes, it just drives more people across those borders and that 

just hurts my communities, and soon there won't be any 

communities there.  What are you going to do to alleviate that 

problem? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We already did a very significant 

action when we removed the harmonized PST.  We removed 7 

per cent PST on everything except prescription drugs and food 

which was in place as of April 1, I believe it was, of 1991.  As 

of October 21 of 1991 that was removed.  That was a major 

benefit to those communities. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- You removed the harmonization.  But 

what you did was you took away a number of tax advantages to 

those very businesses that are being hurt today because they're 

still paying the PST on the products they buy to run their 

businesses, where they don't across the border. 

 

And then people come in.  I had a contractor called me and had 

a concern about out-of-province contractors coming in and 

doing business in Saskatchewan.  The only difference that this 

contractor could see in their types of businesses, in the way 

they ran their businesses, was the fact that the out-of-province 

-- this particular company is coming in from Alberta -- is not 

paying any sales tax on their equipment.  Therefore their 

equipment is 7 to 8 per cent cheaper than what the 

Saskatchewan company is.  And they are getting the contracts. 

 

Are you giving any consideration to that type of relief?  And 

that's just contractors.  But the small businesses in this province 

are also being harmed by that E&H tax that you have just 

jacked up, where they would have benefitted from the PST 

harmonization. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Had the member been here this 

afternoon he'd have heard me explain that.  My explanation 

was that there is a system in place.  Anyone that does business 

in Saskatchewan, there is an audit system that audits, even 

out-of-province businesses located out of province, to 

determine whether they have paid their fair share of the E&H 

tax because they're doing business here.  That audit system is in 

place.  The member 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1247 

has some examples of such companies that he feels are not 

contributing, then let us know and we'll make sure that the 

audit is performed. 

 

(1930) 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, gasoline is also one of 

those items that is dislocated in price between North Dakota 

and Saskatchewan.  Quite a number of people are buying 

gasoline and bringing it back across the border. 

 

Some people have been advocating that there be restrictions on 

the importation of goods across those borders from the States -- 

alcohol, tobacco, beer, gasoline.  Mr. Minister, that in my mind 

is the wrong direction to go.  Putting restrictions on the amount 

you can bring in only encourages more people to bring it across 

illegally, as the member from Greystone had been talking 

about.  And that is a concern in our area and they do catch 

people that are doing this. 

 

The idea that the member from Wilkie had brought up -- 

Lloydminster has a tax-free zone.  You say Onion Lake has a 

tax-free zone.  You state that these are communities situated 

along the border and for that reason they are allowed to have 

this tax-free exemption. 

 

I attended an event today in my constituency.  It included 

people from Gainsborough; Carievale; Carnduff; Coulter, 

Manitoba; Antler; and Sherwood, North Dakota.  It's a 

re-enactment of the original boundary commission coming 

through establishing the 49th parallel.  It was also the same 

trail that was followed by the North West Mounted Police 

when they came into this area in 1874. 

 

And what was interesting, Mr. Minister, is that you could term 

this whole area as one community.  They're all inter-related, 

they marry back and forth; families settled on both sides of the 

border without any regard to where the border actually was.  

And at this event today what was interesting was that they had 

people there speaking from the RMs (rural municipality) on 

both sides of the border -- from mayors in the towns and they 

also had speakers there.  The Mayor of Antler, North Dakota 

spoke and the Mayor of Sherwood, North Dakota spoke, as 

well as the state senator for that area, Orlin Hanson. 

 

Mr. Minister, that whole area is one community.  You spoke of 

Lloydminster being allowed a zero tax base because they were 

one community.  What about those other communities along 

the borders, such as the one I have just described on the very 

south-east corner of this province?  Those people consider 

themselves to be one community.  Are you going to give them 

any consideration to have a tax break right along those 

borders? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, at the present time we are not 

considering any such options. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what is the special 

circumstance that Onion Lake finds itself in that it is allowed to 

have a tax-free zone? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The thing that's unique about 

Lloydminster, for example, is that Lloydminster is on the 

border, it's one city.  And the businesses in that same city 

compete against each other.  And traditionally over the last, I 

don't know if it's 30 or 20 years, there has been some special 

provisions that applied because of that particular circumstance.  

Onion Lake applies in the same way. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- You're saying then that Onion Lake is a 

community that is exactly split in half by the border, the 

Alberta border? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, I'm told it's right on the 

border. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why are you 

concerned then about businesses that are on the Saskatchewan 

side of the border and businesses that are on the Alberta side of 

the border and allowing them to be able to compete back and 

forth when you're not concerned about a business that may be 

one or two miles from that border and yet is still competing 

directly with the community across the border from them.  The 

harm is just as great.  Will you not give them some 

consideration? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, because in 

one case you don't have to move the border.  In all the other 

cases you would have to move the border. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Why would you have to move the 

border?  We're not talking about where the border is situated.  

We're talking about the harm that is caused in those 

communities by the taxation policies on either side of the 

border. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well clearly, Mr. Chairman, if you 

move the border for taxation purposes, five miles or ten miles 

in, you may solve the problem in the communities on one side 

of the border but you immediately cause a problem for all the 

communities on the other side of the border.  And then you 

have unfair competition right within the province of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well if you talk to some of the people 

around the Lloydminster area, they feel that is already the 

situation.  Once you get out of Lloydminster, they feel that the 

people in Lloydminster have an unfair advantage over the 

community 20 miles down the road. 
 

But if you put in a system of staggered . . . move various 

borders across this province.  Manitoba did it a few years ago 

when our gasoline was significantly cheaper than theirs.  They 

staggered, I believe, every 25 miles until you reached a point 

100 miles in their boundary to get the full taxes, to pay the full 

taxes, to protect their businesses.  Why are you so adamant at 

not doing that? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I indicated 

to the questions that were asked by the member from Wilkie on 

another day -- exactly the same questions; we're going over the 

same turf all over again here -- anything that may be proposed 

to us which is possible within the fiscal framework of the 

province I'm prepared to entertain.  If the member has an idea 

which we can analyse and take a look at I'm prepared to do 

that. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that the 



1248 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

idea of a staggered tax system along the borders has some 

merit.  It also creates some problems but it is one of the things 

that should be looked at and perhaps some serious attention, 

some serious study being given to that type of an idea. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've mentioned that there is, that you do some 

reviews, some audit systems on companies operating in this 

province from out of province.  Does this also include 

companies that license vehicles outside of this province and 

operate them in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is yes. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If such companies are operating within 

this province, what do they pay? A portion for the amount of 

time those vehicles spend in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told generally that's correct. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And what sort of method do you have to 

track, to find out, whether or not these vehicles are actually 

operating in the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's the audit system that I spoke of 

earlier. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- And how does this audit system operate?  

Do you contact those particular companies or do you have 

somebody on the road looking for companies that are operating 

in the province, or just what mechanism do you use to find out 

whether or not they're actually operating here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, we actually . . . the 

department actually goes in and audits the firms, even in 

another province.  And secondly, there are interprovincial 

agreements for truckers in which each of the provinces reports 

to the other and makes the necessary adjustments. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- What if these companies are not in the 

transportation business, as in large trucks? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It doesn't matter.  They do business 

in Saskatchewan.  They're still subject to audit. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, various companies have 

made contracts prior to your budget date, based on the 7 per 

cent PST, who are going to have to purchase their goods based 

now on an 8 per cent.  Are you prepared to make any 

amendments to grandfather those purchases, to give some 

consideration? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we went through 

this exactly stuff . . . Maybe the research has given you both 

the same questions as it gave the member from Arm River.  But 

we went through this and I indicated that the 8 per cent applies 

to any purchases made after the new tax system is in place, the 

new tax level.  Any purchases of any goods that were 

purchased before that, the 7 per cent would apply. 

 

And because of the audit system that we do, if there's a concern 

that any contractor might have, have them get in 

touch with us and we'll work it out with them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

hope I don't end up repeating my colleagues' questions too 

closely because I did miss some of your earlier discussions in 

this matter.  But we too have, I'm sure you realize, cross-border 

shopping problems in the Maple Creek constituency.  In fact, I 

got a letter just the other day from the administrator of a small 

town by the name of Golden Prairie.  I don't know if you're 

familiar with the town or not; it's just along the border north of 

Maple Creek.  It's a town that, I guess to put it politely, is 

struggling to survive. It's probably a town that most likely 

won't survive, to be fair about it. But they do have a couple of 

businesses there, and the letter indicated that they are having 

serious, serious concerns about this 1 per cent increase. 

 

The writer stated that while 1 per cent doesn't seem to look like 

very much, in reality it becomes a 14 per cent increase in the 

tax itself or something like that.  And it is to them the death 

knell for the two small businesses that they mention because, as 

they put it, people are just too prone towards fast travel these 

days and easy access to getting over to Alberta, mainly 

Medicine Hat. Of course, there's a couple of other small towns 

close by.  For example, the town of Richmound is close to 

Schuler, and if you happen to have a post office box, 

apparently, in Schuler, you can buy a whole bunch of things 

that people in Saskatchewan are not entitled to. 

 

And I guess I should, you know, get you to answer a few of 

these questions as we go and then refer back to it as I get your 

answers.  The question there is, what can you do to encourage 

people to stay in Saskatchewan in a small town like that?  What 

advice could I give to them, or what hope could I give to them, 

or what suggestions could I give to them, that might encourage 

them to stay at home rather than to do things like taking out a 

post office box in Alberta and qualifying themselves to become 

residents of Alberta?  How can I encourage these folks to stay 

at home and shop in a small town like Golden Prairie? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I guess that's a 

decision people in a small community or any community have 

to decide on their own.  Do they want to support their 

community?  Do they want a community that continues to 

survive and exist and service that general area which the 

community exists in? That's not a decision government can 

make for people; that's a decision that people in the community 

will make.  But I think you can advise them that certain 

measures taken by this government have been of great and 

significant benefit to them. 

 

When there was the harmonized PST in place, their tax went up 

by 7 per cent, the sales tax went up by 7 per cent -- 7 per cent 

federal GST, 7 per cent provincial GST.  When we removed 

that tax on October 21, that tax was gone. Now there's a 1 per 

cent increase on the E&H tax, which is a far less burden than 

the harmonized PST was. I think that's encouragement, but in 

the end it doesn't matter what kind of a tax regime you have.  

There's all kinds of things that attract people to different places.  

People have to decide, do they want their community to 

survive. If they do, they have to contribute to that 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1249 

community in many ways including buying certain services 

and commodities and goods that they need for their everyday 

lives in that community. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, our minister has a 

strange way of philosophizing his mind through the system of 

taxation and a strange way of handling figures.  This is the 

most amazing kind of mathematics I think I've ever witnessed.  

You say that you took off the 7 per cent when you cancelled 

harmonization.  Well you did it on a few specific items.  You 

didn't take it off of almost everything that people buy.  Because 

the E&H tax and the PST were and are and always will be the 

same damn thing.  They have never been any different.  So 

how can you sit there and tell us that you saved Saskatchewan 

by taking off the 7 per cent when you didn't take it off of 

anything except maybe hamburgers and a couple of other items 

that people might use. 

 

The thing is that you've added 1 per cent to most of the things 

that people buy, 1 per cent which translates into an increase in 

that particular tax of 14 per cent of that tax or thereabouts.  

And what you have done is you've created a situation, sir, 

where people in economically difficult times -- and even if 

there wasn't economically difficult times -- people by nature 

will shop where they can get the best deal. 

 

And when you add another per cent onto seven you are not 

making the problem but you are making the problem worse.  

You have made the problem from 7 to 8 per cent on a tax that 

people in Alberta don't pay and people in Saskatchewan that go 

to Alberta don't pay.  I know that you may respond by saying, 

well they should be good citizens and voluntarily pay that, but 

they won't.  That's human nature. 

 

(1945) 

 

I suggest to you, sir, that if you've ever been to Alberta you 

may have bought something and brought it home yourself, and 

if not, maybe you have a relative that did.  Certainly if that isn't 

the case I can point you to an awful lot of folks that are doing it 

every day.  It is just not a thing that you can police and it is just 

not a good enough argument to say to us that people should 

stay home and protect their own community because the reality 

of life is that people will shop where they get the best deal. 

 

Governments have to take that responsibility, sir, the 

responsibility of creating a competitive atmosphere in the field 

of shopping, in the field of business.  If you want to create 

prosperity in this province you're going to have to make the 

province competitive with our neighbours. 

 

I'm not going to suggest to you here how you do that.  But 

playing with figures and suggesting to me that I should go 

home and tell my folks, you better stay home because the 

Minister of Finance said that's your nationalistic Saskatchewan 

duty, because it just won't fly out there.  The small-business 

men are the guys that are going broke and the folks that do the 

buying are the ones that are saying, goodbye, we're going 

somewhere else.  So you have a conflict between the consumer 

and the business man and the business man here happens to be 

your tax base. 

Now if you don't do something to create an atmosphere where 

people will be competitively buying in the province, then you 

are going to lose that tax base.  And what it means is that those 

folks that live further away from the border where it doesn't 

make economic sense to drive across to get goods or can't get a 

big enough shopping list because they don't have enough 

dollars to spend to make it prosperous, then those folks are 

really being asked to pick up the extra load of taxation because 

you've destroyed the tax base along the border.  There's no 

longer going to be any taxes coming in from small towns like 

Maple Creek and Richmound and Burstal and Fox Valley.  It 

just won't be there.  And that means that people in Regina are 

going to have to pay more taxes to make up for the ones you're 

losing along the border. 

 

Now I've also got a list of things here that really makes me 

wonder where these lists come from or how you get them.  And 

I'm sure you can tell me.  But I have a list here of things that it 

says that are taxable and things that aren't taxable with regards 

to the food production industry. 

 

And my first question to you is, where did you come up with 

the list of those things that food producers can buy that are 

exempt, and where did you come up with the list of things that 

they buy that are not exempt from taxation?  How did you 

derive that list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the list comes from the former 

administration.  When we took office, that's the lists that were 

there.  We have not changed any of them.  They were 

developed in the 1980s, I believe.  I don't know whether it was 

1980 or 1981 or '82, but somewhere in there they were 

developed and we have changed nothing until this time. 

 

That's what I say when I say on a number of occasions here 

during this discussion that all of these things have to be 

reviewed, and if there are some changes that may be needed to 

be made from time to time, something that may be worth 

considering. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well this time I agree with you.  There's 

probably time to rethink some things and take a look at some 

things and change some things, and this might be one of them. 

 

And I'm going to just give you a couple of these examples so 

you know exactly what I'm talking about.  For example, on a 

farm you have to pay the E&H tax on well-cribbing.  Now why 

would a farmer pay that on well-cribbing when over here he 

can deduct that off when he buys livestock insecticides?  Or if 

he buys a weed burner he doesn't have to pay it.  And yet if he 

buys a goose-neck trailer to haul his livestock to market in, he's 

got to pay the tax. 

 

If he buys fertilizer, he doesn't pay the tax.  If he buys a farm 

account book, he doesn't pay the tax.  But if he buys a sodium 

light for his yard so he can catch the crooks that are coming in 

to steal his gas, he's got to pay the tax.  If he buys a power plant 

to back up his electrical supplies so that his chicks won't all 

freeze to death in the spring if the power goes off, he's got to 

pay the tax. 

 

These things look to me, most of them, like they're as 



1250 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

important to a food producer as the things that are exempt.  

And the list is quite lengthy. 

 

For example, we've got water pressure systems, veterinary 

supplies, truck tarps.  Can you imagine that?  We've had people 

in Manitoba who have passed laws in the past, and I don't know 

if they're in effect or not right now, but I remember many years 

ago when there was quite a controversy over this, and the 

government actually forced farmers to cover every load.  

There's even been some talk in this province about people 

being more diligent in tarping their loads to keep the spread of 

wheat seeds down.  And yet a truck tarp, you have to pay the 

tax on. 

 

So I really do appreciate the fact that you are saying that you're 

going to take a look at these lists because it is totally unrealistic 

to charge people the tax on these kind of items when you're 

exempting all of these others.  Many of these should be 

exempted if we're going to continue along the lines of 

attempting to make our agricultural producers more 

competitive through taxation . . . holidays, I guess, would be 

probably too strong a word, but forgivenesses on taxes paid 

that make up for cheap food policies in our nation.  It's 

unfortunate that we have cheap food policies and that we have 

to get into this kind of . . . sort of grab-bagging at ways to keep 

people economically viable. 

 

But if you're going to do it, then we may as well do it full-scale 

and do it right.  And to me, charging for some of these things 

and not for others makes it almost impossible for people to 

know what they're doing.  And not only that, it becomes totally 

unfair to certain producers of certain types of livestock for 

example, or certain types of commodities. 

 

For example, you may not need, in a straight grain operation, a 

back-up power source.  But if you're in a chicken production 

business of small chicks or any other type of small animals, 

you might absolutely have to have that in order to make sure 

that these things don't die on you. 

 

So why one producer of one commodity is picked on rather 

than the others, I really don't see the rationale.  So I hope you 

will check that out and do something about relieving that 

problem. 

 

In the area of farming, we've got a lot of exempt items and lot 

of non-exempt items.  And I just wonder how long, sir, would 

you expect it would take for you to review this list and bring us 

an updated version so that we can pass that on to our farmer 

neighbours. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me 

that this is not a problem that is new.  This has been a problem 

that's been around for over 30 years.  This is a list that the 

former government, which the member opposite was a part of 

-- not as an elected member -- found acceptable.  We've 

inherited it.  And I have set no timetable for any review on 

when it might be concluded. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well if it's been around for 30 

years, it sure wasn't started by the past administration.  I'm sure 

you're aware of that.  And also, if it's been around for 30 years, 

it's probably time you changed some things in it and updated it.  

So get at it.  Don't wait for ever. 

 

The 8 per cent tax has got us another problem in our area.  

Tourism is not a big thing in south-west Saskatchewan, but it 

can be and it should be, sir.  We have a lot of potential there. 

 

And I just today had a phone call from one of my constituents 

who had a suggestion for you, and I'm going to pass that on to 

you because he says that the general feeling already, this early 

in the season, is that the 8 per cent tax is in fact sending a 

negative message across both the Alberta border and the U.S. 

border.  In particular, he's talking about the U.S. border 

because we have what they call the Horseshoe Tourism 

Association down there that has been struggling to get 

organized over the past few years in order to promote tours into 

The Great Sand Hills and of course to promote stops at places 

like the Cypress Hills and those kinds of things that we have, 

like the dinosaur bones down at Eastend -- and probably as 

good a collection down there as they've got any place in the 

Tyrrell Museum, for example, over in Alberta.  And no reason 

why we can't develop that tourist kind of a package in that 

corner and do a lot with it. 

 

But this constituent of mine has pointed out that the added 1 

per cent has sent something of a negative impact or message to 

folks outside of our province and they don't seem to be coming 

to our province.  So we're having great difficulty convincing 

them that this is not such a bad thing; that they should come 

along and that it really wouldn't cost them so much money. 

 

So he has made a suggestion and he's suggested that we should 

issue a gas coupon, a book of them, at the border, and when 

people come across from the United States they might be given 

. . . he gives an example, say, of five coupons if you're planning 

on staying for four or five days.  And your licence number 

would be printed right onto that coupon so it could only be 

used on that vehicle with that licence number.  But that coupon 

would allow you to buy gas at a reduced price that would make 

your gas competitive with the American gasoline that they 

were buying as they came up to the border. 

 

This would send out a positive signal, he says, that you are in 

fact relieving them of paying the extra taxation, giving them 

something for nothing as an incentive.  It might, he felt, have a 

tendency to offset this negative message that our increase in the 

sales tax has created, because you can add as well as I can, and 

now we're looking at 15 per cent tax for folks that come into 

our country from states further south where there is no sales tax 

at all.  And of course the border states like North Dakota has, I 

think, an 8 per cent, or maybe it's 6 -- I'm not sure -- but 

obviously not 15.  So they feel quite a shock when they come 

across.  And we could eliminate some of that negativism if we 

offered them some little token like that. 

 

This gas coupon, he suggests, should not be transferable. And I 

think it's good -- he's thought this through.  It would not be for 

sale.  He could not sell it to anyone else.  He could only use it 

for his own vehicle with that licence number on those days that 

he's in the province of Saskatchewan.  It would be good for 

nobody else any 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1251 

place else, but it would be an incentive for tourists to come in 

and stay a few days. 

 

So I pass that on to you because I think that we have to look at 

some kind of incentive programs to get away from this idea of 

discouraging our tourists from coming into our province.  After 

all, if you can get a tourist to come in to something like the 

Craven valley jamboree, I'll bet you that he's probably going to 

buy enough soda pop over the week to cover up for any 

coupons you'd give him for his gas.  And I just wondered what 

you think about that kind of a proposal, to offset this 1 per cent 

increase, in tourism. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, the 

people who use our roadways should make a contribution to 

their construction and their maintenance.  And the members 

opposite are saying that Saskatchewan people should pay for 

the roads, and that everybody else who uses them should get 

off without paying for the roads.  At first blush I don't think 

that's a good idea, but I think maybe the idea that the member 

opposite suggests is something that can be looked at. But the 

principle -- that people who use the roads should make a 

contribution to them, rather than just simply the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer having to pay for that road that everybody else may be 

using. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you folks like to call it an E&H tax, 

which says health and education.  In other words, you're 

collecting the tax to pay for that and not for roads.  We, I think, 

properly labelled it as a PST -- that's provincial sales tax -- 

because we really believe that you throw this money into 

general coffers and use it for everything.  And I think in fact 

that's what you were just saying to us, is that PST is the most 

appropriate way that we could describe our tax nowadays 

because it has nothing to do with health or education any more. 

 

And the reality here is, though, that you're not saying to these 

people that you can travel for nothing.  You're saying to them 

that, we want your business, that we want you to come up here; 

here's a little incentive for you to come; we're going to give you 

a little bit of a break.  We're sending them a positive, 

business-like proposal, a positive message that we are going to 

treat them good and treat them fair. 

 

Just the other day -- it's unusual how these things happen -- just 

the other day, I happened to come across some Americans that 

were visiting in our province.  And they actually said to us in 

all seriousness, we don't understand why any people live in 

Saskatchewan any more.  And one of my neighbours said, well 

you have to live here to understand it, but it's the sort of thing 

that grows on you.  And he said, but how can you tolerate all of 

this high taxation?  He said, when I came across the border I 

find out I've got to pay 15 per cent tax on everything I'm 

buying.  He said, my taxes are too high here and he says, your 

fuel, he says, is unbelievable.  He said most people now that 

might have driven through Saskatchewan are jogging down 

into the northern states and driving across on their highways to 

get across on cheap gas and cheap highways, and they're 

circumventing our province. 

 

If we don't do something, Mr. Minister, if we don't do 

something to stop that kind of thing from happening, it 

can only grow.  It's like a cancer.  It'll have to get bigger and 

worse and worse.  The more people do it, the more it's going to 

happen.  We've got to curb that somehow and if it costs a few 

dollars to encourage people to come in, with some gas coupons 

or something like that to get them to come across, I think you're 

going to have to take a serious look at that.  Otherwise we're 

going to lose our tourism industry and that could affect a lot of 

people in a very negative way in a very short time. 

 

Now it has come to my attention through a letter sent by your 

Economic Diversification minister came across my desk today, 

suggesting that you're going to have a new program come out 

to try and encourage tourism to come to our province.  You're 

going to actually give people money to do marketing and 

advertising to try and get tourism in here. 

 

(2000) 

 

Now if you're going to spend money that way, what's the 

difference if you spend a little bit of that on some gas coupons 

encouraging folks to come across the border.  Seems like you're 

making an investment.  You're not saying, drive on the roads 

for free.  You're saying, we'll make an investment to try and 

encourage folks to come into our province to do business here 

so that we can show you a good time and you'll appreciate 

spending your money in our province.  Now don't you think 

that that would be a good approach? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member's 

friend from the United States should be reminded that under 

the system where he comes from, that if a member of his 

family got ill and got into the hospital for any length of time, 

they would be literally bankrupted for the rest of their lives.  

That's the difference between what our tax system does for us 

and what their tax system does not do for them.  That's a 

comparison that we have to make.  That's one of the 

advantages, and maybe in some ways disadvantages, of living 

in Canada.  But I like to think it's an advantage. 

 

As far as this incentive for tourism, I want to remind the 

member that this year the inquiries by United States tourists, 

potential from the United States, the inquiries are up 200 per 

cent over last year.  Obviously there is something happening 

that is getting them interested.  And I think, Mr. Chairman, it's 

clearly because of all that Saskatchewan offers for a tourist 

who wants to enjoy the clean air and all of the sights and the 

untarnished terrain that we have yet in this province, which 

they don't have in the United States. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's great.  I'm happy to hear that those 

inquiries are there.  What has that translated into in numbers of 

success?  How many people have you actually seen come in, 

more than last year?  Do you have those figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, because the tourist season is 

basically just beginning, so we don't have those numbers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that's probably as good an answer as 

you could be expected to give, because I think the 



1252 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

reality is going to be that you're going to see a lot less.  And I 

don't think you're going to want to admit to us what the true 

figure is. 

 

The inquiries may be there, but as soon as they get back they're 

going to talk to their neighbours -- the first few that come -- 

and they're going to tell everybody about the high taxes up 

here, and the high gas prices, and the high this, and the high 

that.  And then pretty soon our great wilderness and our great 

fishing experiences don't seem so important any more. 

 

Suddenly they hear that the roads are going to be torn up and 

that they may not even be able to get there.  And there's all 

kinds of silly things going on that are sending negative 

impulses out into the world around us.  And I'm just suggesting 

to you, sir, that we ought to try and curb some of that with 

some incentives and some programs that may help. 

 

And you've already set up a program that's going to cost some 

money.  So you've obviously delegated some dollars.  You've 

budgeted then for those dollars.  It's just a question then of 

priorities of how you spend a few of them.  And I say to you 

that somehow, giving a bit of a tax break at the border, or some 

kind of incentive, is the only way that you're going to get these 

200 per cent more inquiries to actually come through and use 

this as their vacation spot. 

 

And we do have the clean air yet and we do have the good 

wilderness locations and the good tourist attraction programs 

and places to go.  There's no question in my mind about that.  

But when a negative thought gets into people's minds, it's hard 

to turn around.  And as I said earlier, it spreads. And we've got 

to stop that by encouraging folks to come here with some 

incentive. 

 

And you have mixed a lot of apples with oranges when you 

bring in the medical care programs that they have as compared 

to ours.  Obviously we have a good system, no question about 

that.  But they also have insurance programs there, and if 

they've bought their insurance, they will be protected and they 

won't lose their businesses and their farms or anything else. 

 

I'm not saying or suggesting to you that I am a promoter of 

their system over ours.  I think each system can work as well if 

applied properly.  But the reality is that you can't mix them 

together and say that the guy down there isn't paying his fair 

share when he comes up here. 

 

When I go down there they don't charge me a tax on their 

roads.  They're quite happy to have me as a tourist, spending 

my tourist dollars on whatever it is a tourist might happen to do 

down there, whether it happens to be to pull the lever on a slot 

machine or to go hunting ducks out in some marsh.  They're 

just happy enough to get us there and then they know that once 

they got me there, I'll most likely spend some of my dollars. 

 

It works the same way when you bring folks into our province.  

Once you get them here, once you get a positive message to 

them, they're going to come on in.  They're going to spend 

some time here.  And they will spend their money because they 

expect to do that.  But 

they don't want to feel as though they've been sort of cheated.  

And taxes is one of the first things that people see when they 

travel. 

 

Now maybe I'm suggesting to you that you ought to have a 

hidden tax. I don't know if that's possible or not.  But when you 

add it on after you buy it, that's the first place the tourist sees 

that he's getting nailed something extra that he doesn't feel that 

he is getting something in return for.  He doesn't really consider 

that he should be buying your roads.  He considers you should 

have built them for him because he's a tourist coming in, and if 

you want his business you should provide a way for him to 

come here.  Now there was just one suggestion of what we 

could do. 

 

Another thing we have to talk about, Mr. Minister, is this 

business of employment along the border.  When a man 

employs someone to work in the oil patch over in Maple Creek 

district or somewhere like that, he employs someone, he's got 

to pay the GST and the PST on everything that he buys.  He's 

also got to pay it, I guess, on the labour and things that go into 

whatever he's hiring the person for. 

 

And we've heard our friends talk earlier about the fact that 

people can come in from Alberta. And you said that there's an 

accounting procedure and that somehow they ought to be 

audited. And I can't for the life of me figure out how you're 

going to catch these guys unless you've got some kind of secret 

police system set up.  How are you going to identify these 

people that are not complying with your set of rules? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not how we're going to, it's how 

it's always been done.  It was done during the last 10 years.  It 

must have been done pretty effectively because the former 

government didn't decide to change it.  But people, to do 

business in the province of Saskatchewan, have to become 

licensed.  They do business in this province, they have to have 

a licence to do business in this province.  It seems to me that 

that's a pretty adequate way in which to identify who they are. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well you're right and you're wrong.  The 

government of the past administration did identify the problem 

and they did do something about it.  They did harmonize the 

tax because harmonized taxation, again, was the answer to 

alleviate a lot of these problems. Because the folks that were in 

our province could get a rebate on all of the taxation if they 

were considered to be in that proper category, and then they 

were competitive with the people who came in from Alberta. 

 

Whether or not licensing actually happens in all cases I'm not 

too sure, because somehow I think a lot of folks maybe aren't 

bothering with it.  But suppose they all are.  Then the reality is 

that the proof is in the pudding.  And the proof here is that 

people from Alberta are still coming in, and people on our side 

of the border are saying that they have unfair competition, that 

they are in fact not getting the jobs -- that the folks that are 

hiring are hiring the people from Alberta. 

 

Now if the system is correct and accurate and working, why is 

that continuing to happen?  It shouldn't be.  So there must be 

something wrong out there.  And if 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1253 

harmonization was designed to alleviate that -- and even some 

of the folks along the border out there before the last election 

finally saw the light of that and realized that that would make 

them competitive, you know -- if it took that to do it then, how 

can the system be working now that you've cancelled the 

harmonization?  What have you done, or what are you going to 

do, to offset those equalization factors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we've been through 

this three times now and we're repeating the same questions 

that were asked by members who were in the House before and 

asked the questions.  But the harmonization is an issue that was 

debated in the last provincial election.  People of Saskatchewan 

clearly said the harmonized PST, the way the former 

government had brought it in, was unacceptable.  It was wrong.  

It had a negative impact on the economy.  And therefore it's 

gone.  And we're not introducing it in this budget.  We 

eliminated it. 

 

We'll be reviewing the tax regime in the province of 

Saskatchewan over time.  We have started that, and as a result 

of that review we reduced the small business corporate income 

tax by 1 per cent -- 1 per cent.  Significant.  We'll continue to 

review that. 

 

We've said that in three years we will phase out the E&H tax, 

the education and health tax on agents using processing and 

manufacturing.  A major impact for places like . . . for 

industries like IPSCO; our printing industry.  And so we've 

taken some initiatives to meet the need that the member 

opposite identifies.  And we'll continue to review to see what 

more we can do as our fiscal situation permits us to. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I guess in all 

fairness you've said what is true.  People have said that they 

didn't understand what harmonization would do for them.  

They had a negative impression of it and they were probably in 

a large extent voting against that at the election. 

 

But that really wasn't my question.  My question was: if 

harmonization was suitable to those people as a tool to make 

them equal along the border to prevent cross-border hirings as 

well as some cross-border shopping problems, my question to 

you was not whether the old system was good or bad.  You said 

you ran an election campaign where you had committed 

yourself to take it off, and that's fair ball; you did.  Everybody 

knows that.  You had to.  You couldn't possibly save face if 

you'd have done anything else.  You know at that point your 

own members in your own party would not have accepted your 

going back to that plan, and we can appreciate that you are 

committed to having to come up with something different, and 

of course that's what I've said. 

 

I haven't said what was bad about the old program, why did 

you get rid of the program.  What I've said to you is what are 

you going to do now as the government to replace that.  And 

you gave a couple of those illustrations for IPSCO.  That's fine; 

we appreciate that; that's good.  If a 1 per cent corporate relief 

in corporate taxes is sufficient to create and stimulate the needs 

of that industry to 

preserve it from cross-border shopping and the pressures of the 

outside world, fine.  If you are willing to look at it and do some 

more, that's great too, but we've got a whole area of people 

along the borders that are affected in a lot of other ways where 

this 1 per cent doesn't seem to be jamming it to the problem 

enough to get results, not yet at least.  I haven't seen any 

results. 

 

And I keep getting letters from people that I mentioned earlier 

from towns like Golden Prairie where the administrator writes 

on behalf of his town council that they are desperately trying to 

save their town and need the government to take some action 

different than increasing the sales tax that is different from the 

one in Alberta.  I've had those requests, I would say from every 

town in my constituency that is within a hundred miles of the 

border.  Every town in my constituency has made the same 

request, and more than once and more than a few people. 

 

These folks are desperately trying to keep their businesses 

going.  There is no possible way that they can encourage the 

general public on their own arguments or their own volition of 

any kind to come in and buy in their shops when folks can go 

down the road to Medicine Hat and buy things cheaper.  It's 

just human nature that folks won't do that and you haven't 

explained to this MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

with any degree of satisfaction what you are planning to do 

that's going to alleviate those problems. 

 

The problem gets worse.  It's getting worse by the day.  These 

towns are truly believing that they're finished and I know that 

some of them will be, and you maybe can't save them all but 

surely we haven't got a plan in this province where we let 

everybody go broke.  Surely there must be some thoughts 

there, you know, that you can get from your back-benchers, if 

nothing else. 

 

They must have some ideas.  Some of them come from close to 

the borders.  If you are not willing to look at things like relief 

through a coupon system or relief from extending the 

boundaries from the way you do in Lloydminster to towns that 

are a few miles off, you must have some other ideas. 

 

Certainly you must have a plan of how you are going to save 

this province from total bankruptcy of a tax base.  That is what 

we are doing; we're losing our tax base.  Where are you going 

to develop the tax base to make up for all of the people that we 

are losing along our borders?  What are you going to do about 

that? 

 

If you say I am repeating myself, you are probably right.  But 

we are going to keep repeating ourselves over and over again 

until you come up with some answers about what you are going 

to do for the people of this province.  Those folks out there are 

desperate.  They aren't going to let me off the hook if I phone 

them up tomorrow and say, the Minister of Finance shrugs his 

shoulders and says we are repeating ourselves.  They don't care 

if we are repeating ourselves.  They want something done.  

They want some action to save their communities. 

 

They want you to take a look at what 8 per cent is really going 

to do to them more than what 7 per cent already 



1254 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

was doing when it was terrible for their situation.  And now a 

shrug of the shoulders or some glib comment that we're going 

to shrug if off and it's repeating ourselves, that's not going to 

get me off the hook.  And I can't afford to let you off of the 

hook as long as I can't get off the hook, so I've got to repeat my 

questions until I get some positive answers. 

 

(2015) 

 

So I will ask you once more: do you have any plans whatsoever 

in any part of your grab-bag of politics to try to alleviate the 

problems of cross-border shopping in this province with 

regards to Alberta, United States, and Manitoba? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the sales tax 

came into being in Saskatchewan in 1937 and somehow our tax 

base hasn't eroded.  It's been there all that long, and businesses 

in Saskatchewan still exist. 

 

No doubt that there is a problem with cross-border shopping.  

But we have taken a very major move in alleviating some of 

that problem.  In this documentation here, Impact of 

Harmonization on Saskatchewan, published by Mr. Hepworth, 

former minister of Finance, here is what he said about the 

communities you talk about. 

 

 Broadening Saskatchewan's tax base in this manner increases 

the number of goods that Saskatchewan residents can now 

find at lower effective prices on the other side of the border 

and increases the tax savings available to cross-border 

shoppers. 

 

He is talking about harmonized PST. 

 

 The expansion of the sales tax base, both in April 1991 and 

January 1992, increases the incentive for consumers to 

purchase the goods and services outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

We agree.  That is why we eliminated the provincial, the PST, 

the Conservative-style PST which provided a great deal of 

assistance to those communities that the member talks about. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, you just quoted from a study that was done by the 

previous Finance minister concerning harmonization.  Have 

you done any studies concerning the increase from 7 to 8 per 

cent of the current E&H tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer to that is no, not 

specifically on the one tax.  I gave you the analysis on the 

overall tax impact of all of the tax measures because that's the 

appropriate way to go.  But the 1 per cent increase on the E&H 

tax is only $62 million.  In an economy of $21 billion that's 

insignificant. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well there's a lot of people out there, 

Mr. Minister, who think that 1 per cent increase is significant to 

their pocket. 

 

When the harmonization was first proposed, you came 

up with a study that said that it would mean the loss of 

7,000-and-some jobs.  Why have you not been able to come up 

with some sort of figures, some numbers to deal with the 

increase in the E&H tax that you have just implemented? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said, the 1 

per cent increase on such a narrow base of items on which the 

tax applies will have minimal if any impact on the 

employment. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well those businesses in my 

communities and all the other communities along the border 

that are going out of business feel that it does have a major 

impact on their livelihoods. 

 

My colleague from Thunder Creek mentioned Manitoba and 

the federal government were co-operating on some new tax 

measures.  It's the collection of alcohol/tobacco tax at border 

crossing points.  What is collected right now for Saskatchewan 

at the border crossing points?  What PSTs are collected, what 

alcohol/tobacco taxes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that there were some rates 

and tariffs on alcohol and tobacco that were set in the 1960s.  

They're the same ones across all of Canada.  It's a very small 

amount.  That's all that's being collected.  But when there's an 

agreement worked out with the federal government on their 

new position, which is that they will collect the tobacco and 

alcohol tax at the border totally, then it'll be significant.  I'm not 

sure that I know what that amount will be because that's got 

nothing to do . . . E&H tax is what this Bill is about.  We'd 

have to talk about the alcohol and tobacco tax in a different 

forum.  But right now it is very minimal. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, right 

now for beer coming into Saskatchewan, the collection at the 

border is $6.50 on 24 beer.  Prior to July 1, in Manitoba the 

collection at border crossing points was $6.54, a 4 cent 

difference.  But since July 1 they are now collecting, I believe 

it is $15.18 for 24 beer.  That is a major tax increase that 

they're collecting there.  That's making beer at the border the 

same price as it is in Winnipeg or Thompson as far as the taxes 

are concerned. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you working . . . are you co-operating with 

the federal government to start collecting Saskatchewan taxes 

at the border? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the same member 

asked the question about a half-hour ago and I gave him the 

answer.  Manitoba has an agreement in place, we're going to 

have an agreement in place.  We're going to do better.  We're 

not going to stop at alcohol and tobacco.  We're talking to the 

federal government about including a lot of other items which 

will help the communities that both he and his colleague, seat 

mate, have talked about.  And we're in the process of those 

negotiations as we speak. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I'm glad to hear that, Mr. Minister, 

because our border businesses need the help.  My colleague 

talked about tourism.  Manitoba has instituted a rebate of 

provincial taxes to out-of-country tourists, and I'll read you 

from a news release: 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1255 

To encourage out-of-country tourists to visit Manitoba, the 

two governments have also streamlined the process for 

obtaining provincial and federal sales tax rebates on goods 

purchased in Manitoba and brought back across the border.  

Out-of-country visitors will be able to obtain GST and PST 

rebates at the same time using a single form. 

 

Mr. Minister, are you considering or will you consider a similar 

rebate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Manitoba has 

to do that because their sales tax applies to a lot more items 

than we have in Saskatchewan.  They tax restaurant meals; they 

tax footwear; they tax various certain things that outfitters 

provide.  So we don't do that. 

 

If a tourist comes to Saskatchewan from the United States and 

drops into Humpty's, which is in my constituency, there is no 

restaurant tax.  They go to the province of Manitoba, there is.  

So they have to have that kind of a rebate because we're better 

off then they are that way.  We don't need it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when a tourist 

comes into this province and gets a flat tire and needs to 

replace that tire he pays the 8 per cent E&H tax now.  When he 

learns that he has to pay that E&H tax, as my colleague says 15 

per cent on all the items, pretty soon he says, well where else 

can I go to?  Can I go to Alberta where I don't have to pay any 

E&H tax?  Can I go to Manitoba where I'm going to get it all 

rebated? 

 

And that's what they're going to do.  They're going to look at 

Saskatchewan and say I can't get out of paying this tax, and 

they're going to avoid Saskatchewan.  And that's going to hurt 

all of us.  It's going to hurt our tax base. 

 

Will you consider some sort of rebate scheme for tourists 

coming into this province from out of country? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're not in 

this budget proposing to do that because the numbers of this 

budget are set.  Once again, in Manitoba, the tourists will have 

to pay not only the tax on the tire, he'll also have to pay the tax 

on the service, that means the labour component of changing 

that tire.  He doesn't have to do that in Saskatchewan since 

we've done away with the harmonized PST. 

 

So I mean, things that the member mentions are something that 

we might want to consider looking at.  But I hope the member 

will stand up and say he supports the efforts we're making in 

getting the federal government to collect the tax at the border, 

not only on alcohol and tobacco but on all other items to which 

our sales tax applies. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I find it surprising 

that they would pay sales tax on services in Manitoba when 

they aren't harmonized . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if 

they do pay it, they still get it rebated at the end of the day 

when they leave the country again.  They get their money back 

whereas in Saskatchewan the E&H tax that you pay, you get 

none of it 

back.  It stays in this province.  And that just encourages 

people to avoid coming into this province. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe that there are a number of items that 

you should be looking at to make it more attractive for people 

to come into this province and more attractive for people to 

operate businesses in this province.  And one of the things that 

you should not be doing is raising taxes like the sales tax which 

hurts all of us.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In our earlier 

discussions . . . I want to go back to some numbers that you 

sent across.  Are you maintaining that the 6.9 per cent drop in 

consumer spending in Saskatchewan in 1991 was strictly 

limited to restaurant meals, clothing under $300, and the other 

few items that were taxed under harmonization? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, because when you take a 

calculation of retail trade, restaurant meals are not part of that 

calculation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there obviously were 

reasons that people were not spending money in Canada.  And 

I look at the numbers that you gave me.  It shows Alberta down 

5.1; it shows Manitoba, 6.5 -- the two jurisdictions that would 

be closest to Saskatchewan.  And yet I distinctly remember 

during the last election campaign, your party saying that this 

was the basic reason that consumer spending was off in the 

province of Saskatchewan therefore you had to cancel 

harmonization. 

 

And I look at the two adjoining provinces, the ones that would 

have the economy most closely related to ours with large 

export-driven economies, large agricultural bases, many miles 

in between communities, and I see that obviously their 

spending was off nearly as large as ours. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you now agree that the tax on restaurant 

meals, clothing under $300, and pet food was not the reason 

that consumer spending was off 6.9 per cent in Saskatchewan 

in 1991. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the member will go back to 

Hansard and look at what I said at the beginning of today's 

committee, he will find out that I said that harmonization was a 

major component of it, but not exclusive.  There were other 

factors that took place.  Let me give you some month-by-month 

analysis of how the retail trade in Saskatchewan changed at the 

time when the harmonized PST was put into place. 

 

In March, before the harmonized PST, the retail sales in 

Alberta dropped by 8 per cent, in Manitoba by 8.5 per cent, in 

Saskatchewan by 6.4 per cent.  In the month of March we were 

the lowest. 

 

In the month of April, after the implementation of the 

harmonized PST, retail sales in Alberta dropped .9 per cent, in 

Saskatchewan 4 per cent, and in Manitoba 3.6 per cent.  In May 

it was a little different there. 

 

In June, 6.2 per cent in Alberta, 10.9 per cent in Saskatchewan, 

6.8 per cent in Manitoba, and it goes on down the list like that, 

clearly showing that although the 



1256 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

harmonized PST was not the only factor -- and I have never 

said that; Hansard will show that to be the case -- but the 

month in which the harmonized PST came in, there was a 

significant change in the rate of decline in the retail trade that 

was taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, people in Saskatchewan, 

in March of 1991, knew that harmonization was coming in.  I 

believe that was announced on February 20, or something like 

that.  There was no deep, dark secret there.  At what point, Mr. 

Minister, according to the figures I have here, they must have 

equalled out.  At what point was that?  Obviously Manitoba 

and Alberta are very close to where we were.  Where did they 

equal out then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, they began to turn 

around in December of 1991 because retail sales in Alberta 

were then 6.2 decline, ours was only 5.1, Manitoba was lower 

at 4.8.  But around December when sort of people are 

beginning to purchase for Christmas purposes, it began to turn 

around.  And since January we have had positive growth in 

retail sales in Saskatchewan, 5.5 per cent in January, 6.6 per 

cent in February, and that's the kind of indications that are 

there. 

 

I might add that that's for 1992, a positive sign for some 

confidence that obviously must be now in the minds of the 

consuming public in Saskatchewan to see that kind of growth 

of the retail trade. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would provide 

that sheet to us to view the numbers that you just gave, and also 

if you also would give me corresponding numbers for 

Manitoba and Alberta?  You must have them.  Obviously I'd 

like to make a comparison if we're doing '92, with what's been 

happening in the two provinces on either side of us. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have it.  

I'm just going for information that's being given to me in notes 

here.  I don't have that material prepared.  But it's all in 

Statistics Canada.  It comes out of Statistics Canada reports.  

It's available.  I can bring Statistics Canada reports here, or the 

member can have his research staff find it in the library.  But 

it's public information.  It's not something that comes out of the 

Department of Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Would you say, Mr. Minister, that there are 

similar results being achieved probably on either side of us, as 

far as consumer spending goes? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told that there are positive 

results on either side of us but not as good as in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(2030) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I guess what it boils down to here, Mr. 

Minister, and we have thankfully got you on the record of 

saying, that most of the major industries in Saskatchewan 

would have benefitted by harmonization, that the consumer 

spending number that were thrown around so freely in this 

province last fall were indeed Canada-wide as far as the 

negative impact with the 

consumer. 

 

And basically what it boils down to, Mr. Minister, is that you 

and your government and your party cancelled harmonization 

strictly for politics.  That as far as the ability of this province to 

achieve economic stability, whether we were harmonized or 

not had nothing to do with it.  That what we were talking about 

here was politics and your desire to win an election.  It had 

nothing to do with the well-being of Saskatchewan's economy. 

 

Almost every number that you have given us here today in this 

committee shows that the impact on Saskatchewan would not 

have been any different if harmonization had stayed in place, 

that other provinces are achieving economic growth with or 

without it, that our business sector would have done well with 

it, and that we can't say that the consumers' reluctance to buy 

restaurant meals, clothing under $300 and pet food, had any 

reason to cancel a benefit, a net benefit, to the business 

community in this province. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Minister, what we would like for you to do is 

give a commitment to all those people out there that know that 

in order to achieve economic growth in the future . . . that 

you're willing to look at harmonization, that you're willing to 

put your political rhetoric aside, and that you're willing to do 

the right thing, if the numbers mean that Saskatchewan 

business will have the opportunity to employ people to pay 

more taxes and to give a positive growth curve to the economy 

of this province.  Because, Mr. Minister, you have basically 

admitted to us all the way through this that it wasn't 

harmonization that had any of those negative effects on the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, let me make 

this point, that the way the former government implemented 

the tax was wrong.  Most people will say that.  The federation 

of business says that.  The timing of the tax was wrong. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, I want to say again which I have said in 

this committee several times, that as our fiscal situation 

improves because of the good management that this 

government is putting into place, as we begin to get the 

expenditures under control, we're quite prepared to look at 

different kinds of tax measures that will help industry and 

manufacturing and businesses be competitive and grow and 

create more jobs in Saskatchewan. 

 

We've already signalled that by our decrease in the corporate 

income tax rate and in the announcement of the phasing out of 

the E&H tax on agents that are used in processing and 

manufacturing.  I think that in itself is a sign of commitment 

and goodwill.  And as our financial circumstances make it 

possible to do more we will be willing to do more as we review 

the whole tax regime. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, there's one other point that I 

want to get on the record, some things that the minister alluded 

to earlier.  In one of the replies to one of my colleagues he said 

that we removed the 7 per cent from a number of items.  And in 

fact, Mr. Minister, the tax base that we have today is virtually 

the same as we had under harmonization other than restaurant 

meals, 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1257 

clothing under $300, and a few other things. 

 

And in reviewing the minister's response earlier in the day 

about certain items and the impact that they have on 

Saskatchewan, particularly on the farm sector which is under a 

lot of pressure as we all know with low commodity prices, debt 

problems, the minister said that Saskatchewan farmers already 

get significant benefit except for items that are dual purpose 

such as batteries and tires and that type of thing.  And in 

reviewing the list that you sent across, Mr. Minister, of items 

that are taxable to farmers, I find it extremely strange how we 

could have a dual-purpose castrator or a dual-purpose calf 

weaner, or a dual-purpose calf puller, or a dual-purpose ear 

notcher. 

 

I mean, Mr. Minister, give people a break when you stand in 

this Assembly and are watched by people all across this 

province, that you can stand there and seriously say that items 

such as this would be used for anything else but farming, that 

they're an input cost. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Veterinarians. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I'm sure that the people that make 

castrators, Mr. Minister, would go out of business if only 

veterinarians were buying them. 

 

So I mean we have a whole lot of input costs here which are 

taxable, which are taxable to the Saskatchewan farming public 

that under harmonization had a net benefit back to those 

people.  I think, Mr. Minister, if you're going to be able to stand 

in this Assembly with a straight face and say that your 

government truly is on the side of most of rural Saskatchewan, 

that you wouldn't be putting an 8 per cent, you wouldn't be 

raising the E&H tax, on items such as this. 

 

If this is the method that you're going to use with the tax base 

then you have to have a serious look at this list, because as I go 

through it there are all kinds of items here that simply aren't 

used in any other way except by the farming public particularly 

and by the livestock industry in a big way. 

 

And if you're going to take the FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) program away from them, if you're going 

to take the cash advance, the interest-free cash advance away 

from them, if you're going to take away the livestock tax 

credits -- I believe there was a tax credit on installations, there 

was various tax credits -- if you're going to take all of that away 

from the red meat industry and expect it to survive in this 

province, and then increase the sales tax on so many items that 

are directly tied to the red meat industry, then you are going to 

have to expand this list to give some indication to people in this 

province that generate around a quarter of a billion dollars of 

income and employ thousands of people in our province, that 

you're serious about seeing that industry stay here, that you 

don't want to see it go to Alberta or the United States, that the 

feeding people, the people on the farms that are in the red meat 

industry, are going to stay there. 

 

Because quite simply a lot of this list is directly tied to them.  

You are charging E&H on them.  It's now gone from seven to 

eight and there is no net benefit.  Are you willing 

at least, Mr. Minister, to expand that list? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all a correction, Mr. 

Chairman, the livestock . . . what was that . . . tax credit was 

eliminated in 1990 by the former administration of which the 

member was a part.  It wasn't done by this administration.  The 

list that the member reads from was a list of the former 

government.  Sure, it's there.  We have adopted it for now. 

 

Any list by the former government deserves a review.  I'm 

prepared to review the list.  It's going to take some time and 

we're going to take the time to do it because as I said on several 

occasions in this committee the whole tax regime needs a 

continuing review over time. 

 

If we can get the federal government to do some of the things 

that we would like them to do on the income tax side we will 

have a major, major change to the tax system in Saskatchewan.  

Right now we're locked into the collection of the tax system by 

the federal government, working by their rules.  All of those 

things we hope we will be able to accomplish, and if we can 

you will see a major change in the tax regime. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well that's the point, Mr. Minister.  The 

former government did away with the whole list.  Everything 

on here was gone.  The costs of production that are associated 

with this list were gone.  So it didn't matter any more, with silo 

on the list but the elevator that takes the silage up to the top of 

the silo being exempt.  All of that nonsense came to a stop, Mr. 

Minister, the minute that harmonization came in.  And as my 

colleague from Morse said, at 10 or 12 or $14,000 that was tied 

to each and every one of those operations, was the ability to 

hire another person. 

 

Those 34,000 people that are on our welfare rolls, that we 

talked about earlier today in question period, would have a 

realistic opportunity of employment.  Because you take 60,000 

farms in this province who didn't have to deal with this list any 

more, and you take another 100,000 businesses that didn't have 

to deal with this list any more, and you multiply them times 

very modest amounts of money, Mr. Minister, and you have the 

possibility of providing an awful lot of employment.  You have 

the possibility of all of those towns and villages that my 

colleagues have talked about having the ability to stay viable 

because that money will spin in their economy. 

 

The former government did away with this list entirely.  And 

by doing away with the list they opened up opportunities that 

aren't available to them today under an increased tax regime, 

Mr. Minister.  When you balance all of this off, how can you 

possibly say to those 34,000 people on the welfare rolls in 

Saskatoon and Regina, much less all the rest of the province, 

hey we aren't going to give you an opportunity to access that 

money that became available when the former government got 

rid of this list. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all the 

point that the member slides over, unfortunately, is that 

harmonization was damaging to the farmers to this extent, that 

they, under harmonization, had to pay all of the tax up front, 

which was in many cases no doubt a 



1258 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

considerable amount of money with all the new tax that was 

there, and then they would have to apply and they'd have to 

wait and finance that money in the mean time to get a rebate.  

So that was a disadvantage. 

 

As I said to the member earlier, we're prepared to review, and 

we'll be reviewing, all of the items on the E&H tax list over the 

next little . . . over the next while.  And any suggestions that 

the member opposite or anybody else can make to us and 

which we can consider to make it better and more workable, 

we will look at it. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, let's go at this a different 

way.  Most of the reading that I've done by economists -- and 

particularly in areas of social policy -- most economists say 

that sales taxes are regressive as far as people on the lower 

income end of the scale.  Would you agree with that statement, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not necessarily.  It depends on the 

structure of the tax base. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think the tax base across 

Canada has traditionally had a sales tax component to it.  It 

doesn't matter what province you go in.  It varies; some places 

it's 7 per cent, some places it's 8 per cent, some place like 

Alberta they don't have any at all.  But generally, sales tax, as 

you pointed out in committee, have been in this province since 

1937.  Across Canada that has been the rule.  Most people on 

the social side of policy say that sales tax is regressive to 

implementing good social policy.  Would you agree with that, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, Mr. Chairman, the 

best tax is the tax that's based on ability to pay.  That's a 

position we've always taken.  But we have had a sales tax in 

this province since 1937.  The harmonized tax base that was 

proposed last year was more regressive than the present tax 

base, because the harmonized tax base applied on everything -- 

services, goods, everything that you had to buy except 

prescription drug and groceries. 

 

The present E&H tax base applies on a small number of items.  

It exempts some of the essentials such as children's clothing, 

adult clothing under $300, footwear, and those kinds of items. 

 

So I think that the sales tax we have now is more progressive.  

It doesn't mean that we shouldn't continue to look at it to see 

what we might change in it to make it better, but it's more 

progressive than was the harmonized approach. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well the simple fact is, Mr. Minister, that 

except for a few items you have exactly the same sales tax base 

in place, only it's higher.  Well other than food and children's 

clothing and pet food, there's not a whole lot of difference 

there. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the seniors in this province that are having 

their heritage grant cut back, that are going to have to worry 

about their level 2 funding, that have to still pay their utilities, 

and more of it, are all going to be worse off under this regime.  

People on the lower income scale are 

basically faced with the same set of circumstances. Other than 

under harmonization they had the child tax credit increased to 

the point to make up for their children's clothing, their pet food, 

and the hamburgers that they might buy. 

 

(2045) 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I would think a party that has campaigned 

vociferously against sales taxes for the whole time that I have 

been in this legislature . . . Well I mean, took the former 

government to task to no end because, you didn't eliminate 

sales tax when you promised it back in 1982.  I can remember 

member after member standing in this House saying, how 

come you haven't taken off the sales tax because it's so hard on 

low income earners and seniors, and all those folks.  New 

Democrat after New Democrat saying, how come you haven't 

taken off that sales tax when you promised it?  And we'll do 

better.  Axe the tax.  Remember that, Mr. Minister?  Axe the 

tax because it's so hard on our seniors and our low income 

people.  You know?  And everybody took you at your word 

and honestly thought you were taking off the 7 per cent sales 

tax. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can a social democratic government in this 

province who has talked about eliminating sales tax over and 

over and over again, now come into this legislature, not take it 

away, but actually increase it, knowing full well that they could 

have done this province a far bigger service if they'd put their 

politics aside and listened to some sound economic advice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This New Democratic Party as an 

opposition never said at any time, or as a government in the 

1970s, has never said at any time that the sales tax would be 

eliminated.  Education and health tax has been around for a 

long time.  We said we would do away with the harmonized 

portion of the PST. 

 

Well let me read the program card.  I've got it here.  This is: 

"Let's do it . . . The Saskatchewan Way".  The election 

program card of the New Democratic Party in the last election 

in which we've said that: "We will repeal this unfair tax".  And 

we were talking about the 7 per cent harmonized PST. 

 

That couldn't be more clear than that.  The only people who 

said that the promise was other than that were the members of 

the opposition.  And most people in Saskatchewan didn't 

believe them.  And that's why, I guess, I'm answering the 

questions and the member from Thunder Creek is asking them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I want to make some 

observations about what you committed yourself to in this 

Assembly in the past.  And I want to use the member from 

Churchill Downs as the example. 

 

When we discussed harmonization he stood in his place right 

over here and he said, harmonization, one tax, is better than 

anything else.  Just have one guy collecting it and it makes a 

whole lot of sense.  And the member from Churchill Downs . . . 

if the other members of the Assembly don't remember that, 

look in Hansard and you'll find that the member from 

Churchill Downs stood 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1259 

right in his place, right over here and he said, one tax is way 

better than anything else.  Harmonize it.  If you do anything, 

anything, Mr. Minister of Finance, harmonize it.  How come 

you didn't pressure him to harmonize it? 

 

And I'll just point out some other things.  I had a hardware . . . 

appliance store in Swift Current come to me during the election 

-- and the proprietor is a good friend of mine -- and he said, can 

you tell the people, please, that it's only the portion of the 

expanded PST that the NDP (New Democratic Party) are 

promising to take off?  Because, he said, nobody else is telling 

them.  And he said . . . And I'll tell the member from Swift 

Current it was Voth Hardware.  And if you don't believe him, 

you won't believe anybody.  Go talk to Abe and he will tell 

you.  He will tell you exactly what I told you, and he's the one 

that told it to me.  If you don't believe me, you go ask him.  I 

challenge you to do that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He is in 

Swift Current.  Voth Hardware is in Swift Current, on 1st 

Avenue West. 

 

Mr. Minister, the toy minister from Churchill Downs stood in 

his place right over here, and he told the people of the province 

of Saskatchewan harmonization was the best thing to do.  And 

do you know why?  Do you know why?  Because businesses 

were going to have a way of being competitive.  Businesses 

were going to have a way of being competitive and that, Mr. 

Minister, was exactly the reason that he used over and over and 

over again. 

 

And how come he hasn't influenced the real Minister of 

Finance in determining that that was a real . . . a pointed 

observation that had merit.  And then the pressure came from 

this side of the House at that time.  The NDP said over and 

over again, harmonize.  It's the best.  It might not be the most 

appealing as far as voters are concerned, but it's the best thing 

to do under the circumstances. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister of Finance, is what the member from 

Churchill Downs, who's the Associate Minister of Finance, told 

us in this Assembly many times.  As a matter of fact I would 

suspect that even your Premier even indicated that a blended 

tax was better than what we've got here today. 

 

I want to point out some things that I think are interesting.  

First of all I want to ask you the question, have you got the list 

of those items there that deal with the harmonization as a 

process where you have the items listed that were there under 

harmonization -- the exemptions and the taxes for agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've already passed that over. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I don't want an additional E&H 

tax list.  I want the harmonization tax list that was there as of 

October, 1991 where the harmonization was going to flow as 

exactly as the federal government harmonization in agriculture 

exemptions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- There is no such list.  I don't know 

of any of such lists and I don't have it.  I don't know what the 

member is talking about.  If the member wants to know what 

was being taxed, there is a whole list of things that were being 

taxed under harmonization in the first year and then everything 

was going to be taxed as of January 1, 1992, all services. 

But what was added in the first list was children's clothing and 

footwear, adults' clothing and footwear, costing less than $300 

per item, yard goods, books, magazines, periodicals and 

newspapers, including subscription purchases of these items, 

meals and prepared foods, snack foods, candies and carbonated 

beverages, non-prescription drugs and medicaments, drugs and 

medicaments for pets, pet food including vitamins and dietary 

supplements, natural gas and electricity used in residences, 

disinfectants and germicides.  That was the list of the new 

items added under the harmonized PST.  Everything else was 

going to be added on January 1 of 1992. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sure that the Department of 

Finance has those available because they will have had to do 

the comparison in 1991.  And given the amount of volume of 

work that was done on each of those items, I'd like you to 

provide for us that list of information on those items from the 

GST that would be harmonized with the provincial sales tax, 

and how many of them in agriculture would be exempt then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I still don't know what the 

member's asking for sure.  But I provided him a list on the 

education and health tax information for farm implement and 

farm supply dealers, which is a list of things that are exempt for 

farmers, and things that are taxable for farmers.  Obviously, 

those things that are taxable would have been eligible for the 

rebate. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's precisely the point, Mr. Minister.  They 

would be eligible for the rebate.  And they'd be eligible for all 

of it, even the ones that you have on this list that are taxable. 

 

Now a constituent of mine wrote you a letter.  And he wrote 

you a letter regarding a trailer that he pulls his dairy cattle back 

and forth with.  He wrote you a letter.  He wrote me a copy of 

it and I said it probably would have been better if he'd have 

sent one with pictures.  You'd have better been able to 

understand it.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

You don't understand that this volume of commodities that are 

here under the tax payables by agriculture in the province of 

Saskatchewan is a significant amount.  You don't understand, 

for example, that when I buy a two-by-four to build a granary, 

that's not tax exempt.  I buy a piece of plywood to build my 

loafing barn, that's not tax exempt.  Under the process that 

would have been used under harmonization, that would have 

been exempt. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, this volume of items here is significant.  

And I believe, Mr. Minister, that it is significant enough to 

have made a significant difference on the buying power and 

consumer benefit it would have been to those people in the 

communities where agriculture buys its services.  They would 

have been able to buy those services, Mr. Minister, and use the 

money to go buy hamburgers.  They could have used the 

money to buy books.  They could have used the money to buy 

all of those things that they weren't exempt on and far more. 



1260 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

A 10,000 GST rebate for agriculture on my farm would have 

been . . . well it is significant, Mr. Minister.  It in fact will buy 

more than hamburgers.  How many 7 cent hamburgers will it 

buy?  A whole lot more than anything that you could ever 

dream about.  And those are consumer goods.  So the consumer 

gets the benefit. 

 

I am a consumer.  I am a consumer of services when I take the 

items that I buy as purchases in my ranch, or in my farm.  And, 

Mr. Minister, those are the same kinds of benefits that would 

have accrued under a small business.  As a matter of fact, in 

meetings we had with small business here in this -- number 218 

here in the legislature -- we met with the industrial base, people 

like Degelman, people like IPSCO, people from the various 

parts of the manufacturing and processing. 

 

Degelmans, for example, told us that they would have a benefit 

of $50,000 a year under this rebate.  How many jobs would that 

have given in promoting sales in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  One and a half for sure.  Would they have been 

able to increase that opportunity to develop and expand their 

market elsewhere?  IPSCO told us that it would make them 

competitive at least another 200 miles further -- both for 

bringing iron material in and moving iron material out. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, those are the things that cost in job creation.  

You don't even begin to understand the value of that in 

anything that you have said, you have told us.  In fact I think 

your regime of higher taxes in power, higher taxes in 

telephone, higher taxes in general insurance, higher taxes in 

your surtax, higher taxes in all of the items that we have in 

E&H here are all items that are going to cost jobs.  Have you 

figured it out, how many job losses we're going to have 

because of the taxes and E&H in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  Have you figured it out to tell us how many 

that would be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- On the 1 per cent E&H the impact 

will be minimal.  At 65 . . . $62 million is what 1 per cent in the 

E&H is going to bring to the treasury this year.  A tax increase 

in an economy of $21 billion, the impact of that is going to be 

minimal. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, 65 million on this tax and 65 

million or 62 million on the surtax, I believe you said earlier, 

65 and 62 -- those two items together.  How much additional is 

the power?  How much additional is the telephone?  How much 

additional is general insurance?  How much on all of the tax 

burden is it going to cost in jobs in the province of 

Saskatchewan?  That's what I'm asking you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we went through 

this the first day of this committee.  I answered the question 

then, and we're now repeating the questions by probably the 

same member. 

 

But as I said on the first day, I'll say again today.  There is no 

doubt that there is some dampening impact of the kind of 

expenditure reductions and the kind of tax increases that have 

been put into place.  But in spite of that, we are still predicting, 

and every independent analysis that's been done of this budget 

shows, that there will be positive growth in the economy, and 

positive growth in net jobs in 

Saskatchewan in this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I don't 

think you're right.  Your volume of tax increases and the 

corresponding decreases in some secondary processing in the 

province of Saskatchewan is going to have a serious, negative 

impact. 

 

We'll just take the hogs and the feedlots in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  By reducing the impact, by reducing the 

volume of expenditures to the hog industry and to the feeding 

industry, you are in fact going to lose 1,500 jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Top that all off with the kind of job 

losses you're going to have from overtaxing. 

 

And we're trying to tell you, Mr. Minister, that you've reached 

the point of no return in this.  How many jobs are you going to 

lose because of these tax increases?  Put them all together and 

give us a number. 

 

(2100) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the point of no 

return was the size of the deficit and the debt.  That's the point 

of no return.  If we didn't have this huge debt that's choking -- 

not choking but close to choking -- the province of 

Saskatchewan, we wouldn't have to do these things.  That's a 

debt which we inherited. That's a debt which the member 

opposite know the credit rating agencies have said is beyond, 

almost beyond, what the province could sustain.  We have to 

deal with it.  Now I don't know whether the members opposite 

would have dealt with it had they been on this side of the 

House after the election, but we feel we have to deal with it. 

 

Now although there are tax increases, there are other things 

happening in the economy -- because you have to look at the 

economy as a whole -- which mitigate against the impact of the 

tax increases.  There's a lower interest rate, significantly lower, 

which is having a positive impact.  There is a decreased value 

of the dollar compared to the United States dollar, 83 cents.  

Very significant impact that comes out of that. 

 

There is a strengthening in the oil sector, in the oil prices, not 

big but it's higher now than we had predicted in the budget and 

that's got a positive impact. Same thing with uranium and same 

thing with potash.  We have an inflation rate that is in the realm 

of the 1 per cent range or less.  All of those things mitigate 

against the impact of some of the things like the tax increases 

and therefore indicate, as others have said, positive growth in 

the economy this year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, is it true that those things 

would have occurred anyway to mitigate against the benefit 

and would they have happened in any case?  That's the point, 

Mr. Minister.  You tell me whether they would have happened 

with harmonization and without. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Obviously a lower interest rate and 

a lower dollar, strengthening of the oil prices and inflation is 

something that we don't influence overall in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- certainly they would have happened, but they 

are positive things.  I'm not standing here saying I caused them 

to happen or the 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1261 

government caused them to happen.  Sometimes people 

overestimate the impact that governments have overall on the 

economy.  They can have an impact but it's not the only impact 

that exists on the economy. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, why not allow the people 

of the province to benefit from those mitigating circumstances 

of lower interest rates, lower inflation?  Why not allow the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan to create jobs in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that we can have more 

opportunities, rather than having what's happening in 

Saskatoon where you went from, what is it, 12,000 people on 

welfare to 15,000, and . . . or 15 to 19 in Saskatoon, and 12 to 

15 in Regina here.  Those are the kinds of numbers that we're 

talking about.  Why are they there?  Are they there because 

people don't want to work?  I doubt it.  You find them a job and 

they'll go to work and that's the kind of thing. 

 

You're using the interest and taking it out of the economy in 

taxes.  You're using the low inflation and you're taking it out of 

the economy in taxes.  You're using the lower dollar, 

American, and pulling it out in taxes, and that's what we're 

concerned about, Mr. Minister.  Every one of them is lowering 

the opportunity to have the people respond in providing jobs. 

 

You made a reference here just earlier to the fact that it was 

outside circumstances.  I believe that that's absolutely accurate.  

The question, Mr. Minister, is this: how many jobs are we 

going to continue to lose so that you have to pay more and 

more money out in welfare?  Is 62 million going to pay for an 

increase of 6 or 7,000 jobs on welfare that are going to have to 

be paid for this whole year?  And maybe we're going to have 

another 6,000 by the end of the year, taking that only in 

Saskatoon and Regina.  And those people need jobs, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

You're taking the money out of the economy.  When all of 

these other factors should flow in to give you a positive impact, 

you're taking the money out so that they can't use it.  And it's 

the small business who are suffering.  It's agriculture who is 

suffering.  And you've just yanked it all out, and you've made 

us uncompetitive.  And when we say that you're going to lose 

jobs, you're going to lose lots of jobs when this starts to 

steamroll the other way. 

 

We're not against having you build the economy.  In fact, in 

your own statements that we read earlier here in question 

period, you said that it was the pulp mill, it was Husky Oil, it 

was the fertilizer plant, that was going to be the economic 

growth for the province of Saskatchewan.  And who did that?  

Did you?  No, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, we're saying 

that the same economic benefits would have accrued if you 

would have given small business the opportunity to deliver on 

those things by giving them harmonization.  And I believe that.  

In fact, the chamber of commerce in the province said exactly 

the same thing.  People from all over the province said exactly 

the same thing.  And you went against it just for politics.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what people have told us over and 

over again.  Mr. Minister, how many jobs -- I'm going to ask 

again -- how many jobs are you going to lose because of this? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can't predict what that will 

be.  The fact is, in net terms there will not be a job loss.  In net 

terms there will be additional jobs created in this economy in 

this year.  I've already indicated that there would be up to 2,000 

jobs in addition to the jobs that are already there. 

 

But I just want to make this comment, Mr. Chairman.  The 

member seems to lose track of this.  There is a tax increase, 1 

per cent on the E&H in this particular case.  Without the tax 

increases, we would have had a deficit of $800 million.  That's 

a disincentive for job creation.  That's a disincentive . . . The 

member says no, no, no.  Well where would he have got the 

money?  If you don't have a tax increase, if you don't have 

some additional revenues, you don't have the money.  There's 

no greater disincentive to investment and job creation than 

continuing to run unsustainable deficits, which was the case in 

the last 10 years. 

 

We said in our election platform: first things first; common 

sense financial management; open the books; a public 

independent audit of the province's financial affairs to cut 

government waste and mismanagement; a comprehensive 

review of all PC (Progressive Conservative) privatizations and 

business deals to determine if they are in the public interest; a 

balanced budget in our first term of office; and a 15-year plan 

to eliminate accumulated Devine deficit.  That's what the 

program card said.  That's the way you get jobs and the 

economy running -- by creating that kind of confidence, by 

showing that you're prepared to provide that kind of financial 

management.  This budget does that. 

 

And that's why, although the credit rating agencies have 

lowered our rating, they said they did it because of the debt that 

existed.  But every one of them also said that the measures that 

the government is taking to handle that debt is something that's 

commendable and it's on the right track.  Now that's a pretty 

good report card, in our opinion, and we're on the right track. 

 

The difference, Mr. Chairman, is that we're prepared to do it, 

while members opposite, when they were in government, 

would only talk about it.  I have here a quote from the former 

premier who said it's a betrayal of the public to create huge 

deficits for future generations to pay, not to try and fix them.  

That was a quote.  That's what he said.  I wish the member 

from Morse would agree with that.  Unfortunately the former 

government never agreed with that. 

 

I have another statement from the former premier, the member 

from Estevan.  Grainews, December 1982: deficits are just a 

deferred tax that must be paid by future generations.  I have a 

quote here from Bob Andrew, minister of Finance under the 

former government: we believe that all governments must work 

in concert to reduce budget deficits.  Failure to accomplish this 

will force harsh financial penalties on our children.  It is 

inevitable that mounting deficits will result in unwanted 

reductions of government services and tax increases. 

 

In 1984, the Conservative minister of Finance predicted the 

kind of financial crunch we would have to deal with, but about 

that time somebody shuffled him out of the Finance portfolio 

and the former government never paid 



1262 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

any attention to that advice. 

 

Today we have a financial crisis.  And today we've got to deal 

with it if we are interested in the future of our children.  And 

we're interested in the future of our children. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'll tell you where you 

could have gotten some more.  You could have taken the 

Liquor Board, which has $150 million out of it, and you 

decided to leave it there.  You could have taken the profit, $118 

million, and still left 115 with SPC (Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation). 

 

You could have taken 40 million out of SaskTel.  Or did you 

just by chance have to pay these guys off who voted for you?  

The employees of SaskTel, is that where the 40 million went?  

What about the 15 million in SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance)?  Those three agencies, power, telephone, and 

insurance, with their reserves is almost $400 million. 

 

When did you decide to raise the rates there?  After you saw 

how much money you could really suck out of the 

Saskatchewan economy?  And now you increase the taxes so 

that small business can't benefit; agriculture can't benefit when 

they're in the tightest squeeze they've had since the '30s.  And, 

Mr. Minister, all you did was say, excuse me but here's another 

tax.  And that's what the people are grumbling about. 

 

Another thing I want to point out, you could have had $200 

million with harmonization.  Did you ever think of that?  And 

they were prepared to deal with it.  But no, you decided not to.  

You decided not to give small business, farmers, and ranchers 

-- small business in this province -- a benefit of an opportunity 

to stimulate the economy, to drive the economy, and to 

establish a better opportunity. 

 

I don't think we got an answer earlier for the volume of dollars 

that we get from export versus what we consume ourselves.  

Have you got those numbers available for us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sorry, I thought the member 

was in the House when I gave that information at the very 

beginning after 7 o'clock, that one-third of the economic 

production in Saskatchewan we export. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- One-third we export or two-thirds we export? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well clearly, that's on the record.  

Mr. Chairman, I don't know, Mr. Chairman, whether this kind 

of repetition is permissible.  But clearly at 7 o'clock one of the 

first questions that was asked is exactly this question and I gave 

the information.  One-third of the Saskatchewan economic 

production is exported out of the province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the point why I asked the 

question is to show you that the lower our input costs are in the 

province of Saskatchewan, the more benefit that $7 billion is in 

relation to the economic growth in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Those aren't large companies that provide that 

economic 

growth.  That economic growth probably comes from wheat, 

durum, canola.  It probably comes a little bit from the 

manufacturing sector, a significant amount from the gas 

industry, and a significant amount from the oil.  And those 

areas, Mr. Minister, in this province are small business. 

 

Why didn't you give them an opportunity to be competitive?  

That's the question.  You increase the taxes and reduce the 

competitiveness of the industries to compete in the 

international market.  Why did you do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we cut the small 

business corporate tax rate by 1 per cent.  We are, in three 

years, eliminating the E&H tax on agents in processing and 

manufacturing.  That will make them more competitive.  That's 

a start.  That's a targeted approach.  We don't think the potash 

industry needs to have a Saskatchewan taxpayer subsidize it as 

the harmonization would have done.  So we have not made that 

kind of a decision. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the taxpayers in this 

province are used to subsidizing those agencies that you 

purchased.  At the beginning they subsidized Saskoil.  At the 

beginning they subsidized PAPCO (Prince Albert Pulp 

Company); they subsidized the potash plants; they subsidized 

all of that stuff.  And, Mr. Minister, we subsidized that for 

years.  People in this province have always subsidized those 

and they haven't carried their weight.  That, Mr. Minister, is a 

fact.  And if you go back to the 1970s, you'll find out that it is 

absolutely a fact. 

 

Mr. Minister, the one that you mentioned, the potash, is 

probably the only one that is exported that has significant 

impact in the markets other than to deliver a small-business 

benefit impact. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is not allowing those people who are in 

the service industries and in the agriculture and ranching to 

have an opportunity to show the world that they can be 

competitive. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Minister, agriculture needed that.  Instead you took it all 

away on them.  You took it and delivered it, drew it right out of 

them.  Is that a punishment, Mr. Minister, for having them vote 

Conservative, perhaps?  Is that a punishment for having them 

vote against a decision by you to say that they would want to 

have the GRIP '91 (gross revenue insurance program) -- is that 

a punishment? -- rather than '92? 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I want to say that I believe that that is 

exactly why you're doing it.  And as a matter of fact, the way 

you're funding the level 1 and level 2 care in the two years is 

also an indication to me that it's crush rural Saskatchewan at all 

costs. 

 

Because the senate from Regina, those people who are elected 

to the city of Regina will always have their seats.  And that is 

what you have done, Mr. Minister.  You've retired to the city.  

And you feel comfortable in your seat, so I can tax those 

people in rural; I can tax small business in rural; I can reduce 

services in rural.  And, Mr. Minister, 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1263 

this is supposed to enhance the opportunity in rural 

Saskatchewan because this is an education and health tax. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, I don't believe is stimulating the 

economy one bit.  In fact, businesses in my constituency are 

going downhill and having a very difficult time.  And, Mr. 

Minister, you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the minister said 

it's the GST.  Well I'll be.  Agriculture gets all the GST back, 

sir, and that is a fact. 

 

And we would have got a list, a substantial list of tax dollars 

back if we would have been able to use this kind of an 

opportunity to deliver back to us some of the inputs that we 

give to the province of Saskatchewan, and allow us the 

discretion on consumer goods to deliver that. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'm going to read a statement and I'm going to see 

if you can confirm who said it. NDP finance critic stated that 

his party supported this harmonization of the two taxes but 

added they would lower the rate.  It makes much more sense to 

have one tax rather than two, he told reporters. 

 

And that member happens to be the Finance critic from 

Churchill Downs, the Associate Minister of Finance.  That, Mr. 

Minister, was as late as March 15, 1991.  There's a second 

statement. Harmonization was recommended by NDP MLA 

from Churchill Downs who felt it would be simpler to have one 

tax -- the Moose Jaw Times-Herald, February 21, 1991. 

 

An NDP government would harmonize the taxes but at a lower 

rate than the combined 14 per cent, the toy minister of Finance, 

the Associate Minister of Finance said to the Leader-Post on 

February 21, 1991. As far as harmonization, harmonizing the 

two taxes, we have said that it would only make sense if the 

federal government was prepared to make concessions in 

removing items such as farm inputs from the tax base. 

 

Which they did as a subsequent discussion later on.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, was made on October 15, 1990.  And, Mr. 

Minister, if I had the time I'd probably be able to find in 

Hansard where that member said exactly the same thing.  He 

spoke for your party; he spoke on your behalf and saying that 

one tax is better than two.  It might be at a lower rate, but it 

should be necessary to harmonize.  And that cost, Mr. Minister, 

is costing the people of Saskatchewan $5 million a year to not 

harmonize.  The Finance critic at the time, the member from 

Churchill Downs who is now the Associate Minister of 

Finance, said that.  Why didn't you take his opinion then as 

something substantial to deal with in the cases that we've got 

presented here today?  Why did you take his advice then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm looking at the 

program card of the election platform of the New Democratic 

Party in the last provincial election, and with regard to the 

expanded 7 per cent PST, we stated clearly, we will repeal this 

unfair tax.  A promise made, Mr. Chairman, a promise kept, 

because that was the policies of the party in that provincial 

election. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you don't believe 

your critic at the time, the Finance critic, the member from 

Churchill Downs; you didn't believe him then.  You didn't 

believe it when he said we should harmonize and put the two 

together.  Maybe you'll believe it when your leader told us in 

the province of Saskatchewan that he was going to harmonize.  

The fairest and most sensible way to proceed would be to 

harmonize the two sales taxes -- a Saskatchewan New 

Democratic news release by the now-Premier of the province 

of Saskatchewan on October 3, 1990.  Did you say that?  Oh 

no, we never said that; we never made that commitment.  Your 

leader did.  Your leader did on October 3, 1990.  That's what he 

said -- the fairest and most sensible way to proceed would be to 

harmonize the two sales taxes. And he made a news release, he 

made a news release on that item. 

 

The next one it says, and another news release by the New 

Democrats -- a side by side tax is preferable to a tax on a tax.  

And then he went on to say in October 4, 1990, he said he 

wouldn't say whether the NDP supports harmonization, argued 

it isn't the right time for the NDP to say how it would handle 

the issue.  Well we're finding out, we're finding out, Mr. 

Minister, we're finding out that the Associate Minister of 

Finance, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan today, 

said that it was a fair way to do it.  It may be less, but it was a 

fair and reasonable way to do it. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you stand in here to say, well we had a 

brochure that said.  Well I've got a brochure that says that the 

Premier who selected you to be his Minister of Finance said it 

would be done.  Another one in the Star-Phoenix, Mr. Minister, 

he, the now Premier, said an NDP government would not be 

bound to a harmonized sales tax, but he refused to say if the 

change would be reversed.  Now we got him standing with 

both feet firmly planted on either side of the fence.  That was 

on March 22, 1991.  He's beginning to shift his focus here a 

little bit. 

 

The next one, when asked if the NDP would change the system 

back if in the mean time the government passes its 

harmonization plans in the legislature, the now Premier was 

non-committal.  Oh he's starting to fudge.  At the start he says, 

yes, it's a good idea, just like the Associate Minister of Finance 

said, yes, it was a good idea, Leader-Post on March 15, 1991. 

In the past the now Premier has refused to offer an opinion on 

harmonization.  Well we go from saying yes, it's a good idea 

but the rate should be less, to well maybe, I don't know for 

sure, to today where we've got it on the other side of the fence. 

 

Expediency based on what, Mr. Minister?  It had nothing to do 

with fact.  It had absolutely nothing to do with fact and that, 

Mr. Minister, is borne out by the sweeping change that went 

over the party over there from October to March -- October, 

1990 to March of 1991.  That, Mr. Minister, was real 

decision-making time in that party.  It showed no plan then 

and, Mr. Minister, it shows no plan today. 

 

Yes.  And I hear some back-benchers say they had two plans.  

And, Mr. Minister, they had more than one brochure.  But there 

was a brochure floating around my constituency that had a 

rural development program in it and when you opened it up, 

there was nothing in it. 



1264 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we have here today -- a 

Premier who doesn't understand economics, a Premier who 

doesn't understand what he stands for, and his critic who told 

him what to say, who doesn't understand it either.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is why we are asking these questions on this 

basis, to try and make you understand that there are economic 

benefits that would have accrued to small business, that would 

have accrued to agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan.  

What for?  It was to stimulate the economy. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I don't believe you when you say your focus 

on tax increases is going to be neutral because you increase the 

taxes on one hand and the economy deals with itself in 

lowering the interest rate, lowering the inflation rate, and 

lowering our export opportunity to the United . . . or enhancing 

the opportunity to the United States because our dollar is lower. 

 

Mr. Minister, you had nothing to do with those.  You could 

have harmonized and delivered the same kind of benefit where 

we could have taken advantage of them, but you failed to do it.  

You failed to deliver on any of that.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

why we are questioning the validity and the value of all of 

these commodities that we are dealing with in relation to this 

Bill. 

 

We don't agree with you; we probably never will.  And that, 

Mr. Minister, is exactly why we want to point all of these 

things out to you.  My colleague from Maple Creek has some 

more questions for you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have a question for you.  As I was pondering and working my 

way through my correspondence here the last few minutes, I 

discovered a few questions that are linked to this particular 

question and this increase in taxation.  Now the question . . . 

and I'm going to give it to you and then I'm going to give you a 

minute or so to reflect on your answer, because you may want 

to put together a really good argument for this one.  One of my 

constituents has asked the question: what are the positive things 

that this increase will produce for our province? 

 

Now we've reflected for quite a while this evening on what we 

think to be some of the negative things that will happen, and so 

I guess in all fairness we should allow you a minute or two to 

tell us what are the positive things that an increase in taxes can 

do to our province, an increase of 1 per cent, or 1 cent, which is 

14 per cent increase on the provincial sales tax.  We've shown 

you, as I've said, all the things that we think are going to be bad 

about it, so tell us what the good things are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, clearly it's 

going to help get the debt and the deficit under control.  It's 

going to get the trajectory of the financial affairs of this 

province on the deficit side downwards so that we stop 

building and accumulating this huge debt which is strangling 

our financial capacity to do things that any government would 

like to do.  It's guaranteeing the future for our children by 

beginning to manage the financial affairs of the province. 

 

And it's meeting the first commitment that was made in 

the election platform, the election program of the New 

Democratic Party, and that's first things first, common sense 

financial management.  Getting the deficit under control and 

working towards a balanced budget so that we can guarantee a 

future for our children and their children, rather than choke 

them with debt and deficit which would in the end bring them 

even more taxation. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well we've given you an opportunity to 

expand and you've taken the short road out.  I'm quite sure 

there must be a lot more going on in this province than that.  

But in reading these last couple of letters here, I also find one 

of my constituents wanting to know what you are doing to 

improve the provincial credit rating and will this increase in 

taxation assist in improving our credit rating in the rest of the 

world? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, what will improve 

the credit rating is to get the financial affairs of the province 

under control, and the credit rating agencies have 

acknowledged that this budget begins that process. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Now you and your 

colleagues, and you in particular this evening, have indicated 

that you believe that there is a financial crisis in our province.  

And I think I have to agree, certainly in some specific areas, 

there is definitely a financial crisis.  And I want to know, what 

are your personal views on how this crisis can be overcome? 

 

(2130) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, it's not a 

question of my personal views.  I speak on behalf of the 

government.  And you get this crisis under control by 

beginning to get a handle on the deficits and the growing debt.  

That's what this budget does. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you've alluded to a very 

simple sort of answer for what we consider to be a very major 

problem.  And I don't think it's quite that simple.  You 

discussed earlier the fact that you felt that we have one kind of 

a taxation system that's different, especially in health areas, to 

that in the States, and of course we all know that in Alberta 

they have a much different approach to the funding of the 

health program. 

 

And having thought about those kinds of things and the 

differences in our taxation processes, I got to thinking about an 

article I read in the paper earlier today that alluded to someone 

suggesting that we might have to put our three prairie 

provinces -- Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta -- into one 

economic region and come up with one system of government, 

one system of taxation.  And I'm sure that you will have read 

that and probably discarded it as nonsense, but there are people 

who genuinely think that this may be the future role of our 

prairie region as we find ourselves continuing to depopulate 

and continuing to find ourselves without a tax base with which 

to recover from our financial woes. 
 

My question of course is going to be to you tonight: if that 

happens, which taxation system do you think is going to 

survive -- yours, Alberta's, the American one, or some new 

taxation system?  Which one will it be?  Will we have a health 

and education or PST tax that's going to fund our 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1265 

different systems, or will we go to one of the other systems? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't deal in if's, 

and that's a hypothetical question and therefore I have no 

answer to that question because I don't at this point in time 

anticipate that that'll happen.  But I want to point out to the 

member that what we're doing here is dealing with the huge, 

horrendous debt which the former government left the people 

of Saskatchewan with after they were defeated on October 21, 

1991. 

 

And I refer the member to a very important document tabled by 

the minister of Finance, Mr. Hepworth, called CHOICES, and 

here's what he said: 

 

 Continuing deficits, and the debt that results, threaten the 

Province's future.  Rising debt servicing costs are using up an 

increasing amount of the Government's revenue, limiting the 

amount of funding available for other programming. 

 

Mr. Chairman, that's pretty clear.  The former minister of 

Finance believed it was necessary to do that.  We believe that 

it's necessary to do that.  The former government took no 

action to do that because if they had we wouldn't have a $15 

billion debt today.  Now maybe the member from Estevan will 

say, well they did in 1991-92.  I will ask him, where was he 

from 1982 until '91-92 when the damage was done?  We're 

addressing that damage in this budget. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it may be at the start of 

your reply hypothetical as you say, but the reality is that it's not 

so hypothetical when you stop to think about the realities of all 

of the problems that we've been discussing here tonight. 

 

Let's go back a step and recall now.  We've talked about 

cross-border shopping problems that are created by your 

system of taxation, a system that was created, as you pointed 

out, 30-some-odd years ago by a then CCF (Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) administration attempting to fund 

health, basically, and education of course, as well.  The reality 

of life is, sir, that in Alberta they took another approach and 

they direct-taxed people by an annual fee.  And they don't put 

an education tax or a health tax on their goods. 

 

Therefore we have created for ourselves the cross-border 

shopping problem.  We've created it with our system of 

taxation not being synchronized with the systems of taxation 

that our neighbours use.  I'm not saying that our system is 

necessarily bad, not necessarily even wrong.  But it's different, 

and the fact that it's different means that we are putting 

ourselves into an unfair position as trading partners to our 

neighbours.  And if we don't smarten up and change that, they 

sure as the dickens aren't going to change it for us.  They're 

going to continue to take our shoppers and our money.  Why 

wouldn't they? 

 

We are the only ones that are losing.  Saskatchewan is losing.  

We are therefore the province that has to change. 

 

We are the ones that have to get into synchronization with our 

neighbours through taxation systems that work in harmony 

with the people around us.  If we don't do that, 

we will continue to lose our economic strength, we will 

continue to lose our competitiveness, and we're going to 

continue to lose, in the end, our people. Because our people are 

going to follow the flow of economics, and the flow of 

economics is to the West, it's to the South, and it's any place 

out of here.  I guess not so much to the Northwest Territories, 

but I think there's probably even a few that are heading that 

way. 

 

The reality of life here is that we are the ones that are not 

following the mode of the rest of the people.  And they're not 

going to change, so you've got to do the changing.  You're the 

one that has to set the pattern. 

 

And I want to discuss with you, when we're thinking about this 

money and the amount we're going to be spending, or earning 

to be spent, $62 million is alluded to as the amount that this 

will bring in.  I say to you that it will be that if in fact we have 

enough people with enough money to be able to spend on 

anything so that there's an 8 per cent tax charged on something, 

which is becoming doubtful in these days as we go along.  So 

as people spend less money to buy goods, that figure could 

even drop. 

 

But I want to know, sir, what percentage of that $62 million 

does go to health care in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member opposite wants us to 

synchronize with Alberta.  Well I want to ask the member 

opposite, does he want us to synchronize with Alberta's deficit 

this year, which is $2,300 per capita?  Our deficit has been 

brought down to about $500 per capita.  I don't think we want 

to do that, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Alberta is making the same mistakes as the former government 

in Saskatchewan made in the 1980s.  Alberta doesn't have a 

sales tax because over a period of time it had huge and 

immense oil revenues and natural gas revenues.  So they didn't 

have to have a sales tax. 

 

But the papers in cities like Calgary and Edmonton are 

chock-full of the oil industry and chamber of commerce saying 

to the Alberta government, it's time to consider a sales tax.  

Because at least the business community in Alberta is 

beginning to realize you can't continue to accumulate debt the 

way the Alberta government has been doing in recent years.  

Because the example of the impact of that is clearly seen in the 

province of Saskatchewan where we have the highest per capita 

debt in all of Canada.  That's unmanageable; it has to be 

brought under control. 

 

I am not one who is going to suggest or support the 

synchronizing of the kind of per capita debt or deficit, annual 

deficit like you have in the province of Alberta; $2,300 per 

capita as opposed to ours of about $500 per capita.  That's too 

high and we would like to bring it down, and we are going to 

bring it down until we balance this budget in the next few 

years. 
 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, as I ask my next question I 

wonder if you would consider answering the last one as well 

which was, what percentage of the $62 million will go to health 

care in our province?  Now you've suggested that Alberta may 

be considering some alternatives.  I think 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

that's probably a reasonable thing for any government to do.  

You might just get lucky and have them put a sales tax on and 

help to bail you out of the problem that we're in.  But I 

wouldn't bet my last pair of shoes on it, because if I were you, I 

think you might possibly end up losing. 

 

I think probably Alberta has got a government that is going to 

continue to have their province grow and prosper.  I wonder, 

when you allude to the fact that they are considering 

alternatives, have you and your colleagues considered any 

alternatives to this increase in taxation?  And if you did, what 

were they and how would they have worked? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Indeed, Mr. Chairman, during the 

budget deliberation we considered the whole range of tax 

opportunities that exist now and we decided on the ones that 

are before us now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- All right, we'll go back two questions.  My 

second last question which you still haven't answered was, 

what percentage of the $62 million will be spent on health?  If 

you'd like to answer that along with the last question that I have 

asked that you didn't answer, what alternatives did you 

consider and how will they work?  And if you want to go on to 

another question so you can bypass them all, can you provide 

us any concrete evidence that you in fact looked at any other 

proposals at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am not sure if I got the last 

question, but we are expending in this budget 2.461 billion on 

education and health.  That's a significant part, almost 50 per 

cent of the budget.  That's what's being spent there.  The 

revenues from various taxes aren't targeted for any particular 

program area.  They go into the Consolidated Fund.  Then out 

of the Consolidated Fund you allocate money as you have 

available for different kind of program areas depending on the 

priority of the day. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We're doing well.  I ask three questions in a 

row, then I get the answer for the third last one.  So I'll ask you 

the last two over and a new one so that we can get the third one 

back answered. 

 

Now did your cabinet consider any alternatives to this tax, and 

if you did, what were they?  Second question, how would they 

work?  And the third question, do you have any concrete 

evidence that you in fact looked at anything else as an 

alternative? 

 

And now I'll throw in a fourth question.  Maybe you'll answer 

two at once.  If your Agriculture minister has made an error -- I 

want to put this as tactfully as I can -- if he has made an error 

in his judgement on the handling of the GRIP program, and if 

in that error by allowing the federal government off the hook 

for two hundred millions of dollars that could have come to the 

province of Saskatchewan's agricultural producers, if he has 

made a mistake and if there is a call for a lot of money to be 

paid out because of some kind of crop failure or disaster, are 

any of these monies going to be allocated to bail him and his 

departments out when they find out that they've lost all that 

money? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This question, Mr. Chairman, I did 

answer.  And I said we considered all of the various tax options 

that are available to us and decided that the ones that are before 

us in this budget are the ones to go with.  We're not here 

debating the GRIP program, Mr. Chairman.  And therefore I 

am not going to get into debate of the GRIP program.  We're 

talking here about the 1 per cent increase in the E&H tax. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well in all fairness, Mr. Minister, you did say 

that this $62 million that you would collect from this 1 per cent 

increase would go into consolidated funds.  You also said to us 

that consolidated funds is used to pay the bills of the 

government. 

 

Is not the Department of Agriculture and the Department of 

Rural Development and the programs of Crop Insurance and 

GRIP a part of your government's administration?  Is it not a 

responsibility to Finance?  And if it is, will not some of this 

money end up being spent to bail that fund out if it finds itself 

in a deficit situation? 

 

GRIP does come into this problem.  The monies you're raising 

through taxation are the monies that are going to pay the bills.  

And if it all goes into consolidated funds, what percentage of 

that money are you going to use to bail out the GRIP program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, none of this 

money would go to any additional expenditures if there 

happened to be some, because this money is already allocated. 

If that had to happen -- I don't predict that it will -- it would 

have to be borrowed money. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wonder, Mr. 

Minister, if you are able to provide us with a complete list of 

the commodities or various items that farmers pay sales tax on, 

that they would have been exempt on if they had harmonized? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again, I've 

answered that question about a half an hour ago.  We're going 

into repetition again.  The list that I provided, which I handed 

over to the member from Thunder Creek at the beginning of 

this committee, when the former . . . Well I won't say who was 

here or was not.  But the question has already been addressed 

and we've had a discussion on it.  We're now repeating the 

process again.  But the list provides both the exempt items and 

the items that would be taxable. 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I'm not sure that we have got anything close to 

the list that I have here, and it's a lengthy one, that farmers pay 

taxes on.  And obviously they don't get any break, they just 

pay.  I could put them in here for the record but there's an awful 

lot of items that they have to pay tax on where they wouldn't 

have to pay if they were harmonized. In other words, were 

sales tax free for the agricultural sector.  Do you have a 

complete list?  Maybe while you're looking there, Mr. Minister, 

I'll just put a few of them in the record here. 

 

For farmers, the following are some of the more common items 

on which tax must be paid by farmers.  This is not an 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

all-inclusive list, but this list would be exempt if you were 

buying items under harmonization, and had the GST and the 

PST returned:  aircraft, other than specially designed and 

licensed spray aircraft; all-terrain vehicles; building materials 

including paint; cellular telephones; cement mixers; chain 

saws; crawler tractors used for construction; electrical and 

plumbing supplies; fuel pumps; hand and electric storage tank 

pumps; fuel storage tanks; generator plants; goose-neck 

trailers; hand tools; heaters; radios; air conditioning equipment 

when purchased separately for farm tractor or other farm 

machinery; high pressure washers; home and multi-use heating, 

cooling, and water supply or air conditioning equipment. 

 

And even things, Mr. Minister, like horse trailers; household 

appliances and furniture; lighting plants; livestock trailers; 

mercury lights; various kinds of nuts, bolts, other cultivator 

equipment; power plants; Quonset and metal material other 

than grain bins; road construction and maintenance equipment; 

shop equipment and welders; snow blowers; snowmobiles; 

sodium lights; storage tanks other than weed control chemicals; 

structures other than grain bins whether movable or 

immovable; tires other than low speed implement tires; trout 

cages and aerators; truck boxes; truck hoists; truck tarps; 

veterinary instruments including calf weaners; truck racks; 

water pressure systems; welder helmets; well cribbing, and the 

list goes on, Mr. Minister. 

 

As a result of not harmonizing we see just one industry -- 

which you could apply to the oil patch, you could apply to the 

steel industry, you could apply to potash, you could apply to 

uranium, pulp and paper, and so forth -- all of those items 

would be sales tax free, which is a considerable amount of 

savings for anybody investing in these, which is everyday kind 

of investment, year in and year out.  Would the minister 

acknowledge that.  And I understand that he has acknowledged 

that sales tax harmonization would be a direct benefit to 

resource industries, but would he acknowledge that this kind of 

a list that I've just read for agriculture would be applicable for 

other resource industries, small business, anybody dealing in 

the business sector.  If we had harmonization none of these 

would be taxed, or, in other words, the tax would be returned 

because all the GST and PST is returned to the individual 

business person. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I invite the member, 

because he is reading from the information bulletin which I 

passed over . . . And if he is going to be frank and honest with 

the House, he should read pages 1 to 9, because pages 1 to 9 

also include all of the exemptions that are already available to 

farmers, valued at well in excess of $200 million a year.  That's 

the kind of benefit that the farm community gets from 

exemptions already in existence under the E&H tax. 

 

Now harmonization would have included . . . harmonization 

would have included the rest of the list.  Of course it would 

have.  But who would pay?  Who would pay, I ask.  The 

consumer would pay.  The retired citizen would pay.  The 

widow would pay.  Children who have to buy books, children 

who have to buy books to go to school would pay.  People who 

have to buy reading materials would pay.  The consumer would 

be upon 

whom this tax would be shifted, because you can't rebate things 

out of the treasury unless you have some revenues that came to 

it.  This tax, this harmonization, was shifting a large portion of 

the tax load to the consumer, the working people, the waitress 

in a restaurant, the schoolteacher, the labourer at IPSCO, the 

construction worker. 

 

You see, the one thing that the former premier never could 

figure out, and refuses to figure out today, is that the tax system 

has to apply fairly to everybody and everybody should pay 

their fair share.  Farmers don't mind paying some fair share of 

their taxes.  They don't mind doing that, and so they should.  

Potash corporations should be able to pay their fair share of the 

taxes.  But no, the member from Estevan says you should 

rebate it all to them, all of the E&H tax, 100 per cent.  Well we 

don't agree with that philosophy because that is an unfair tax 

system and that's why the kind of harmonization that the 

former government implemented, we promised to eliminate -- 

and we did. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, if you can provide a very 

competitive advantage to Saskatchewan businesses that are in 

the export business, and if we take agriculture and we take 

forestry and we take the steel industry and oil and gas and pulp 

and paper and potash and uranium as examples, fertilizer 

manufacturing, meat packing, and you can give all them a 

comparative advantage in exporting to the rest of the people 

and they bring that money home which is in a multiplier effect, 

stimulates the economy, wouldn't you suggest that that's an 

advantage to those industries and in turn they have money to 

spend to create economic activity? 

 

Plus, Mr. Minister, if you provide a sales tax credit, a tax credit 

to lower income people, then you have helped the lower 

income consumer on one hand and you've completely allowed 

the industry side, small business, resources, and agriculture 

which Saskatchewan's all about, to have a competitive 

advantage.  So you've helped the low-incomers in terms of 

taxes and you've taken the industry and you've stimulated it 

because it doesn't have to pay the taxes to compete with other 

provinces. 

 

Now I understand, Mr. Minister, that you have admitted that 

sales tax harmonization is good for the resource industries, 

including agriculture, steel, potash, uranium, oil and gas, pulp 

and paper, and meat packing and the like in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Is that true that you've admitted that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, any time you cut a 

tax for some particular sector, it's going to please them and 

bring some benefit, but you don't consider taxation policy that 

way.  You consider taxation policy on how it impacts the 

whole economy and the harmonized tax system that the former 

government introduced was going to have a negative impact on 

the whole economy, that was clear.  Well the member from 

Estevan says it's not true.  He might say that's not true, I 

disagree with him and I say that it is true. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you see what we're talking 

about is not whether we should have tax money to balance 

budgets, we're talking about how you tax.  Isn't 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

that it?  How you tax, all right.  We're talking about 

harmonization stimulates the business community and creates 

economic activity and if you have low income offsets then it 

helps the consumers that don't have money. 

 

Under your system, Mr. Minister, what have you got?  You've 

got a higher deficit.  You've got more families on food bank.  

You've got poverty taking a big leap forward and you've got 

your party members really worried about it.  We're just trying 

to get that concept of, if you are going to raise a certain amount 

of money, would it be better to help economic activity so that 

you could get around the food bank increases and the welfare 

rolls and help those low-incomers as opposed to the way you're 

doing it?  Which is, add more sales tax for everybody, 

consumers and farmers and the poor, and then raise utilities for 

the poor, because your power rates and your telephone rates 

and your SGI rates, they're on top of that, until you get poverty 

increasing in Saskatchewan, food banks increasing, your credit 

rating going down and you've got a bigger deficit this year than 

the year before, and the year before that. 

 

Now all we're getting at, Mr. Minister, is perhaps the choices 

you made were not the appropriate choices.  Because the 

business community, the chamber of commerce, the resource 

industries, small business -- which I'm sure you must be 

interested in -- small business says you should have 

harmonized. 

 

They're still asking you to harmonize, stimulate the economy.  

And if you want to help low income people with the taxes, go 

ahead and give them a tax credit.  And then you won't have to 

hit the utilities so hard, which hurt not only the businesses, and 

the farmers, but on top of that hurt the low incomers and the 

seniors.  Your seniors have to pay all that.  So, Mr. Minister, if 

we're talking about how you tax, and you've admitted the tax 

harmonization is good for all of business in Saskatchewan -- 

the majority of which exports -- there's large multipliers in 

creating economic activity and you can provide offsets for low 

income.  Then, Mr. Minister, you're starting to get boxed in 

because your tax system has (1) higher deficit; and (2) all these 

people on food bank and all . . . and the welfare roll is 

increasing. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, would you not acknowledge that when all of 

the economic activity in the province of Saskatchewan is 

benefitted -- would you acknowledge now -- from sales tax 

harmonization, and you can help the low income people with 

offsets, that it is less harmful to the economy than if you're 

going to apply the sales tax to business, utilities to business, 

income tax to business, as well as all the consumers.  So you've 

taxed everybody.  You say though that's equal pain, but you've 

got no economic activity.  That's the problem.  No economic 

excitement, no investment, the kind of thing that would 

stimulate the economy, so we end up with more people on food 

banks and more people on the welfare line. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, wouldn't you acknowledge -- and we can 

go back and we can go through the quotes that you or the 

associate minister or the Premier today have said -- sales tax 

harmonization makes sense.  One tax makes sense because it 

saves 5 million in administration.  It stimulates economic 

activity.  Maybe you should have 

done it at a little lower rate.  All those logical things. 

 

Now what we're trying to point out, Mr. Minister, is -- and 

we've been through this before, you campaigned of course on 

less tax, but now we're even over that hump, you obviously 

changed your mind -- but even if you had to tax, in looking at it 

all over again, the benefits to all of the industrial sector plus the 

offsets for low income, are increasingly evident even to those 

that are lined up in the food banks, lined up in welfare rolls, 

and even across this, I'm sure, on both sides of the House in 

this legislature.  So you're just stuck with just tax on top of tax, 

and now you're raising the sales tax. 

 

Would you not acknowledge, Mr. Minister, that harmonization 

has some benefits in practical terms and in theoretical terms for 

the province of Saskatchewan given the fact the whole country 

is into GST.  Wouldn't you acknowledge that that has some 

potential or . . . I mean I can read you all the things that you 

were going to say that . . . or you've said that was all the good 

things.  Couldn't you acknowledge that it has some of those 

features that are very, very attractive for economic activity, and 

plus jobs, welfare, in a province like Saskatchewan which has 

to cope with GST anyway because it's here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Very clearly, Mr. Chairman, no.  I 

would not acknowledge that because I'm glad the member from 

Estevan raised the GST.  Because if this was such a wonderful 

great benefit to the growth of the economy, what happened to 

the impact by the GST?  Where is this growth in the Canadian 

economy that's supposed to do these wonderful things?  Our 

unemployment rate in Canada is over 11 per cent.  GST hasn't 

fixed that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's fixing it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Our . . . it's fixing it.  It keeps going 

up and the member from Estevan says that it's fixing it.  Our 

recession has lasted, particularly in central Canada, longer than 

anybody suggested or predicted that it would.  There is a 

constant revised downward trend of economic forecast by the 

federal Finance minister who struggles every single day about 

what's happening to the economy. 

 

Retail trade across the country was pummelled in 1991.  

Manufacturing processes and the serving sector were 

particularly hit hard with the GST.  There was damage done 

with the GST.  And the member from Estevan, the former 

premier, says wouldn't it just be great if we inflicted the same 

kind of damage on the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's here.  It's here.  The GST is here. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well that's right.  And so it's here, 

of course it is.  And the member from Estevan says, well the 

GST is bad and it's here so we might as well make it double 

bad and put in a provincial harmonized PST. 

 

Well, that's his approach to the world.  That's not our approach 

to the world in Saskatchewan.  We said the harmonized PST 

which the former government introduced was bad for the 

economy.  It had a net negative 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

impact on the economy, that if we were elected we would 

eliminate it, and one of the first acts of this government when 

we were elected was in fact to eliminate it, because it is the 

wrong kind of tax. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, see what we're trying to get 

at is how you led the public along, then changed your mind, 

then promised to reduce taxes, and then end up saying, well I 

didn't really mean what I said way before the election.  And I 

didn't mean what I said at the election.  And now I have to raise 

all these other taxes which are pretty ugly, but they're likely 

better than what the other guy did. 

 

Because . . . I keep looking at this.  This is a news release from 

the New Democratic Party on October 30, 1990 -- the fairest 

and most sensible way to proceed would be to harmonize the 

two sales taxes; October 3, 1990, by the Leader of the NDP. 

 

What happened?  What happened?  Did you do a poll and say, 

well taxes won't be popular so we'll promise not to tax.  Is that 

right?  Because: the fairest and most sensible way to proceed 

would be to harmonize the two sales taxes -- Roy Romanow, 

Saskatchewan Democrats, October 3, 1990. 

 

(2200) 

 

Another one, October 3, 1990: a side by side tax is preferable 

to a tax on a tax -- the Leader of the NDP talking.  Now I can 

find a few more.  The NDP Finance critic, and this is the 

Leader-Post, March 15, 1991, the NDP Finance critic, Ned 

Shillington, stated that "his party supported this harmonization 

of the two taxes, but added they would lower the rate."  It 

would make more sense to have one tax rather than two, he told 

reporters. 

 

Now the logic was there before you.  You put the two together.  

And your leader said it was the right thing you to do and your 

Finance critic said it was the right thing to do. And I repeat, 

"(The) NDP finance critic Ned Shillington stated that . . . his 

party supported this harmonization of the two taxes . . ." 

 

Well you were part of the party then, Mr. Minister.  What 

changed your mind?  " . . . harmonization was recommended 

by NDP MLA Ned Shillington who felt it would be simpler to 

have one tax." Moose Jaw Times-Herald, February 21, 1991.  

Then it goes on to say the NDP would harmonize the taxes but 

at a lower rate than the combined 14 per cent. 

 

Well that's a fair argument. At least you put them together, 

you've saved the administration costs, you've stimulated the 

economic activity for business and farmers and resources and 

for low income people; you can help them. 

 

And this is a good one.  This is Cross Country Connection, 

October 15, 1990.  I quote:  As far as harmonizing the two 

taxes, we have said that it would only make sense if the federal 

government was prepared to make concessions in removing 

such items as farm inputs from the tax base. 

 

Which happened, as a matter of fact, so that there were 

exemptions and people were allowed to participate and give 

their ideas, and the exemptions were there. 

 

Mr. Minister, the concept of having a province that is sales tax 

free for the productive sector in resources, agriculture, services, 

all of those things, because people have it all returned, has 

some stimulative economic possibilities. 

 

And if you've acknowledged tonight, in more than one 

occasion, that it's good for those sectors and it's good for the 

people that work in those sectors, then the only argument 

you've got left is, well that helpfulness wouldn't be as large as 

some of the offsets paid for by the general consuming public. 

 

Now you're going to have to show that in a province like 

Saskatchewan with a million people, that the resource sector is 

not significant in a major way.  Don't you think that it is?  The 

resource sector is very significant in Saskatchewan. 

 

Agriculture, we have half the farm land.  Right?  So if you've 

got half the farm land in Canada, it's in Saskatchewan, and you 

make it sales tax free.  If you're the potash capital of Canada 

and it's sales tax free; you're the uranium capital of Canada and 

it's sales tax free; and you're the heavy oil capital of Canada 

and it's sales tax free; and you can produce fertilizer for the 

first time in your life and it would sales tax free; and packing 

plants and processing and manufacturing -- all sales tax free -- 

pretty relevant to a province like Saskatchewan.  And you say 

no, that wouldn't be fair because we'd have sales tax for the 

general consuming public. 

 

Well the public already has sales tax.  And now you're even 

raising it for all those people, with no tax credits.  So you have 

to convince the general public that all of industry in 

Saskatchewan, which includes agriculture which is half the 

farm land in Canada, wouldn't benefit, and if it did benefit it's 

not enough to convince you. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you're drawing a long bow here to give 

probably the largest tax break to all of economic resource and 

development, including . . . I mean those that you have shares 

in, Mr. Minister, whether it's potash or uranium or Saskoil or 

WESTBRIDGE or others, to stimulate economic activity.  You 

must admit when you looked at one tax and said all these 

things . . . the Leader of the NDP Party said one tax makes 

sense.  The critics said one tax makes sense.  You looked at all 

the resources and said it makes sense. 

 

How can you stand in your place now and say that it doesn't 

make sense for the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite and myself are going to continue to disagree because 

the member opposite does not take a look at the whole 

economic picture.  I want to remind the member from Estevan 

that the mining sector and the agriculture sector are 15 per cent 

of the economy, approximately 15 per cent.  The biggest sector 

in the economy is the service sector which is 72.2 per cent.  

And the provincial harmonization of the PST caused it to go 

reeling because the consumer stopped spending when 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

the PST harmonization was brought in -- in a major, major 

way. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the GST, the federal GST has been the greatest 

cause of cross-border shopping in Canada.  Cross-border 

shopping sky-rocketed when the GST was brought in and it's 

still a serious problem.  All of those arguments, Mr. Chairman, 

lead to only one conclusion -- that the harmonized PST, as the 

former government had introduced it, was inappropriate. It was 

the wrong way to do it, it was the wrong time in which to do it 

because it had a major negative impact on the economy.  And 

that's why it doesn't exist in Saskatchewan today. 

 

We're going to do what we have to do within the financial 

capability of the province to provide assistance to different 

sectors in the business community, and we started that in this 

budget with a 1 per cent decrease in the corporate small 

business tax rate, with a phasing out of the education and 

health tax for consumables and agents in processing and 

manufacturing.  That's the way you do economic development.  

You target it where it should be targeted. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Member of the opposition and Mr. 

Chairman, I don't think that the potash industry needs 

assistance from the Saskatchewan taxpayer/consumer.  The 

potash industry is doing quite well.  If the member from 

Estevan thinks that we should rebate all of the education and 

sales tax to the potash industry because they need that help then 

he's wrong.  Because you have to get it from somebody and 

that means you have to get it from the consumer, the labourer, 

the farmer, and everybody else who has to pay that additional 

portion of the tax. 

 

The potash industry is doing quite well, thank you very much, 

and is able to contribute to the Saskatchewan treasury in the 

royalties that it's paid as well as the E&H tax that it pays.  And 

that's the way it should be. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, let me just . . . fair enough, Mr. Minister.  

If you're saying in your party's representation that 

harmonization is not good for Saskatchewan agriculture and 

Saskatchewan potash and Saskatchewan oil and gas and 

Saskatchewan uranium and pulp and paper and steel, that 

you're saying you don't agree with the chamber of commerce 

and the board of trade, you're smarter than they are, and all the 

industries including the service industry which is exempt 

because you pay the tax, you get it back.  Find me, sir, a 

service sector that doesn't get the GST/PST returned. 

 

I mean if you pay it, you get it back.  If it's a legal service, a 

technical service, any kind of a service, if you pay it you get it 

back.  So if it's a growing industry, if you wanted to stimulate 

the service sector in Saskatchewan, the computer industry, the 

knowledge industry, and all of those services that might pay 

tax, you could stimulate that new, high-tech, information-age 

knowledge sector by saying, let's go give that a Saskatchewan 

competitive edge.  And you've missed that too. 

 

I mean if you just talk to people any place who say, if we could 

be sales tax free . . . Look at the Pacific Rim for sales tax free 

zones.  Look at world-wide when you've allowed 

that to happen.  So you can't find me a sector that pays GST 

that you wouldn't get exempted back or rebated back -- the 

service sector, the resource sector, manufacturing, processing, 

all of those things.  Now if it's a growing service sector that 

you're interested in, well -- that's paying GST -- I mean please 

describe this.  Because I think you've missed it, if you think it's 

just the service sector.  It's not.  The service sector is part of the 

economy, and it would be exempt.  So please explain that, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is beginning to confuse even himself.  Indeed there would be a 

rebate to the service sector but there would be a considerable 

amount of less money that the consumer would have or would 

be spending -- and so that whole rebate is a counter-productive 

argument.  And all of the indicators in 1991, when the PST 

came in, showed that to be the case.  The consumer literally 

stopped spending.  And therefore, Mr. Chairman, it had an 

impact on the service industry in the main way.  Just talk to the 

people who sold books and magazines and subscriptions.  Talk 

to the restaurateurs and have them, Mr. Member from Estevan, 

have them tell you what kind of a negative impact it had on 

their businesses.  The rebate didn't mean a thing to them 

because the consumer stopped spending money in the stores 

and the shops, creating a negative impact on the economy. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Come on, you can play at politics during 

election, but are you standing up or comparing the hamburger 

market, retail market, with the agricultural sector, and the 

potash sector, and the oil and the gas, and all of the rest of that, 

Mr. Minister?  The whole service sector paid the tax and the 

service sector got it back.  And your own comparisons the 

percentage change in retail sales across Canada in 1990 and to 

1991 are similar across the country.  You can't just pick on 

Saskatchewan.  In Ontario it's minus 7.5; Manitoba minus 6.5; 

Saskatchewan minus 6.9; and Alberta minus 5.1; as high as 

minus 10 in Newfoundland; P.E.I. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, did you do all of this for coffee and 

hamburgers?  Is this the whole reason you decided to raise the 

sales tax for the public, renege on your word, add more income 

tax?  All these fees and all these health care fees you charge, 

you're doing all this because you said, oh well if you go to the 

restaurant you got to pay 7 cents on a cup of coffee.  You'd lose 

$1,400 on a pick-up truck and you'd lose millions of dollars in 

the whole resource sector.  But oh no, if you didn't want to 

make your coffee at home and you went over here, look at that. 

 

Is that what you're saying, Mr. Minister?  Point to me the 

service industries that would not get all of that sales tax back.  

Please.  I mean you've got to do better than this to say that you 

have figured it out that your tax system is better for the 

resource base and the economic activity in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I mean you talk about hamburgers and coffee.  

Is that it, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

is beginning to get a little exercised because he's finding it 

difficult to defend his position because he knows that on 

election day the vast majority of Saskatchewan people said 

they don't want it.  They said it 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

was wrong.  And I'm telling you, Mr. Chairman, I have full 

respect and confidence in the judgement of the voters of this 

province, and I respect the judgement that they make. 

 

The member from Estevan obviously hasn't learned that lesson 

and he continues to argue with the electorate of the province of 

Saskatchewan even to this day.  The point is this, Mr. 

Chairman, that all of the retail industry was losing dollars in a 

big way because of reduced spending by the consumer because 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Across Canada. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Across Canada, yes, but more so in 

the province of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well, just a minute, well let's talk about those figures.  Because 

here is what happened. 

 

In Saskatchewan we had real growth in the economy in 1991.  

In spite of the fact that we had real growth in the economy in 

1991, our retail trade still dropped 7 per cent -- 6.9 per cent.  In 

Quebec and Ontario, they had a negative growth in their 

economy.  That would obviously be a major impact on their 

retail trade.  If you put that into context, Mr. Chairman, clearly 

the impact of the GST and the PST on the retail trade in 

Saskatchewan was devastating and all of the evidence as to 

what the GST has done to Canada shows how devastating it has 

been. 

 

There is nothing in the country of Canada that can be shown 

where the GST has had a positive impact on anything, no 

reduction in unemployment, no change in the forecast in a 

positive way that the federal Minister of Finance has had to 

make.  None of those things can be shown to be positive. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to talk about . . . you 

said . . . the vote at election time . . . you keep coming back and 

they spoke.  Now I'm going to mention, what did they vote for?  

Listen, this is Mr. Romanow, Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 

October 17, '91: We're not going back to taxing people. 

 

In the debate Mr. Romanow says, you vote for us, the PST is 

gone.  They voted for tax cuts.  Tax cuts.  And then you fooled 

them and we're in here now talking about tax increases.  How 

can you say that's a test of your theory? 

 

You didn't tell them the truth.  They voted for tax cuts and now 

you're bringing in tax increases.  Why do you think people are 

upset?  You keep coming back, well they voted for this.  They 

voted for tax cuts because they believed the NDP leader and 

you. 

 

(2215) 

 

This is what he says: the PST comes off, October 21.  They 

voted for tax cuts and no more tax increases.  Creating more 

jobs will stimulate revenue without raising taxes -- the Star-

Phoenix, Mr. Romanow said, October 12, 1991. 
 

Now that's what they voted for.  Do you think they'd have 

voted for you if you'd have gone through and said, I'm going to 

raise the sales tax and I'm going to raise the income tax and I'm 

going to raise municipal tax, and I'm going to raise your 

prescription drug deductible?  And on 

and on and on. 

 

They wouldn't have voted for you.  You know the majority of 

these members wouldn't have even supported it.  They said 

how could we win with that?  You were not honest with them.  

You weren't honest with the public.  And you're standing in 

here, a little self-righteous, saying, well they voted for it.  Well 

for Heaven's sake.  Is that all this is about -- they voted for 

you? 

 

You're taxing them in a heavy way and we're now looking at 

situations where we've got welfare rolls up, poverty up, food 

bank up, your credit rating going down, your deficit's up, and 

you've got no economic plan, and you say your tax system 

makes sense when prior to the election you said harmonization 

was the way to go.  We can manage, stimulate the economy.  I 

mean you were . . . you're all over the map. 

 

Now you said that the federal package hasn't made any 

difference.  Do you remember what the interest rates were in 

1982 when you lost power?  Do you remember what inflation 

was in 1982 when you lost power?  What were the exports like 

to the United States in '82 when you lost power?  The 

NDP-Liberal coalition, right.  Remember that?  The old 

Trudeau-NDP games that went back and forth and what did 

you have?  You had 22 per cent, and the Minister says those 

were good times, the old NDP-Liberal coalition -- Trudeau in 

Ottawa and the NDP here and they just raised havoc and what 

did you get?  You got the fastest-growing deficit in the history 

of Canada.  You had interest rates at 22 per cent.  You had 

inflation running 12.  You had trouble trading into the United 

States. 

 

Now what have you got today?  You've got 6 per cent interest 

rates, between 6 and 7 per cent interest rates.  We've got zero 

per cent inflation and you've got 30-year all-time high exports 

into the United States, and without the interest on the debt the 

federal budget is balanced.  Now you didn't have that under 

NDP-Liberal combinations of all the things that you were 

doing.  So you talk about what we had to go through cleaning 

up what you created in terms of 22 per cent interest rates, 12 

per cent inflation, drought back to back to back and $2 wheat.  

You cope with 22 per cent interest rates on your deficit. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'll just put it this way.  I think in here not too 

long ago you admitted in 1982 there was about a $3.3 billion 

deficit in Saskatchewan.  At 22 per cent interest rates, do you 

know what that is after 10 years?  That's a problem, Mr. 

Minister, and that's what you left us with, that kind of a 

problem.  That kind of a problem and now you're saying, well 

we got interest rates down to 6 per cent, we got inflation to 

zero, we got record exports into the United States.  You say 

well jeez, that isn't working.  And you don't like co-operating 

with the federal tax system to give all of the industry in 

Saskatchewan -- service sector, agriculture, and others -- a 

break, because you think you've got a smarter way to treat 

coffee and hamburgers? 

 

And then you have the audacity or whatever it might be to say, 

but they voted for us.  Well for Heaven's sakes, they voted for a 

sham.  They voted for you, and you promised 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

to take down taxes, and lower, give them more money in 

agriculture, cost of production in GRIP, get more money from 

Ottawa.  And none of that is available.  All we got are tax after 

tax after tax after tax.  And now we're looking at welfare lines 

up and food bank lines up.  So don't give us a song and dance, 

Mr. Minister, that they voted for you, then you had this lovely 

plan. 

 

If you had given them the plan, the real brochure, they wouldn't 

have voted for you.  They wouldn't vote for you in 100 years.  

If you went out there today and said, here's the plan, boys, 

here's the plan: we're going to raise taxes and we're going to 

raise sales tax and income tax and surtax, and raise all your 

premiums and your deductible -- vote for us -- do you know 

what?  I'm not even sure the member from Quill Lakes would 

make it back.  I think in 1982 you tried that, and you lost every 

seat but eight, and even in '86 you lost every rural seat but a 

handful. 

 

And what did they say?  They said they didn't like the 22 per 

cent, they didn't like nationalizing potash industries and paying 

too much.  They didn't like the land bank.  And the only way 

you could get elected was promise something you could never 

deliver on; promise something you could never deliver.  So you 

went out and said, well I know that harmonization is worth 

$200 million, the debt's 265 -- that will be 500 million.  It won't 

matter; we'll do it anyway.  So every time you mention the 

vote, we're going to have to remind you that you promised to 

cut taxes, and when we're in here debating your huge tax 

increases, the NDP flip-flopped, didn't tell the truth.  And that's 

why we're asking these questions.  That's why you're on the 

carpet here tonight.  The people don't want to let you off the 

hook.  You promised to help them in agriculture, you renege on 

contracts and GRIP.  They don't like that.  It's worth money to 

them because they believed you'd look after them and you 

reneged. 

 

So every time you mentioned the vote in here, all you do is 

make . . . people all over the province said, well boy, I wish I 

had a chance again -- that's what they say.  I wish I had a 

chance again to tell you what I think of your plan. 

 

So I'm coming back, Mr. Minister.  If in fact harmonization is 

good for all of these sectors, including the service sector, how 

can you stand in your place here tonight and say that your tax 

scheme -- which hurts all of those sectors, plus consumers, plus 

seniors, -- is smart, is wiser.  Where is the economic studies?  

Where are the economic analyses?  Table your research.  Show 

the comparisons.  Because you just standing up in here and 

saying, well retail sales were down across Canada and in 

Saskatchewan -- that means nothing. 

 

Show us where your plan on tax increases all over is smarter 

and more productive and more competitive than the 

harmonization that was put together that you once thought was 

a really good idea and it suddenly changed your mind.  Have 

you got anything that could document why you think and why 

you believe that this economic analysis of yours is meaningful 

at all? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, interesting 

comments from the member from Estevan, who also has made 

other comments in the past.  He chooses to ignore them here 

today as he tries to remember the defeat that he 

suffered on October 21, 1991.  I know that was difficult but I 

urge the member from Estevan, forget it.  Put it behind you and 

think about the future.  Sour grapes, you know, is something 

that is interesting but the public doesn't respect it very much. 

 

Here's what you said, Mr. Minister, in 1987:  it's a betrayal of 

the public to create huge deficits for future generations to pay, 

not to try and fix them.  That's what you said.  Well what did 

you do?  You created huge debt.  That's what you said and 

that's . . . but nothing happened. 

 

You inherited a province in 1982 with all kinds of promise, all 

kinds of promise.  What did you say in New York in 1983?  

You said, and I quote word for word: Saskatchewan has so 

much going for it that you can afford to mismanage it and still 

break even.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. former premier, if there is 

anything that you did well it's mismanage.  If there's anything 

you did extremely well it's mismanage, and that's why we have 

to do what we have to do today.  To get the thing under control. 

 

Let me talk about . . . let me make a comparison between 1982 

and 1992.  In 1982 there was accumulated debt in this province 

of $3.5 billion.  In 1992 you know what it is -- $15 billion, 

thanks to you, thanks to your mismanagement, thanks to your 

promise to the business community in New York.  In 1982 the 

interest on the public debt in Saskatchewan was $44 million.  

You know what it is this year, thanks to you -- $760 million is 

what you added in interest on the public debt which we have to 

pay, which our children are going to have to pay, and which 

their children are going to have to pay. 

 

In 1982, even in your own documents, you showed that we had 

a surplus of a $139 million.  Your minister of Finance, Mr. 

Gary Lane, printed that and published it.  What do we have 

today?  We have a deficit of $517 million, and that's down 

from the $1.2 billion which it would have been if we had not 

taken these measures. 

 

In 1982 there was a promising future for our children in 

Saskatchewan.  And now we've got a huge debt which they're 

going to have to pay.  It's our commitment that we're going to 

restore that promising future for our children.  And we're going 

to deal with the finances of this province and get the debts and 

the deficit under control. 

 

In 1982, Mr. Member from Estevan, there was 6,800 housing 

starts in Saskatchewan.  In 1991 there was less than a thousand, 

thanks to your economic development strategies -- less than a 

thousand. 

 

This plan, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chairman, deals 

with getting the finances of this province under control.  It 

deals with the first commitment that the New Democratic Party 

made in the election campaign.  The commitment was to open 

the books.  And I'll read it because I think the member from 

Estevan forgets what it was.  The commitment was to open the 

books -- a public, independent audit of the province's financial 

affairs to cut government waste and mismanagement. 

 

And boy, there was a lot of waste and mismanagement.  Look 

around.  I mean, you only have to look at things like the report, 

the Special Report of the Provincial Auditor, to 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

know how badly the waste and mismanagement was there.  The 

premier and his colleagues got thousands of dollars of -- the 

former premier -- of liquor from the Liquor Board free of 

charge, free tickets to Big Valley Jamboree, free tickets to the 

Centre of the Arts, thousands of dollars of wasted money.  

Every single . . . tens of hundreds of thousands.  Every single 

cabinet minister and MLA who was defeated was on a 

patronage ticket, appointed by the former premier. 

 

Boy the mismanagement was there when the premier said in 

New York, this province has so much going for it you can 

mismanage it and break even.  He sure knew what he was 

talking about, except the one part -- you couldn't break even.  

You can't spend like drunken sailors on everything without any 

thought about what the impact that it was going to have, 

without causing the financial problems that we face today. 

 

So we said in 1991 that we would open the books. A public 

independent audit of the books would take place.  We said that 

a comprehensive review of all of the PC privatization and 

business deals would be done to determine if they are in the 

public interest.  That's being done. 

 

And we said a balanced budget in our first term.  Now it may 

not be possible to do it completely in the first term.  That's still 

the target.  It may take five years.  But we are going to do it.  

And it would not be possible to do it, Mr. Chairman, without 

some increase in revenues. 

 

And that's why we are providing some increase in revenues, 

because we are setting our sights down the road and not just 

looking at it from a one-year basis which the former 

government did for too long, the 10 years that they were in 

power. 

 

That's what the analysis that has been done that is here.  And 

those people who make judgements on us, those people who 

advise people whether they should buy our bonds, have said 

we're on the right track. They said our credit rating has dropped 

because of the horrendous debt which we have inherited, but 

they said we're on the right track with the decisions we have 

made in getting the deficit under control and in guaranteeing a 

future for our children.  Because when it really comes down to 

the final point, Mr. Chairman, it's our children that are 

important here and not the friends and the political friends of 

the member from Estevan, who were the only ones who 

benefitted during 10 years of Progressive Conservative 

government.  That's going to change. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There seems to be an unusual amount 

of enthusiasm for what I'm about to say, Mr. Chairman.  I'm 

actually going to move that this committee rise, report 

progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:31 p.m. 

 


