




















































Hansard: August 07, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2121 

 August 7, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just begin 

today by making a few remarks about some of the things that I 

said the other day that relates to the constitutional reference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that of all of the Bills that I've ever seen 

in this House, this one most demands an opportunity for a 

reference to the Supreme Court.  I have gone through it; I've 

looked through it. And I take that not as a legal counsel but as 

an observation from a person who has sat on a legislative 

committee of this Assembly since about 1983.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, one of the things that I have noted in this Bill over 

and over again are the various sections that cause and create a 

considerable amount of concern. 

 

We have, as we had originally talked about, had a significant 

apprehension about the time that the government took to put 

into place all of the details relating to the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program, and the time went beyond when 

the government was supposed to make the information 

available to the producers. 

 

And I want to outline just the reason why that that date was put 

into place, Mr. Speaker.  The date was put into place on March 

15, after we had gone through considerable amount of meetings 

across the province.  It was a decision made by our government 

on the basis that the people had said to us over and over again 

that March 15 was the last day when any reasonable decision 

could be made in relation to the program to deal with 

government, so that the producer still had time to make some 

rational decisions about their management of their farms. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why March 15 was put in 

there.  So that the time lapse between March 15 and seeding 

would be sufficient enough.  And in order to bring this into 

perspective, this year for example, there were people who were 

busy on their land in the south-west part of the province by the 

middle and the end of March.  And that is not an unreasonable 

happening in the south-west part of the province. 

 

I want to make the point too, Mr. Speaker, that this has a 

number of references to that date and because it was 

significant, I believe, in how the government responded, it took 

what they, I guess would consider the responsibility of putting 

that into the preamble of the Bill.  And in the preamble of the 

Bill, Mr. Speaker, they mentioned the March 15, 1991 as a 

date-line for the kinds of things that they were going to discuss 

later on in the Bill.  And it deals with that in a very significant 

way because it states that as a fact.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

important, because what we find later on in the Bill is that there 

are certain areas that deal with that. 

 

One of the areas is that it expressly says that all of the actions 

taken by government, except that those that will be established 

in regulation, will be placed in a sequence and made void -- 

absolutely no reference to any of them.  I believe that, Mr. 

Speaker, is why they put the date in the Bill so that they made 

sure that was one of the items that they would identify as 

having to void, having to make absolutely non-existent. 

 

Now to make it void, it's as if it never happened.  Mr. Speaker, 

it did happen.  There was a reason for it being there.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, not only that, they go back to January 1, 1991 as the 

day that from that point on everything is void.  Now what's the 

significance of January 1, Mr. Speaker?  On January 4 or 5, the 

Minister of Agriculture for Canada, the ministers of 

Agriculture from Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba, met in 

Saskatoon to deal basically with a structure and the focus of 

attention on what it should be and finalizing some of the last 

aspects of the GRIP '91 deal.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

the decision was made to go back to January 1, 1991 because 

that was the first decision-making day.  Nothing was signed, 

but the agreement was reached between the three ministers of 

Agriculture from the three prairie provinces and from the 

federal government.  Now that is where the dynamics are of the 

making absolutely non-existent all of the activities that took 

place back to 1991. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the farmers across the province, prior to the 

date of March 15, were at a significant amount of meetings.  

The Department of Agriculture at the time organized at least 

100 meetings across the province.  I know that, for example, 

Mr. Speaker, I have personally attended 40 of them -- 40 of 

those meetings from the last week of February till the last week 

of March.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was a very, very intense 

education not only for myself, but for the rural people in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know that those things happened.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

what we have in this Bill is that they are made void.  They 

didn't happen.  According to this Bill as it's presented in this 

Assembly, when it's voted on, none of that happened.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is what we find really, really interesting in 

this Bill. 

 

Another thing that is in this Bill that strikes us as being 

interesting is that it deals, in the case of a court, where you 

have a reason to take an individual or a Crown or a government 

to court, it deals with what can be put into an action against the 

individual in a court or whatever.  And that says that it's: 



2122 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

. . . any claim (against this individual), cause of action, suit, 

debt, account, demand, claim for damages, loss, cost, 

expense or interest, of any nature, whether arising in or 

imposed by law, equity, statute or otherwise and includes 

any judgment or order of a court. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, says that there is absolutely no way that 

anyone from dealing with this Bill and the GRIP program has 

any way to attach itself to a court action.  No way.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, we have said all along that this government is hard, 

imposing.  And we said all along that this is what they would 

have to do if they didn't agree to the GRIP '91 to start with. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the farmers across the province, 50,00 of 

them, have a problem with some of this.  And so do we.  The 

people in this caucus here who are farmers have a problem with 

it, and so do 50,000 others.  They have a serious problem with 

it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we are concerned 

about it.  It deals with that item on the one merit.  It says in a 

cause of action you cannot take it to court.  If you have a 

judgement or a court case pending, you do not have an option 

to take it to court or extend it beyond that. 

 

And when, Mr. Speaker, when in the history of the province 

has that happened before?  When has it happened before?  And 

it goes back, Mr. Speaker, to earlier -- not in this session, but 

earlier in this mandate for this government.  In December of 

1991 this government decided that all of the people who were 

in any kind of non-union contract in the province of 

Saskatchewan would have their rights extinguished as a part of 

the decision that they made and how they were going to deal 

with those people they didn't want working for government. 

 

And they had all of their rights in court extinguished, Mr. 

Speaker.  And those are exactly the same words, exactly the 

same words that this Bill talks about in extinguishing the rights 

of individuals for access to the court.  It extinguishes them, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker . . . and I would hazard a guess that the 

majority of people sitting in this Assembly who came from the 

eastern part of Europe came here for the right to have their day 

in court.  Due process in court was one of the reasons they 

came, because they didn't have that opportunity in the land that 

they lived in.  And that, Mr. Speaker, it extinguishes the right 

of an individual to sue the government. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have had the Premier and others here use 

land bank as an example.  But never, Mr. Speaker, never did 

we ever exclude them from due process in a court of law.  

Never.  We did not exclude them. 

 

And I heard through the years that people on the other side 

have said, well everybody had you in court.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, it's easy to say that glibly when you are in a position 

to clearly eliminate due process in justice in a court of law.  

And what stops you from doing it, Mr. Speaker?  It's because 

you have a constitutional right in this country, and in the 

province of Saskatchewan you have a constitutional right to 

never, ever be refused from a court of law.  Never. 

And in fact, Mr. Speaker, if I recall correctly, it was people on 

the other side who put in the legal aid system.  So people, Mr. 

Speaker, who were not able to afford a case before the court 

would be able to get a person who was legally competent to 

provide legal advice in a case-by-case basis for that individual.  

And that, Mr. Speaker . . . The reason was so that people, no 

matter how poor or how rich, could have equal access before 

the law. 
 

And what have we got here now, Mr. Speaker?  That right of 

the quarter section farmer or the guy that has 50 quarters is 

extinguished by this Assembly and is going to be extinguished 

by this Act in this Assembly and, Mr. Speaker, that is going to 

be all of the actions in a contract before the court, and a case 

before the court is going to be extinguished.  The rights of 

individuals will be extinguished and that, Mr. Speaker, is very, 

very serious.  In my view, Mr. Speaker, it is far more serious 

than the Electoral Boundaries Commission discussion that we 

had a little over a year ago.  And that, Mr. Speaker, had a 

reference to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court made 

the decision that the Bill was within the framework of the 

constitutional rights of individuals.  The NDP (New 

Democratic Party) didn't agree with that, but that's the way it 

came down from the Supreme Court. 
 

(1915) 
 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill does some other things that are, I think, 

unique.  Mr. Speaker, in the presentation made by the deputy 

minister on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture, he said that 

he would be bringing a case before the court which would 

include a Bill that would deem that they would have sent a 

letter out to the people of the province of Saskatchewan prior to 

the 15 of March. 
 

And that affidavit sworn before the court, Mr. Speaker, it was 

sworn before the court in Melville, stated that the deputy knew 

that this Minister of Agriculture would put a Bill forward that 

would say that the March 15 letters had been sent out prior to 

that. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, was what this minister asked his deputy 

to do, because he said he would do it.  And what have we got 

on the Bill?  No, Mr. Speaker, they decided to do it a little 

different.  They decided, in their wisdom, that they couldn't 

deem to have sent a letter out because it might interfere with a 

court and yet in the beginning in their preamble, it says, Mr. 

Speaker: 
 

Whereas changes were made by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to (the) gross revenue insurance program 

contracts after March 15, . . . and the time for producers to 

make decisions was extended . . . 
 

Now, they made . . . they made the decision, Mr. Speaker, 

when the court was held in Melville, to say that they were 

going to deem to have sent a letter out.  They even say that they 

have incorrectly informed the farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan, knowing all of that, knowing all of that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

In section 5.4 they say, Mr. Speaker, that anything prior to 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2123 

the first of April is void.  It didn't happen.  The March 15 was 

never a day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, March 15, 1991 was not a day.  In fact it makes 

reference to section 49, section 49 of the contract that 

individuals had with the Government of Saskatchewan and the 

Crop Insurance Corporation.  That, Mr. Speaker, it makes 

March 15 never to have happened. 

 

Now the farmers in Saskatchewan worked on March 15.  Didn't 

the Minister of Agriculture? Was he void at the time?  Where 

was he on March 15, 1991, when the contract he signed was 

there for him to see that the day on March 15 was what he was 

deciding he was going to do. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, he said never happened.  April 1 on 

back, never happened.  It never happened, Mr. Speaker.  It was 

gone.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what the problem is.  That is 

what the seriousness of the nature of this Bill is. 

 

And we have tried to explain it to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan over the years.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

we think it's wrong.  Not only, Mr. Speaker, if you want to 

make a point, you make a point by saying this is what 

happened on such and such a day.  Or you make a point by 

saying, do you remember when this happened?  Then that 

becomes a bench-mark for what you do in the future. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the bench-mark for farmers in the province 

of Saskatchewan, and they all know this, the bench-mark is 

March 15.  Mr. Speaker, March 15 is the day that they said that 

they wanted their contracts to be dealt with, and we will deal 

with the changes through the year.  And then next year, before 

March 15, we'll pick them up again. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they didn't only say this once in this Bill; 

they say it at least three times in this Bill that individuals' rights 

are extinguished.  Individuals' rights are extinguished.  You 

know, Mr. Speaker, in a court of law, how many witnesses do 

you need to an action taken places?  One?  Two?  Or three? 

 

But no, this government says not only what they did wrong in 

the beginning of the Bill; they also take that and -- to put it into 

perspective, Mr. Speaker -- they say it didn't happen.  And then 

to exclude any action at all, either through the safety net Act or 

The Crop Insurance Act, they said we will extinguish the rights 

of individuals to appear in court on that basis. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, and then, Mr. Speaker, they have the 

foresight of all the knowledge in the world.  They say we will 

put into perspective by regulation all of the days as we said that 

they happen.  Now March 15 might be slid ahead or it might be 

moved back.  The regulations will determine when the 

individual items of the contract the farmers signed happened.  

So you can move this all on a sliding scale, Mr. Speaker, on the 

time line from January 1 on. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this government is going to do.  

By regulation, they will be able to determine whether the rate 

was the right rate from '91 on.  They'll be able to determine it 

by regulation.  They will in fact, Mr. Speaker, 

be able to say -- as I have studied the Bill -- they will be able to 

say that individuals have been overpaid even perhaps in the 

1991 GRIP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by regulation they can determine that those are 

the items that they will give.  We'll give you this amount of 

money and that's it and if the Minister of Finance decides that 

he doesn't want to pay any more, even though they have a 

contract, the Minister of Agriculture by his regulations will be 

able to determine what the premium will be or would have 

been.  He will be able to determine what the coverage was and 

the crops that he covered -- all by regulation, Mr. Speaker, and 

it'll go retroactive to January 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of this on a sliding scale from January 1, 1991 

to where we are today will be . . . All of the actions that were 

done and all of the things that were accomplished, all of the 

principles that were set down in the GRIP program, will, by 

this minister, be decided because he knows best.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, is the capacity of the Bill and, Mr. Speaker, he could, 

for example, say that what payment you got in the spring of 

1992 was all you're going to get.  And, Mr. Speaker, that is the 

kind of thing that we have a great deal of concern about. 

 

Who are you going to deal with next in exactly the same 

fashion?  That, Mr. Speaker, all of those reasons, all of those 

reasons, I believe, should initiate this government to give it a 

chance. The people of this government should be giving the 

farmers a chance to present it to the Supreme Court.  And then, 

Mr. Speaker, even the people in government should say, well if 

it is unusual and maybe we've overstepped, they should say, 

should we take it to the Supreme Court ourselves?  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, would be the honourable thing to do.  If you 

really believe that you are within your constitutional right by 

putting this kind of a Bill before this Assembly and before the 

people of Saskatchewan, then turn your courage up and give it 

to the Supreme Court for a reference.  Mr. Speaker, it is 

significant to the people of Saskatchewan that that should be 

provided.  Why don't they turn up their courage and do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our Justice minister and our Premier have been in 

Toronto and Ottawa and at various places talking about 

constitution.  And the constitution has been talked about a 

number of times in the last 15 years.  In 1981-'82, the now 

Premier, who was the attorney general at the time, brought the 

constitution home together with a Bill of Rights that said you 

have equal access before a court at any time for redress, 

without discrimination, without anyone being able to tell you 

you do not have a choice. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am just now brought to mind about an 

individual who had that right, who was a retarded child in 

British Columbia, who was given the right before the court to 

have representation, and that child got it, because it had an 

individual right -- an individual right that was established by 

the constitution; an individual right that was established by the 

Charter of Rights.  And put the two together, Mr. Speaker, that 

constitutes what I say in a reasonable sense that this Bill should 

go to the Supreme Court for a reference.  Mr. Speaker, I 

believe that to be only fair to the producers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 



2124 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, that is a tremendous risk, but it's also a 

responsibility.  I believe that this government has not shown 

any proper stewardship, even in how they presented the Bill.  I 

don't believe they have.  I don't believe they understand the 

depths to which the process of law and the impact of this law 

would have on the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  

And I say to the people of this Assembly, that you've got 

serious, serious problems in relation to this. 

 

I want to go on to talk about one other area tonight yet and that 

deals with what I think GRIP should be.  We've got GRIP '91, 

which I have said right from the very inception, that there were 

changes that were necessary.  People wanted a contract for 

1991 because in the spring of 1991, Mr. Speaker, it was very, 

very dry.  Across the province of Saskatchewan there was 

almost drought all over the province.  Almost no one had snow.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, was what we had from the north at 

Tisdale through to Carlyle, from Maple Creek to Meadow 

Lake.  And that, Mr. Speaker, were the kinds of conditions that 

existed. 

 

People said, if I don't have coverage, then what am I going to 

do?  I don't have any money.  I don't have any chance to put my 

crops in.  And so we said, okay, we will work hard to deliver 

an opportunity.  What do you need in this?  And we had had 

some recommendations brought to us, as representatives of the 

province of Saskatchewan, to deal with it. 

 

And under the framework of discussion from across Canada, 

we said, this is what we can reach from consensus and 

compromise.  And in the three prairie provinces we had 

Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, who had typical weather 

conditions, typical . . . or similar land conditions, similar 

farming conditions.  Those all existed as a part of a 

decision-making process.  And as we went along, that decision 

to do the things that we did became a reality. 

 

And then on January . . . I think it was the 4th or the 5th of 

1991, the decision was made to go ahead.  Now as we went 

into the meetings from January through to the middle of 

February, it became evident to us in Saskatchewan that we 

needed an opportunity to make presentations to the farmers.  

And they had heard about it, and the first one we began with 

was a meeting in Swift Current and we had over 500 people at 

the meeting, Mr. Speaker.  There was a definite interest.  So we 

said, we'll plan about a dozen meetings, see what happens, and 

then, Mr. Speaker, it went on and on and on until we had over 

100.  And all told we probably averaged 40 . . . 400 people at 

every one of them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I spoke at John Deere shows across this 

province.  I think we had nine of them that we were invited to.  

Machinery dealers were asking us for all the kinds of things 

that they could so that people could be provided with the 

information.  And, Mr. Speaker, we gave the people the 

opportunity to do that. 

 

(1930) 

 

There were things that we should have done different. 

There are still things that I think should be changed.  But what 

happened in the process, Mr. Speaker, is that we had an 

election. People were disgruntled, people were disgruntled all 

over Canada.  And what did they say?  I don't like GRIP.  Well 

what did they not like about GRIP, and what did they like 

about GRIP? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point some things out that they 

liked about GRIP.  Number one, they liked individual 

coverage.  They wanted their individual farm protected.  And 

the second thing, Mr. Speaker, they wanted was individual 

crops on their farm. 

 

The two things, Mr. Speaker, that I heard . . . I was in an RM 

(rural municipality) meeting in Maple Creek, and I spoke there.  

And they grow a lot of fall rye there.  That's exactly what they 

asked me for there.  I was in Arcola at a meeting there.  There's 

lot of people who grow canola down there.  They said, we want 

individual coverage for our individual crops.  We want 

individual coverage for ourselves on our own farm. 

 

Because underlying every farmer in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is this pride that he has in himself 

-- the pride that he has in himself that I can do better than my 

neighbour.  And they have that across the province.  They have 

that within their gut feeling, Mr. Speaker.  They say that I can 

do better, and I can even do better next year than I did this 

year.  That's the underlying philosophy of farmers across this 

province. 

 

So what did that mean when you had individual crops and 

individuals having coverage for their own farm?  What does 

that mean? 

 

Well through the process . . . And I won't elaborate on all the 

details of why things were done at this point, but I know that 

there were some concerns.  And as I went around, I heard some 

of them.  And some of them we addressed and some of them 

we couldn't.  Because administratively, Mr. Speaker, we were 

running the same time line as the Minister of Agriculture was 

at this point.  And, Mr. Speaker, we said, we'll go with this, and 

then we'll make changes as we go along so that next year we 

can do it better.  And we set up a committee to do that. 

 

What was also happening at the same time, Mr. Speaker, was 

that Crop Insurance had set up an agent process -- an agent 

process to deal with the various aspects of the crop insurance 

programs that came forward.  And, Mr. Speaker, those agents 

became a valuable asset in allowing the information to be sent 

out to the people of the province of Saskatchewan . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the House 

Leader from the other side says it was a bunch of Tories.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, if you come into my constituency you won't find 

a bunch of Tories.  You'll find that there is a mix equally 

among all three parties, Mr. Speaker.  And I will tell you that 

straight out, straight out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know this for a fact that those people don't 

vote for me.  They didn't in '82, they didn't in '86, and they 

didn't in '91, Mr. Speaker.  But they were, as perceived by the 

people who selected them, to be the best people for the job 

when they applied.  And so that was the way it went forward.  

And I could take, and I won't do it 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2125 

here in this Assembly, but I will show the House Leader some 

day who is Liberal and who's Conservative and who's NDP in 

that group. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, how do you know, Mr. Speaker?  They 

come and tell you what they vote.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's the 

kind of thing that they have a reasonable comfort in telling this 

member at least, Mr. Speaker, what they vote, because they 

know they're not going to get turned down, thumbs down, on 

the things that they get coming to me. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about what I think 

some of the changes should have been.  And I think it would 

enhance the GRIP program even if they were changed to that 

place right now.  Mr. Speaker, the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan had GRIP '91, so I'm going to use that as the 

base because the people compare it to that. 

 

GRIP '91, one of the first things that I think it should be today 

is crop specific. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I listened to arguments from the university; I 

listened to arguments from various people in the economics 

department of the university.  I listened to all of that, and then I 

went to the farmers and I said . . . but they don't agree with 

what the farmers are saying.  And so I said, what do the 

farmers want to have.  And they said it needed to be crop 

specific.  They said it needed to be farm specific.  Mr. Speaker, 

that is exactly what I believe that it should be -- crop specific 

and farm specific.  No area risk, Mr. Speaker, and no basket 

approach to the kinds of things that we have seen in GRIP '92. 

 

The second thing that I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we should 

have in here, and I met specifically with the pulse growers.  

Pulse growers, I believe, should have the option to include or 

exclude some of their crops.  No, I'll give you the reason why, 

Mr. Speaker, because these reasons were told to me over and 

over again.  It needs to be crop specific on the pulse crops.  

Why?  Because most of the time there isn't a capacity to 

establish what the yield potential of that individual crop will be 

on that individual farm. 

 

So they have to be treated a little different, Mr. Speaker, and 

that's why I believe that the pulse growers and their 

representation to me should have that acknowledgement, that 

these crops should have some way to deal with how they get 

identified to get a significant average over a period of time.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is there so it enhances the opportunity 

for diversification. 

 

The third reason, and I've outlined this before, is that basket or 

offsets could be offered with reduced premiums.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, if you have crop specific, which was the way it was in 

'91, it cost X amount of dollars.  If you go in a basket, it could 

be reduced. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the opportunity is evident in certain places 

and a benefit to certain places.  There are certain producers 

who only grow wheat; there are certain producers who would 

only grow flax; there are certain producers who would only 

grow canola.  And, Mr. Speaker, that's the reason why, if you 

give an opportunity for this individual, because he only has one 

crop, to be 

allowed the choice, then I believe it should be done. 

 

Another option I believe that should be in GRIP, Mr. Speaker, 

is a buy-back option for dry land producers, so that people 

would have an opportunity, if they wished, to buy an option 

that would give them a target yield.  So that they could say, I'm 

going to see if I can target all of the conditions that exist this 

year.  I've got a four bushel over average target, and I would 

put that on. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that was done last year in Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker.  It was done with 100 irrigators in the province of 

Saskatchewan as a pilot project.  And, Mr. Speaker, that was 

done because of the insistence of individuals from the Outlook 

area who grow the kinds of crops that are crop specific, but 

also have very intensive production management styles, 

because they add water, they add fertilizer, and then they seed 

different than dry land.  But a dry land buy-up option, which 

they have in Alberta, worked really good. 

 

There were other areas, Mr. Speaker, that needed to be 

addressed.  And we had a lot of discussion this year about 

lentils.  And lentils was touted by the minister as being 

something that should be discussed, but he, I think, was making 

false observations.  If the lentil production in the province of 

Saskatchewan would have been managed the same as it was in 

'91, it wouldn't have caused a problem because the people in 

the pulse crops said that that is what we should do.  And I met 

with the president of the pulse crops, Mr. Tait, from Rosetown.  

And that is what they told us we were supposed to do, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So there are others that would be typical of the same kind of 

observation.  The people in the west side of the province talked 

to me about fall rye.  They said it should be crop specific, and 

give us improved probable yields so that we can increase our 

production.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the fifth item. 

 

Number six, compliance to GRIP guidelines and regulations.  

Now in compliance . . . The federal government told us last 

year that we had to have compliance, very rigid compliance.  

And so to begin with, you had to have a bench-mark.  And 

compliance was a difficult thing to do, so people were asked to 

provide that compliance opportunity.  Some of it had dealt with 

the crop insurance from the year before, some of it dealt with 

initiatives of GRIP in 1991. 

 

But we believe that you need to improve random auditing.  

And the second thing in that compliance is that grain 

measuring only for compliance, a random sampling. Just like 

you do with E&H (education and health) tax across the 

province, you do the same thing with farmers across the 

province. 

 

Another thing that people said we should do, we should have 

more farm checks during the period of time when the crops are 

growing and see whether the crop was doing what it was 

supposed to do.  And I've travelled.  You know, people talk 

about moral hazard.  People have talked about moral hazard, 

and the government has talked about it all the time.  But you go 

across this province last year and this year, you go across this 

province and you watch to see how many people on a 



2126 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

road from here to Saskatoon, from Saskatoon to Swift Current, 

from Saskatoon to Lloydminster, you just watch to see how 

many people are not complying with good farming practices. 

 

And in all of those travels that I have done, Mr. Speaker, I'll bet 

you you wouldn't find a dozen.  Mr. Speaker, people have the 

basic philosophy within themselves to say that, I am going to 

do it for all the right reasons.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what I 

believe. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, people on the other side have said, it's 

because you've got GRIP '92 that the fertilizer sales went up.  

Well I'll be switched.  What happened to the cost of money in 

the province of Saskatchewan?  It went from 15 down . . . or 12 

per cent down to 7 and 8.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a bigger 

reason why there's fertilizer sales in the province of 

Saskatchewan than any other reason.  It has nothing to do with 

GRIP '92. 

 

If fertilizer was the reason and GRIP '91 and GRIP '92, then 

what happened to the lentils, Mr. Minister?  You get up and 

answer that question -- why lentils are increased this year over 

last year.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . When you get to your 

chance to talk about this, you can talk about it. 

 

And then we need to probably take, as the farmers have told us, 

provide some guidelines for better farm practices and show 

them to people and have them more clearly defined. 

 

Another thing that farmers said should be changed . . . and this 

is significant because most of crop insurance assessments on 

land across the province today, and the capacity for it to 

produce, is based on the type of soil that it is.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, people across the province know, people who have 

been in the farming business know, that it isn't only the type of 

soil that makes the crop grow, because we have today an option 

on inputs that is far in excess of the capacity to influence the 

ground today than it was 20 years ago.  And that's why, Mr. 

Speaker, there should be less of a reliance on the soil class to 

give the individuals their long-term average yield. 

 

(1945) 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'll just use an example.  In the Outlook 

area, if you go into the Outlook area and take a look at some of 

the farms that have irrigation on them, they have pure sand 

there, Mr. Speaker.  It is pure sand that they grow alfalfa, 

canola, and all of these crops.  It's a condition that exists to 

most effectively use not only the water but also the nutrients 

that are put into the ground.  So there should be an adjustment 

on that. 

 

Another thing that the farmers said is you should eliminate risk 

areas.  And I'll give you an example, Mr. Speaker.  If you take 

a risk area which is in the very southern part of the province of 

Saskatchewan -- you take a risk area that is somewhere in the 

area of Rockglen, and it goes all the way across, all the way to 

Eastend and then up north to Maple Creek, and I think maybe 

even it goes as far north as Richmound and Fox Valley -- now, 

Mr. Speaker, the risk areas in those kinds of conditions are far 

too big.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the farmers are 

right.  Another thing that, Mr. Speaker, GRIP '92 uses those 

risk areas.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that they are a 

detriment to the kinds of things that farmers can do, because I 

believe that they need to be covered on an individual basis. 

 

And I guess in order to understand this, I'll use the analogy of 

people buying insurance on their homes in Regina.  Should all 

of the people in the city of Regina be required to buy the 

insurance for their homes at a fixed value that would be the 

average of all of the homes in Regina?  And let's say that's 

$100,000.  If that was what was the limit to what you could buy 

insurance on houses in Regina, then the people who would be 

over 100,000 wouldn't be protected, and those who were under 

100,000 would be over-protected.  And if you had a fire in one 

that was under, he would be getting 100,000.  If you had one 

over 100, he would only get 100. 

 

And that's why the risk areas under this kind of insurance and 

1992 GRIP are wrong.  Because they allow averages to dictate 

what the insurance is going to be.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

what's wrong -- individual farms for individual crop 

production. 

 

Another thing that should be done, Mr. Speaker . . . And as we 

go through the process of dealing with this, we are going to see 

that different crops have different time lines that they should be 

seeded in.  Different parts of the province have different time 

lines.  And I believe that we should be dealing with those in a 

very real way. 

 

Another thing that should be done, Mr. Speaker, and the 

farmers told us this, is that good-experience discounts should 

be earned on the same basis as with crop insurance.  So that if 

you don't use the program, your premium goes down or your 

coverage goes up.  And, Mr. Speaker, in order for people to 

understand, if you didn't claim on crop insurance, you could get 

up to 125 per cent coverage on your yield -- or 25 per cent over 

your yield -- in order to give you the benefit that would accrue.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what crop insurance enjoyed, and 

that's what people asked us to provide in a revenue insurance 

program.  If you don't use it, you get an added benefit. 

 

Another thing that the farmers asked us, Mr. Speaker, was that 

producers would like to exit the revenue insurance without a 

three-year notice.  Now that is a tough one.  But farmers across 

the province are hampered, I believe.  Crop insurance, they can 

come in and go out every year.  They can decide what they 

want to do.  But in revenue insurance, farmers have said, 

maybe we should do it the same way. 

 

And then, Mr. Speaker, if they wanted to come back in they 

could have a penalty.  You could go out when you wanted to, 

but you would have a penalty to re-enter, at a staggered rate; 

let's say 50 per cent the first year, 75 per cent the second year 

and 100 per cent the third year.  You would have full premium 

cost, full premium load, but that's the way you would work 

yourself back in. 

 

Now what are some of the administrative-type things that I 

think should be done?  One of the things that one of my 

constituents told me, Mr. Speaker, as I was travelling 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2127 

around in 1990 . . . in the spring of '91, and that, Mr. Speaker, 

was that people should be able to deduct, at the point of 

delivery of their grain, their premium for the GRIP program.  

That, Mr. Speaker, would be an added benefit to the people of 

the province . . . the producers would. 

 

There are a number of reasons why I think it would be a good 

idea.  First of all the farmers would be able to pay it at one 

point; they would know where it would be.  It would be 

deducted as a part of the production.  The third reason would 

be that it would have an attachment.  I believe that the 

collection on the part of the government would be a whole lot 

easier, because a little bit all of the time is not as hard to take, 

Mr. Speaker, as a whole chunk when it comes due in the fall.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I believe that the 

payments should be made all through the year. 

 

There are others, Mr. Speaker, reasons why it should be done.  

Because the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government 

of Canada borrow money on a continual basis to pay for the 

premiums.  And their cost of financing the programs would be 

reduced at the same level, because they wouldn't have to 

borrow or they could forward, hedge the borrowing, whatever 

they decided to do to accomplish what they anticipated in the 

premiums.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I think the 

premiums should be paid at the elevators. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that what should be done to enhance the 

payment process should be that you should have a different 

kind of ratio on the split on the way payments are made 

through the years.  Farmers told us three times was fine, but 

moved more to the beginning of the year rather than to the end. 

 

Another thing the producers said, they should have an option to 

apply their interim payments to any outstanding account 

balance.  So that if you had payments coming and you had a 

lands branch account, you should be able to say, okay I'm 

going to pay my lands branch account with my payment from 

GRIP.  Allow the farmers the flexibility to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of others here that need to be 

addressed.  If people could get an advance on their GRIP like 

they can get a cash advance on their grain when they know that 

there's a default, or there is going to be a payment, and then, 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers could get an advance on that. 

 

I had in here yesterday -- and the reason why this is important 

-- I had in here a member of the native community in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And the natives in this province, 

because of the relationship they have with the federal 

government, cannot borrow money against the land in the 

reservation.  They can't do that because they can't use that as 

collateral. 

 

But what they could do, Mr. Speaker, with GRIP '91 and they 

couldn't do with GRIP '92, is they could not take it to the bank 

and borrow against '92 GRIP.  But they could borrow against 

'91 GRIP.  And, Mr. Speaker, you want to talk to some of the 

native people.  They will be back again, because they're going 

to be coming back in.  They told us that.  They told us that, Mr. 

Speaker, and I believe them. 

And they told us they had voted with the NDP.  And they said, 

we made a big mistake, Mr. Speaker.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

the reason why we should have advances on this and also make 

it bankable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that one of the items that needs to be 

addressed, and from all of the indication that I have heard, is 

that the people in the province like the marketing agents.  They 

like the concept of the marketing agents.  And, Mr. Speaker, as 

I've gone across this province, I've met a lot of them.  And you 

know what they like about it, Mr. Speaker?  The people come 

right to their own yards.  The people drive out.  They're 

interested in their own particular farming operations.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, I think is a very important part of the GRIP 

program, and I think it should be maintained. 

 

Now what are some other options that could be put in here, Mr. 

Speaker?  I believe because we have so many of the farms in 

the province of Saskatchewan where livestock are involved 

directly, Mr. Speaker, directly with livestock and grain, I 

believe that across this province, Mr. Speaker, we need to have 

people be allowed to use their livestock as a part of the total 

revenue from GRIP.  They need to be able to insure their 

livestock or their capacity for net income and gross income and 

its relationship to the program.  They need to include that. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know that as we have talked about it 

earlier in the period of time, Mr. Speaker, that was voided by 

the Minister of Agriculture across the way. All in that period of 

time there was a lot of discussion by the now Minister of 

Finance, Mr. Mazankowski and Mr. McKnight in dealing with 

providing an opportunity for forage crops to be included. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no hail coverage for forage.  There is no 

storm loss coverage for forage.  And today, Mr. Speaker, 

people who irrigate land in the province of Saskatchewan for 

forage are not covered and cannot buy coverage. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it would be, I believe, an important part 

of developing a new strategy -- better than tripartite 

stabilization even, Mr. Speaker -- that we would be involved in 

including all of the farm income in a gross revenue insurance 

plan.  And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that we would have a 

significant amount of people who would be interested in that. 

 

The second thing that I would like to look at, because it has 

been an option on the part of the people of Saskatchewan in 

farms, is that spot-loss hail be made available through the 

GRIP administration.  People from across the province have 

said that.  And as a matter of fact, I would say to the minister 

that it could be made available through private people if some 

imagination was used. And that's what I would believe that was 

a necessary kind of an opportunity.  Mr. Speaker, that would 

provide a method so that the people could have that spot loss 

covered in a way that would help them out. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have made this information available, I 

want to identify the people who helped make this available 

from across the province of Saskatchewan.  And those were the 

agents themselves when they asked 



2128 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

farmers, what do you think?  What do you think? 

 

Mr. Speaker, they said that these are the things that farmers 

brought forward.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out a 

number of things, what they are.  They are, Mr. Speaker, first 

of all, sensible; they're reasonable; they would have been the 

kinds of changes, I believe, that would have made a '91 GRIP 

almost perfect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the things that they outlined in their letter 

to us, I believe is very significant.  And I want to point out a 

number of things too, Mr. Speaker.  This letter and this 

information was made available to the Minister of Agriculture 

himself.  This information was detailed in a letter that they 

sent.  And one of the statements that they made, I believe, Mr. 

Minister, are very significant.  One of the things that they said 

is this: many are concerned that too many changes will flaw a 

program well understood and a program that has been working 

for them. 

 

Now I didn't write that. 

 

(2000) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's obvious.  It's good English. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Churchill 

Downs didn't write that either, because it would have been 

worse English. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan who deliver the program had that to say about 

what the '91 GRIP was.  Why?  Because the farmers from 

across the province told them that.  And, Mr. Speaker, I think, 

as a part of this, that we need to seriously evaluate how we can, 

as a farm province, initiate a kind of a program that has 

revenue insurance that will provide, not a liability to the 

province of Saskatchewan, but an asset.  And so, Mr. Speaker, 

when all of this comes down to the very last straws and when 

we vote on this Bill as I've outlined it here today, I will 

categorically, Mr. Speaker, never ever vote for this Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for me and the province of Saskatchewan, I 

believe the farmers will never vote for this Bill either.  As a 

matter of fact, I had a fellow from Climax come into my office 

who told me, he said, you think these guys think that I will ever 

forget what they have done to us?  They think that I'll forget in 

four years.  But he said, I will never forget what they have done 

to us.  And that, Mr. Speaker, are the kinds of things that I have 

heard from all over this province, from people who have called 

me and said, it's the wrong thing to do, GRIP '92.  And if you 

go and deal with it in the context of what Hartley Furtan 

suggested, he said two things that stick out in my mind that will 

always be there.  If you want to look up moral hazard, moral 

hazard will always continue to exist whenever taxpayers' 

dollars are involved in any kind of a program.  The second item 

that he said was, if you have drought, you have a problem with 

'92 GRIP.  That, Mr. Speaker, is a fact. 
 

And what do we have across the province of Saskatchewan?  

We have serious drought problems.  Mr. Speaker, the second 

thing that we have a serious problem with is frost.  Where we 

don't have drought, we have frost, and that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

fact in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  As a matter of fact, in July we have had frost in 

my constituency this year, and not in the fridge either.  Mr. 

Speaker, that's the kind of province we have, and that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the kind of things that we need to talk about in this 

province, and we should. 

 

My recommendation to the Minister of Agriculture is this.  Let 

it go for a reference to the Supreme Court.  Turn back the 

opportunity to let the farmers have '91 GRIP.  You're almost 

there already.  You've got an offer from the federal 

government.  Take that offer and give yourself time to do the 

program right, Mr. Speaker, do the program right.  Go back to 

'91 GRIP and do the program right so that all the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan can say, Mr. Minister, you listened. 

 

But have you listened, Mr. Minister?  To who?  Were you in 

Shaunavon the day the 1,200 people met and 400 of them 

walked out when the minister responsible for Crop Insurance 

decided to talk about whose responsibility it was, and he 

blamed the federal government?  There were people who stood 

up there and said, you're wrong, Mr. Minister.  They yelled at 

him.  They hollered at him: you're wrong, Mr. Minister; just 

give us '91.  You're the one that's taking it away.  And when he 

just blundered on, they turned around and walked out -- 400 of 

them at least just turned around and walked out.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, was not initiated by me.  Mr. Minister, in fact that 

was initiated by some very strong supporters of the member . . . 

or may be used to be supporters of the member from the 

constituency of Shaunavon.  And that, Mr. Minister, is a fact. 

 

So as I make my presentation as a plea not from the opposition 

but as a producer in the province of Saskatchewan, think about 

what you're doing in a number of areas, Mr. Minister. 

 

Number one, you're throttling the court.  You're saying you're 

higher than the court.  You're saying that you have more power 

than the court.  You're saying that you know better, and that 

you will tell the farmers what they're going to do and what 

they're not going to do.  And, Mr. Speaker, that isn't good 

enough for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  The 

honourable thing for you to do, sir, would be to say, provide an 

opportunity for them to decide on their own. 

 

Give them an opportunity.  Let them decide which is better.  

And the consequences, Mr. Speaker, are significant.  They are 

significant in the economic benefit to the province of 

Saskatchewan because you, sir, are leaving a considerable 

amount of money from the Government of Canada on the table.  

And that, Mr. Minister, is significant and I think you should be 

held accountable for what you're leaving on the table with the 

federal government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are my remarks for today and, Mr. Speaker, 

I'm going to be voting against this Bill when it comes up the 

next time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too want to join my 

colleague from the Morse constituency in speaking 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2129 

against this Bill and I'll do so on several fronts.  But I believe 

among the most relevant arguments why this Bill, as my 

colleague said, should be referred to the Supreme Court, is the 

fact that the legal community, including the Premier, including 

legal counsel across Saskatchewan -- and increasingly now 

across Canada, as we see people look at this Bill -- believe that 

it's unconstitutional. 

 

We believe, as many people here now know, that this 

retroactive piece of legislation will not only hurt farmers and 

not only change their economic conditions, but it deprives them 

of the right before the law and the right before the courts, and it 

violates their Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And I'm going to start my arguments tonight, Mr. Speaker -- 

and I will move an amendment to the Bill -- but I'm going to 

start by looking at the latest evidence in the media from the 

legal community who are saying that this Bill could be 

unconstitutional.  And imagine, here we are dealing with an 

NDP administration supposedly wanting to help farmers, and 

they're going to end up in the Supreme Court of Canada 

breaking the law, breaking the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

as they attack farmers -- this rural revenge. 

 

Farmers didn't vote for them in '82 and didn't vote for them in 

'86, and so finally they led them down the garden path and said, 

we'll give you the cost of production and really help you with 

your GRIP.  And when they got elected, they not only wrecked 

the GRIP, but they've broken precedent in this Legislative 

Assembly.  They have now broken the law, they are covering 

up, they're trying to legislate change in history, and now they're 

going to end up before the Supreme Court.  And they've 

completely violated individual rights before the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Today in the paper, in Saskatoon, we had the legal community 

coming forward -- and legal community who at least have been 

known as NDP supporters -- have said, the Bill maybe should 

be referred to the Supreme Court.  Well I don't know where the 

minister got his legal advice or what the Attorney General is 

doing, but when you've got NDP lawyers coming out and 

saying, this is likely unconstitutional, it should go to the 

Supreme Court, then we've got a serious problem at hand.  And 

the farmers deserve their day in court, as does everybody else. 

 

The Saskatoon . . . I'm going to quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 A Saskatoon lawyer believes the bill amending the Gross 

Revenue Insurance Plan is on very shaky constitutional 

ground and thinks it will be challenged in court. 

 

 Audrey Brent, who specializes in farm law, said Thursday 

she advised clients unhappy about GRIP changes to avoid 

suing over breach of contract, but to wait and see the 

legislation and decide whether there were grounds to 

challenge it. 

 

"Now we know the pill that has to be swallowed" . . . says this 

NDP lawyer. 

"Now we know the pill that has to be swallowed and it will 

be up to each individual to decide what to do," she said. 

 

 The 16-page bill does several things. 

 

 In the preamble, the government argues the details of the 

original GRIP evolved through the spring of 1991 and the 

former government didn't meet deadlines when introducing 

it. 

 

 The text of the bill not only provides for the coverage 

changes made this year, it also gives great flexibility to the 

government to change GRIP in the future.  Cabinet will be 

able to make and change terms and conditions of the revenue 

insurance contracts, state which crops will be covered and 

how premiums and payouts will be calculated without a 

requirement to notify the insured of the changes. 

 

So once the Bill is passed, not only is it retroactive, but the 

government can then make all kinds of changes retroactively 

without even notifying the farmers, says this NDP lawyer. 

 

 The notification issue is a key element in the opposition to 

the 1992 GRIP changes. 

 

And she goes on to say: 

 

 This week's legislation eliminates the March 15 notification 

requirement and any future notification provisions. 

 

Well, well, well.  The NDP lawyer points out that the GRIP 

Bill removes past notification obligations and any future 

notification obligations.  So no matter when a farmer signs up, 

even into the future, it can be retroactively changed because 

there are no requirements to give notice. 

 

What kind of a Bill, what kind of confidence could you 

generate in Crop Insurance, a multi-billion dollar agency, when 

you don't even have to give notice of changes?  You can do 

them retroactively.  You can do it in cabinet.  You can do it by 

regulation.  Who would trust, who would trust the NDP 

administration with that kind of power given what they've done 

-- given the flip-flops on taxes, given the flip-flops on health 

care we heard today, ripping up rural roads, closing hospitals, 

nursing homes, and now changing tens of thousands of 

contracts.  And this Bill lets them do that retroactively for ever. 

 

 This week's legislation eliminates the March 15 notification 

requirement and any future notification provision. 

 

 The bill would also make it impossible (now listen to this -- 

the Bill will also make it impossible) for anyone to sue the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corp. or the government over 

the changes cabinet makes to GRIP. 

 

Not only are you going to be above the law retroactively, but in 

all future changes that you can surprise people with, you will 

be above the law.  And Crop Insurance or 



2130 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

cabinet cannot be sued in court.  What awful, terrible, 

mean-spirited, ugly legislation.  For what?  For farmers, you're 

doing this for farmers?  Who's this for, Mr. Minister?  Who's it 

for? 

 

Where are the crowds and herds of people are saying, I want 

the government above the law.  I want you to have these kinds 

of powers.  You can change all of this and I can't sue you, but 

that's good because you're New Democrats and you're always 

fair.  There's never any patronage.  You're always right on the 

mark. 

 

Do you think the public believes that?  And the NDP members 

left in the House here are saying, well that's what they think, 

yes.  Well imagine the dream world they must be living in 

when your own NDP lawyers are saying this is unconstitutional 

and violates the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And they 

say, oh that's okay; we're NDP.  What an attitude.  What an 

attitude.  And the member from Swift Current says, yes and 

we're nice guys, good guys.  And he says, you bet -- dream 

world, the whole bunch of them. 

 

And the NDP admit.  They say, well we messed up; we messed 

up.  The minister says, well we'll fix it somehow; it's okay.  

And they use rougher language than that when they're out in 

the halls.  And in the media they say, well we really made a 

serious mistake, but we'll ram it through.  We'll get over this.  

We'll get through this.  You know who says it.  Cabinet says it.  

You talk to them and say, oh well we don't . . . we'll let the 

Minister of Agriculture hang out to dry. 

 

(2015) 

 

The article goes on to say: 

 

 In court actions already proceeding against the government 

the Bill states that "a court shall not consider any principle of 

law or inequity that would require adequate, reasonable or 

any notice with respect to any amendments or change to the 

contract." 

 

And this is where the lawyer says, and I quote: 

 

 "I think this is the most disturbing aspect," said Brent. 

 

Audrey Brent, a known NDP supporter and lawyer in farm law, 

said this is the most disturbing because it is retroactive, and 

they are above the law for ever. 

 

And then she goes on to say retroactive legislation is not 

something new.  It's not necessarily unusual.  She said the 

Conservative opposition has had it.  And she referred to the 

highly controversial Bill 16. 

 

 There is precedent for the government making changes . . . 

but here what you have is clear acknowledgement of 

breaches of contract and then, for their (the government's) 

own purpose, legislating them away. 

 

See she even makes these changes, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  She 

says: 

There is precedent for government making changes . . . but 

here what you have is a clear acknowledgment of breaches 

of contract . . . 

 

In other words, the government has acknowledged it broke the 

law -- a breach of contract, and then, for their own selfish 

purposes, legislate these responsibilities away.  Now no 

wonder lawyers are upset and no wonder people are saying this 

should go to the Supreme Court.  You admit you've broken the 

law.  It's a breach of contract.  And then to cover your tracks, 

you bring in this legislation so NDP lawyers are on the front 

page of the paper in Saskatoon saying, no you can't do this. 

 

The rule of law, rights and freedoms, legislative rights, 

democratic rights are more important than your political 

agenda or more important than one-half of 1 per cent of the 

budget that this was going to cost you. 

 

Brent says, the legislation can be attacked in two ways, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  This ugly piece of legislation, according to 

NDP lawyers, can be attacked in two ways. 

 

 (She) would argue that the GRIP is a tripartite program 

involving the farmer, province, and federal government.  This 

bill affects the federal government and because provinces 

can't make legislation binding on Ottawa, the bill is 

unconstitutional, she said. 

 

 Second, she would argue the bill contravenes the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

Well how about that?  Here is the Minister of Agriculture for 

the NDP, who is being chastised by an NDP lawyer saying the 

Bill is unconstitutional and should go to the Supreme Court.  

Second, she would argue the Bill contravenes the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And this is attempted to be passed in this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when lawyers are saying 

they've never seen as ugly, retroactive, unconstitutional lack of 

respect in terms of a piece of legislation in their life. 

 

Well it seems, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Premier and the NDP cabinet ministers 

want to be above the law.  And they deny people their right to 

be in court and have their day before the courts -- no rights.  So 

who could be next?  You can do this to farmers.  In the 

legislation we've seen before the House, you can walk into 

anybody's house now, and a cabinet minister has the power, if 

there's a bar of soap at a person's house and you think it might 

be environmentally a problem, in you go.  And there's no 

recourse before the courts. 

 

Will you break union contracts like this?  Retroactively.  

Somebody signs a contract, they go by the dates of the 

contracts, they've been operating without a contract, you say 

well, we'll unilaterally change this, the contract won't be valid.  

Can you image the uproar, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Can you 

imagine it in your riding if you retroactively changed union 

contracts like this?  Would you support that?  Would members 

of this Legislative Assembly 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2131 

support retroactively breaking union contracts? 

 

What about teachers?  Teachers sign contracts.  Nurses sign 

contracts.  And we have federal money involved in health care, 

in transfer payments, big time money.  And you say, well they 

cut us back, the feds cut us back in health care transfers or 

something else, therefore we're retroactively breaking the 

nurses' contract.  That's what you're doing here.  How 

unconscionable.  How undemocratic.  How illegal.  Breach the 

contract because the feds say that they're going to change the 

money supply, and you're saying well, I'm going to 

retroactively change the legislation so that they have no more 

contract; it's void. 

 

Now can you imagine campaigning on that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  Can you imagine that?  Nobody would dare do that.  

But you've done it here in this Bill for farmers, and it means 

you have the moral mind-set then of course, or the immoral 

mind-set, to do it to anybody.  You could apply this same logic 

because the feds are involved in money and health, money and 

education, money and agriculture.  You could change teachers' 

contracts retroactively, health care contracts retroactively, 

telecommunication contracts.  SaskTel was competing 

interprovincially and internationally, you'd say well, SaskTel 

employees, you have a contract, but because this is changed, 

we're going to retroactively rewrite your contract or it's void.  

How absurd. 

 

And that's the kind of legislation you have here.  And that's 

what people know you can do.  You've done it with civil 

servants already, and put yourself above the law.  You fired 

them.  You've asked people like Judy Bellay, for Heaven's 

sakes, who used to work for the deputy premier, Pat Smith, pay 

last year's salary and don't even work.  I mean, we're above the 

law.  What a way to treat a person.  Ugly pieces of legislation.  

And you passed Bills in here last fall to protect you so people 

couldn't sue you. 

 

This GRIP Bill has got NDPers, Liberals, Tories, anybody else 

with any kind of decency, really upset.  It's the worst piece of 

legislation in Saskatchewan's history.  And on top of that -- 

given all the history of the medicare debate, the potash debates, 

and other kinds of controversial debates in here, and 

privatization, nationalization -- we've never had closure, on 

closure, on closure, and muzzled the members, but only the 

new-found Democrats do that. 

 

Bring it right into here and change the rules, change the law, 

retroactive, all of those things, because you're above the law.  

Above the law.  Forget the morality of it.  Forget the 

constitutionality of it, the parliamentary democracy associated 

with it.  You're above the law.  And I'm going to get into what 

your reasons are.  And I can quote you some of your 

hypocritical attitudes when you were in opposition. 

 

Well I point this out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that today in the 

newspapers we've got well educated, trained, recognized NDP 

lawyers, who are saying this is a terrible Bill for two reasons: 

one, it's unconstitutional and two, it violates the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms in the country of Canada.  And it's done 

by NDPers who supposedly want to help you. 

And it's the same legislation they could use to break contracts 

and yes, as my colleague pointed out, to break treaties.  And 

the native community and the Indian community have brought 

that to our attention.  Because if you can break any kinds of 

laws like this, you can therefore retroactively break treaties.  

And this kind of Draconian, unilateral action has them upset.  

And you'll certainly be hearing more about it.  And native 

leaders and native people who've come in to see us said, we 

voted NDP but we had no idea these people would be like this.  

And they're ashamed of it.  And they're telling their members.  

Ashamed of it.  It's awful, ugly piece of legislation.  For what?  

For what?  What's the reason behind this?  To protect the 

Minister of Agriculture's political hide?  Is that what it's all 

about? 

 

It certainly can't be about $23 million.  What is it?  It tells you 

what they're really like.  It tells you what they're all about.  The 

rule changes here, the unilateral changes in the Assembly here, 

going into Estimates with closure where the minister can't get 

on his feet.  I mean, we have never seen this kind of stuff 

before. 

 

Well I agree with my colleagues that this should be a reference 

to the Supreme Court right now.  Screw up your courage and 

do it.  Show them that you're not afraid, that you've got some 

backbone.  You've got some principle.  And if you're right 

before the Supreme Court, fair enough.  But you are not above 

the law.  In this Legislative Assembly, even though you've 

muzzled our right to speak on many, many occasions, people 

are now recognizing that you are not above the law. 

 

And we'll have this Bill all over the province in every hand . . . 

and anybody whoever concerned about their rights and 

freedoms constitutionally in the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms. 

 

This is another article.  And the headline is that the NDP 

Premier is dancing around the GRIP issue.  And it goes on to 

say: 

 

 Back in the legislature Thursday after a round on 

constitutional talks . . . (the Premier) was dancing around the 

issue of whether the . . . GRIP farm aid Bill would rob 

farmers of their constitutional rights . . . 

 

 The law, if passed, would extinguish the right of farmers to 

sue the government over failing to give proper notice over 

changes to the program . . . 

 

 Outside the Assembly (outside the Assembly) Romanow 

deflected reporters' questions about whether the rights of 

farmers to sue the government were being legislated away 

saying he didn't want to express a legal opinion. 

 

Here's a former attorney general, a lawyer, who doesn't want to 

express a legal opinion. And he goes on to say, which is very 

interesting: 

 

 "The courts will have to decide that," he said. 

 

Well first of all, the farmers can't go to court because you've 

made it above the law.  And secondly if he really 



2132 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

believes the courts should decide, then have a reference to the 

Supreme Court. 

 

You can't have it both ways.  He can't run out and say, the 

courts will have to decide when you know that the courts can't 

deal with it because you won't let farmers go to court and sue 

you because it's right in the Bill.  That's how cowardly it is.  

You won't let the farmers go to court. 

 

And your leader stands up and says, the courts will decide.  

Who does he think he's fooling?  The only other court is the 

Supreme Court.  So if you've got the courage, then take it to the 

Supreme Court.  Then we'll all know.  Get a reference because 

it's going to end up there anyway.  People are so upset with this 

ridiculous piece of legislation and the attitude and the reasons 

for it.  There are no reasons for it.  What's the reason for this?  

To help what farmer?  To help what principle?  Well if the 

NDP Premier said this should be settled in the courts, there's 

only one court left, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is the Supreme 

Court and he talks on it. 

 

 . . . the issue of retroactively changing contracts, Romanow 

said the 'larger public interest' justified what was being done 

to the GRIP program. 

 

The larger public interest -- what is that?  What is the larger 

public interest that puts you above the law?  What is it? 

 

 On the issue of retroactively changing contracts, Romanow 

said the 'larger public interest' justified what was being done 

to the GRIP program. 

 

What is this larger public interest?  Whose public interest?  

Whose public interest?  Is it dollars are more important than the 

law; dollars are more important than principle; dollars are more 

important than this Legislative Assembly; dollars are more 

important than the constitution; dollars are more important than 

the Charter of Rights; dollars are more important than people, 

from so-called socialists with a heart.  This larger public 

interest -- whose interest is it to bring in this Bill? 

 

My goodness, what a statement.  He says it'll be settled in the 

courts and he removes the courts from the farmer, then he says 

it's in the larger public interest.  Whose interest?  For who is 

this going to help?  What?  Who?  What constituency benefits 

from this?  What legacy to Saskatchewan benefits from this -- 

this new-found democratic principle that you're above the law 

and retroactively can change it and for ever retroactively 

change it, for ever, without notice? 

 

Well these stories yesterday and today tell you what it's about.  

There's no plan; there's no idea of helping; there's no idea of 

conscience; there's no idea of decency.  Nobody would vote for 

this; nobody'd campaign on this. 

 

I raised this in question period.  And I'm going to go back to it 

again.  This is June 23, '92. 

 

(2030) 

 

This is the NDP Premier and it's about GRIP and he says, and I 

quote.  This is a little bit of conscience coming out, 

okay.  I quote: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that (says the NDP 

Premier).  I mean, one has certain rights (he says). 

 

One has certain rights.  What did the lawyer say today in the 

paper?  You have rights.  Decent men and women in 

democracy have rights before the law and a Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  And the NDP Premier let it slip here on June 

23.  He says: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

Well how would you like to hear that in a court of law, when 

the Premier that's introduced this retroactive legislation that is 

going to be challenged constitutionally admits that he's worried 

about the rights and he's worried about contracts.  Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think that says it all.  Out here in the alley, 

out here behind the rail, he says it'll have to be settled in the 

courts; I'm not going to give you a legal opinion.  And then he 

takes your right away to sue, and then he goes on to say: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

So we have to wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is this bigger 

public issue, that he'd run the risk of his political career, his 

political history, that he would run the risk of hurting people's 

rights, denying rights, denying access to the Supreme Court, 

flying in the face of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms as one 

of the attorney generals that was involved in the Canadian Bill 

of Rights, and he's worried about . . . 

 

Why would he do this?  This has got to be -- you think -- 

maybe the dumbest thing that you could do politically.  It hurts 

everybody.  It hurts the whole party.  It hurts your caucus.  I 

mean, it's obviously the minister is into it right up to here.  And 

you could say, well let him go; he's done.  But why are you all 

sort of riding with it?  You know that it's not right.  You can let 

him go, but the problem is more of you are going to go with 

him, because if you vote for this, you're just like he is.  He 

made a mistake, and he says, we'll get by it somehow.  But 

your caucus rode it with him.  He got on that bronc and it piled 

him into the rhubarb, and you were right there in the saddle 

with him, and you're going to go down in the dust with him 

because the Premier's admitted it isn't right. 

 

And NDP lawyers admitted it isn't right.  Your caucus admits it 

to us and to the public; it wasn't right.  It's a big mistake.  Your 

cabinet ministers admit you really messed up on this one.  And 

yet you still do it.  You're up to here in political sin, and you're 

still revelling in it.  Money is more important to the NDP than 

rights -- legal rights, democratic rights, or parliamentary rights.  

That's what we're into right here.  Twenty-three million dollars 

and it's above the law because that's what it cost you.  You 

don't care.  The bigger public issue . . . If you don't think it's 

money, then you tell me what the bigger public issue is.  What 

is it?  What is it? 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2133 

The NDP Premier says: 

 

 I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean, one has 

certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walkout is. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the member for 

Last Mountain-Touchwood to have the courtesy of listening to 

the member as opposed to interrupting the member, and to not 

interrupt the proceedings again. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Obviously I'm getting the attention of the opposition who are 

ashamed of this piece of legislation.  And they should be.  They 

should be absolutely ashamed.  There's no defence of this -- 

none whatsoever.  I don't know who it helps. 

 

Last fall on a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) 

program on several items -- this is October 9, 1991 -- the NDP 

leader was a guest.  And he's talking about GRIP and NISA 

(net income stabilization account) and he says, well the 

contract calls, for example, in GRIP and NISA, the agreement 

calls for a one-year review of how it's working.  This is the 

NDP leader, then leader of the opposition, and he says, the 

GRIP Bill calls for a one-year review of how it's working. 

 

Then he goes on to say this: that is written right into the 

contract.  October, he says, in that GRIP and NISA contract 

there's a one-year review.  And I quote: that is written right into 

the contract.  I am presuming that the authors of that program 

contemplated that by after one year's operation that we will 

have a better idea of whether or not it's working. 

 

He admitted that there's a one-year provision in the contract, 

and he said contract like maybe you should live up to the 

expectations and the letter of the law on a contract.  Here's a 

lawyer talking about a contract and says, we can review it after 

a year; that's built right in.  And he brings in legislation that not 

only doesn't give you a year, it doesn't give you six months, it 

doesn't give you 10 seconds.  It gives you a void and it takes it 

right back to January '91.  You didn't exist in '91. 

 

And he talked holier-than-thou about, well it's right in here, 

that is written right into the contract.  What malarky.  And 

you're going to vote for this and you're going to defend this.  

Where?  I wonder, I wonder. 

 

I'll tell you, everybody's going to get a copy of this Bill and all 

your comments about how you have some higher, higher 

calling that puts you above the constitution and the Charter of 

Rights and the Bill. 

 

And the Bill, and ironically, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the Bill 

in the third . . . whereas in the Bill, they go right on to say . . . 

and it's ironic because they just come right out and say, well 

they messed up, and we'll just retroactively rewrite it.  They 

say: 

 

 WHEREAS changes were made by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to gross revenue insurance program contracts 

after March 15, 1991 . . . 

Whereas the changes were made . . . which means they broke 

the law and they acknowledge it.  Then they go on to say, 

section 5.4: 

 

 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or the 

regulations, section 49 of every revenue insurance contract 

deemed to have been entered into pursuant to subsection 

5.1(1), being the provision stating that any changes in the 

contract shall be mailed to the insured not later than March 

15 of the year for which the changes are to be in effect and 

that those changes are deemed to be part of the contract on 

and after April 1 of that year, is void and of no effect and is 

deemed to have always been void and of no effect. 

 

Imagine, you are deemed to have always been void in 1991.  

What's void?  It's empty, hollow, of no substance.  That 

describes not only the minister but the cabinet and the caucus 

that would present this before the people of Saskatchewan 

saying, well this probably is against the constitution; it's 

probably against the Charter of Rights; it really upsets a lot of 

farmers.  And we could probably do it with other people, but 

we'll do it anyway because we have a higher calling. 

 

Well what is it?  What is it that drives you to do this? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Money. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And if it's only money, what are you NDPers 

for?  I thought you believed in rights and conscience and the 

poor and the farmers and the down-trodden.  And the Minister 

of Health advised me today she's getting 13.6 million out of 

people who are sick just with eye problems and with back 

problems -- today. 

 

And now you're retroactively changing the law so you can get a 

whole bunch more money out of farmers.  Doesn't matter that 

they're going broke.  You campaigned in the middle of a crisis, 

a rural crisis.  Cost of production for the farmers, says the NDP 

leader, lower premiums.  And that's in here too, lower 

premiums.  And you got none of it.  You got higher premiums; 

you got less coverage.  No cost of production.  Less money 

from the feds.  You've broken all kinds of contracts.  Used to 

be able to write off your sales tax on your trucks or your farm 

machinery or anything else, but you wrecked that too.  And 

then you bring in this legislation which is far beyond 

agriculture -- way beyond agriculture.  It goes at the heart and 

soul of democracy and the rule of law. 

 

And we have more and more and more people going to 

recognize this is ugly legislation that belongs in some other 

century, in some other country -- not here in Canada in 1992. 

 

I want to give you some idea of what people think of this.  

And, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, you wrote farmers on July 21 

telling them what a good idea this GRIP was.  I've had lots of 

letters from NDPers who said, I didn't think he was going to do 

this; I can't believe it. 



2134 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

But there's a couple of problems in here, and I've raised it in 

question period, Mr. Minister, and I'm going to raise it again.  

You wrote the farmer, after we've had it confirmed in the 

budget, that your Agriculture and Food budget is reduced from 

$331 million down to 265 -- 40, $50 million reduction.  Crop 

Insurance is down; roads are down; rural hospitals are down.  

You're spending less in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I'm going to tell you something.  And the minister says that the 

interest is up.  Interest rates are down, thank you very much.  

Interest rates are down.  Interest rates are down . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the member from Swift Current hollers, 

760 million.  Well if you think that was serious, why did you 

promise to cut taxes, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . 

. . Now he says that he didn't know.  Well the Leader of the 

Opposition knew.  Everybody knew.  They said in here that it 

was 14 billion, and that's what it is.  And then he promised tax 

cuts.  What about . . . (inaudible) . . . It's still the accumulated is 

there and he talked about it.  And then he says, I'll cut taxes.  

Boy isn't that something.  Now they chirp, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, now they chirp.  They have cut the agricultural budget 

by . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  This is the second time 

that I've had to call members to order, and I ask them -- order -- 

I ask them to observe decorum and not interrupt the speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I want to go 

back to the budget because we talked about it with the Minister 

of Finance and I want to remind the Minister of Agriculture.  

He's cut the agricultural budget from 331 to 265 million -- 40 

or $50 million cut.  He has cut crop insurance.  He's cut rural 

health care.  He's cut the Highways budget.  He's cut 

agriculture in terms of FeedGAP (feed grain assistance 

program) and other things.  And then he writes to farmers on 

July 21 and he says this: 

 

 The province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, has 

taken on a dramatically increased role in providing income 

support to farmers. 

 

Where is that, Mr. Minister?  You've cut every single 

department.  And you went out and didn't tell them the truth.  

Your letter says: 

 

 . . . in spite of its limited financial capacity, (the province) 

has taken on a dramatically increased role in providing 

income support to farmers. 

 

Try that to the hog producers.  Try that on the beef producers.  

Try that on wheat and canola growers.  That's a bold-faced 

falsehood.  You didn't tell the truth.  You didn't tell the truth.  

You cut the budget by tens of millions of dollars in all of 

agriculture and you write the farmers a letter.  Why don't you 

send them a copy of the budget as you're ripping up the roads 

and as you're cancelling their pension and as you're wrecking 

the GRIP and as you get rid of all that? 

 

That's the first thing.  You know, that's what makes these mad.  

And then here's a letter.  You sent this letter to a Mr. 

Hookenson at Kisbey.  Some Hookensons are known to 

be fairly good NDP supporters.  Well they're not any more. 

 

And he gets this letter and he's just irate, he's just irate.  He 

says, where did this guy come from?  And I'm going to read.  

And he sent this to the Leader-Post.  I mean, this isn't 

confidential.  He sent it to the Leader-Post and to the Leader of 

the Opposition and the NDP leader. 

 

(2045) 

 

He says:  please find enclosed copies of the correspondence 

taken to all the farmers.  That's where you didn't tell the truth.  

You tried to tell the farmers you were spending more money 

for income support, but you're spending less.  I don't know how 

you could . . . Where do you get the conscience to do this?  

Where do you get the conscience to do this? 

 

What is he going back to 1988.  They're void, right?  

Remember the past?  You've wiped that out.  It doesn't count.  

You can't be that hypocritical and jump back into the past and 

make it relevant, and then when it isn't, bring in legislation to 

say, oh no, that's void.  What a joke. 

 

First, let me point out . . . and this is Mr. Hookenson writing 

you. 

 

 First let me point out that on the meeting with you the day of 

the Farm Rally at the Legislature. We the concerned farmers 

pointed out that by changing GRIP without due consultation 

you were in breach of contract and  therefore you would 

bring about a law suit from farmers against the Province. 

 

 Secondly, (Mr. Hookenson says this) we pointed out that by 

changing GRIP in this way, you would be subjecting farmers 

to the full brunt of any natural disaster, with very limited 

protection compared to the old program. 

 

This is what they told you. 

 

 We pointed out that by doing this you have placed the farmer 

in the firing line between Ottawa and the province. (And you 

were warned.) It is bad enough that we have been caught in 

the middle between the U.S.A. and the E.E.C. but now we're 

also caught between two Warring Political Factions!!!  The 

Provincial N.D.P. and the Federal Conservatives.  On my 

farm alone (Mr. Hookenson says) the changes to GRIP 

amount to a possible loss of over $71,000.00 from GRIP 91 

to GRIP 92 based on the same seeded acreage (of) . . . of 

Durum and Hard Red Spring wheat. 

 

Then he goes on to say, Mr. Minister: 

 

 You dismissed our plea and warning and therefore have 

placed thousands of farmers in a disastrous position due to 

drought and potential frost. 

 

He's recognized it immediately.  Not only your letter was 

phoney, but he says, if you have a crop failure because of 

drought or frost, he can be out $71,000 in his farm alone. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2135 

When you developed a program that would pay a farmer who 

grew 50 bushels per acre of canola, a full acreage payment 

under GRIP, what in the world were you thinking of?  You 

weren't sensitive to the things that the member from Morse 

brought forward.  You don't know what . . . have any concept 

of what the moral hazard means, when you bring this kind of 

problem in, you have a great crop, 50 bushel canola, and you 

get a payment.  And if you get burned out, dried out or froze 

out, you just get a little bit of coverage. 

 

And he goes on.  This is the classic line: 

 

 Farmers need protection against bad times and not against 

good times!! 

 

And you're suing them to make sure that they get it bad all the 

time.  This is the agricultural wellness model -- the new ag 

wellness model.  And it's just as much of a farce as the health 

wellness model.  Charge people.  Charge them if they're sick.  

Charge them if they're in a drought.  Charge them if they've got 

problems.  Charge them if they've got low-price wheat. 

 

 In closing let me say this, I feel greatly for the farmers with 

no crop caught in the middle between the Province and 

Ottawa.  The people of this province deserve to know that 

you have given every farmer in this Province a horrendous 

cut in income and that because of this every city, town, 

village and business will suffer the consequences. 

 

 For the people that designed this New GRIP and signed it I 

have nothing but CONTEMPT, (says Mr. Hookenson) every 

farmer and business person in this Province should write and 

let you and the GRIP Committee know exactly what they feel 

about it in no uncertain terms. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you have got lawyers saying that it's all wet 

and it's wrong.  You've got farmers saying the same.  You've 

got the native community saying it's not right.  It's dangerous 

precedent legislation.  You've got union people who have 

contracts who say this is very, very scary stuff.  You've got 

public employees who you've fired and then went above the 

law.  You have taken this Legislative Assembly, you have 

changed the rules.  You have modified the behaviour in here so 

that in fact you can muzzle people when you want to.  You 

have protected ministers from even answering questions in 

Estimates, and then you pass legislation or bring it in here that 

puts you above the courts. 

 

Now what is this higher purpose, my NDP colleagues, for this 

kind of activity.  What is it?  Because you don't have money?  

You had the opportunity to have harmonization.  You have the 

opportunity to raise money in all kinds of ways.  You've got 

money for your friends.  You've got all kinds of money for 

patronage.  You've got patronage coming out your . . . you got 

money for this friend, that friend, on this board. This land bank 

guy gets 60, $70,000 with the same house.  You've got money 

for all your friends but you don't have the courage and the 

decency to deal with this place and the public fairly, and that's 

a fact.  Because I don't see what higher calling this is all about. 

There's no legal protection or justification.  The Premier doesn't 

give us any legal justification.  He says, I don't want to talk 

about it legally.  If he had half a case he'd be talking about it 

legally, but he doesn't want to talk about it.  And what's more, 

he won't let anybody sue him, because he's going to be above 

the law and he says, I won't talk about it legally. 

 

Well you're right.  The NDP are not above the law, and they're 

not above the political law of the land, which says you will 

have to justify this and similar kinds of legislation in front of 

everybody in the months and weeks and years ahead.  And this 

is your legacy.  This goes down for ever.  This is here.  You 

changed the rules.  You brought in the legislation.  You will be 

before the Supreme Court.  You will be challenged on the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

You'll have NDPers ripping up their cards, farmers, lawyers, 

union people, and others -- and I don't know for what.  What's 

it all about?  What's it about?  What's it about?  It's because of 

good management when you're elected to be for the people, for 

the people?  For Heaven's sakes, this Bill isn't about 

management.  It's about your own narrow-minded self-interest. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I can 

find it here . . . If in fact they think that this is something that is 

going to balance the budget, it's just a little bit like the health 

care Bill that was in here earlier today -- 13.6 million they're 

going to tax the poor that are sick so that in fact they think that 

they can contribute to balancing the budget. 

 

And every time we ask the Minister of Health, why are you 

doing this, she says, well we have a deficit.  Well every 

province in Canada has a deficit.  How about that?  So the end 

justifies . . . Tax the sick. Be a good NDPer and tax the sick. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're the champions of deficit. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well and the member from Swift Current says, 

we're the champions of deficit.  Well I'll tell the member, if you 

can have your leader before an election say this -- just think 

about this for a moment -- we've got a $14.2 billion debt.  

That's what he says.  This is early October, '91.  And then he 

goes on and says, but if we're elected, we will remove the 

provincial sales tax.  Well how could you campaign on 

removing the provincial sales tax when he acknowledges we've 

got a $14 billion debt and still look yourself in the mirror? 

 

And the member said, oh, it was a dumb tax.  Well the 

chambers of commerce and the board of trade and the farmers 

and the oil patch and others said, well at least we co-operated 

with the feds, with their national tax program.  We get it all 

back.  We save 5 million a year, which you can use for 

agriculture and health care. 

 

But no, you were so hungry for power you said, well we'll go 

do it some other way.  We'll get through it somehow.  And isn't 

that what the Minister of Agriculture said?  So you campaign to 

reduce the tax or take it off, to lose 2 or $300 million and then 

when you're elected go back in, and what do you do?  You 

have a higher calling all of a sudden. 



2136 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

What's the higher calling?  Oh, oh, we need money.  Oh, oh, 

there's a debt.  You talked about the debt for years and all of a 

sudden, oh, there's a debt, and you got to do something.  And 

what do you do?  You attack farmers; you attack the sick.  You 

break contracts; you break the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  

You're going to be challenged at the Supreme Court because 

it's unconstitutional, and you're doing this because you got 

elected on a sham. 

 

That's the whole reason. There's no other justification.  Well we 

got elected; now what are we going to do, boys?  Holy smokes, 

they voted for us; they believed us. Oh my goodness!  And they 

open up the books and say, well there's a $14.2 billion debt.  

Well that's what we said before. What'll we do now? 

 

Well we'll go tell them that we found some new debt 

somewhere and we'll take the old accrual method and we'll 

bring up all this stuff and we'll write it off and say, oh my gosh, 

look at that.  We won't have any tax measures for the first six 

months -- blame Devine for that.  Got an $800 million debt in 

the first month; 500 million with this budget.  And then say, 

but then we have to get really miserable and people will 

understand.  They figured you out. 

 

Who do you think . . . this province is politically astute.  And 

you can play those kinds of games but nobody believes you 

can't do better than this.  They threw us out, he says, and they 

voted for a falsehood because you said you could balance the 

budget and cut taxes at the same time.  And you campaigned on 

it.  And do you know what?  You're not doing it.  You are 

against the law; you are breaking contracts; you're going to 

break the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  And you increased 

the sales tax 15 per cent on every item in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

On top of that, Mr. Minister, Mr. Member, you're going to do 

that.  And you're going to continue to increase.  You took off 

harmonization on a handful of items and then you increased it 

on tens of thousands of items.  Every time you go to a shopping 

centre, you go to a store -- Canadian Tire, Eaton's, Sears -- you 

pay 15 per cent more on everything because they voted NDP.  

That's the higher calling, the reason that you think you're above 

the law.  You got caught on your own falsehood. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Because we believed you. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- No, they thought they believed this guy over 

here, that he knew what he was talking about.  And you didn't 

tell him the truth.  You didn't tell him the truth.  So you ask 

people. 

 

When you said, I'll give you cost of production; I'll cut your 

taxes; I'll increase health care expenditures; I'll do all this and 

I'll do that . . . You've got $1.3 billion extra deficit and your 

credit rating's going through the floor. 

 

Your reputation is as bad as it is in Ontario.  What have you got 

in Ontario?  Nine billion deficit the first year; nine billion 

deficit the next year.  What did they promise?  Oh we can do 

better then the Tories or the Liberals. 

 

You're twice as bad as they are.  Your credit rating is worst 

than Ontario's, just going like this because you don't have an 

economic plan.  You don't have an agricultural plan.  Your 

wellness model is just huff and puff, as the member from 

Rosthern pointed out.  You tax the sick.  And then when you 

get in real trouble, you change the rules in the legislature 

because you don't want people to debate.  You bring in closure, 

and then you say, and we won't let anybody sue us because the 

NDP are above the law. 

 

What a bunch.  It is pathetic.  It is the weakest show of 

honourable Democrats in the world.  It's awful.  It's absolutely 

awful. 

 

So, Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to support this Bill.  I don't 

know how anybody over there . . . That's why the House is 

practically empty because they don't like this.  I'd go on 

holidays too if I was an NDP member and had to sit and kind 

of clap for this stuff.  But I'm not going to support it.  I'm not 

going to support it.  And I'm here arguing for it on Friday night 

. . . arguing against this on Friday night because this is 

shameful legislation. 

 

So I'm going to move an amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And it's going to be seconded by the member from Rosthern . . 

. Morse, pardon me.  And the amendment is simply this: 

 

 That the words following the word "that" be deleted and the 

following substituted therefor: 

 

 this Bill not be read a second time because the House Leaders 

have not reached agreement on the principles involved and 

the process in which it has been brought forward. 

 

I so move, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- I thank the Leader of the Opposition 

for the amendment.  I wish to reserve my ruling on the 

amendment itself but will allow debate to continue on the main 

motion and then we'll bring in a ruling on the amendment.  In 

the meantime debate can continue on the motion. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  On a point 

of order, it is significant to the opposition that we be allowed to 

speak in the order in which we intended to speak.  And the 

member from Morse originated this debate, and then the 

Leader of the Opposition has spoken secondly to the main 

motion and made an amendment. And it is the desire of the 

member from Morse to speak to that amendment.  So I would 

ask you now to make a decision on the validity of that 

amendment before we continue further in this debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I find the amendment to be in 

order.  Debate on the motion and the amendment will continue 

concurrently.  Those who have spoken to the main motion but 

wishing to speak to the amendment must speak directly to the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Speaker, I 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2137 

want to read the amendment so that people will understand 

what we're dealing with here.  We want this Bill not to be read 

a second time for this reason: because the House leaders have 

not reached agreement on the principles involved and the 

process in which it has been brought forward. 

 

And so I want to raise that as a point and as two basic points, 

one on the principles and one on the process.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the principles of the response that I want to make 

come in this fashion.  There were, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, some 50,000 people. There were some 50,000 

people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who either received or got a copy 

or could get a copy of a little pamphlet called "The Contract of 

Insured Revenue Insurance."  And, Mr. Speaker, the heading at 

the front end of the little pamphlet says this, and this has been 

the stumbling block for the Minister of Agriculture right from 

the beginning.  And the first day I discovered this, I said the 

fellow has floundered and has fallen.  The contract reads this, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

 And these are the principles that haven't been brought 

forward to be discussed between the House leaders.  

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation is making a 

contract. 

 

And it states that and goes through it, right through the whole 

process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you where I picked this up.  It was 

available to me at a rural service centre.  That's where I went 

and picked mine up because I personally don't have a contract 

with Crop Insurance.  However, Mr. Speaker, I went and 

picked this up at the farm service centre in Swift Current.  And 

I went through the details of this little pamphlet.  And there's 

two of them like this.  One deals with a crop insurance 

contract.  And the other one deals with the revenue insurance 

contract. 

 

And in this contract, Section 49 states this: 

 

 Any changes in the contract shall be mailed to the issuer not 

later than the 15th of the year for which the changes are to be 

in effect.  And those changes are deemed to be part of this 

contract on and after April 1 of that year. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is where the farmers of Saskatchewan 

have a legitimate case in court. 

 

And those are the principles, Mr. Speaker, that I believe that 

the House Leader on our side and the House Leader on the 

government side should have been discussing because we have 

some very fundamental differences of opinion.  And, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the people who are responsible for leading 

this Assembly asked this Assembly to have the House leaders 

review that and negotiate a settlement not only on the GRIP 

Bill, not only on the GRIP Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but on the 

fundamentals of process that came to the place where we are 

today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of Saskatchewan, I 

believe, were denied a democratic right.  And if I was to bring 

forward all of the different speeches that I have 

heard in this Assembly in 1989, that said that bell-ringing, 

stopping bell-ringing was against the constitutional or the 

democratic right of individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could 

read here for days on just the speeches that were made and the 

total contradiction of the focus of people from that side of the 

House and what they believed three years ago and what they 

believe today.  And, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if it's what they 

believe or whether it was what they were told to say. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the process that evolved in coming to this 

point, we have had a series of very, very serious areas of 

differences.  I want to lay this out because people in the 

province need to understand, because this whole discussion on 

GRIP is tied to the process that we got to in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, prior to this session beginning, I and the 

member from Rosthern were asked to be members of a 

committee that dealt with rule changes in this House.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, in that process of events as it took place over the 

period of time, the process evolved to this point where we are 

today.  And that says that you can have bell-ringing for 30 

minutes on a basis of a major debatable motion, and 10 minutes 

for anything else. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I heard members, one after the other, of the 

26 that are sitting on the other side who were here prior to '91, 

speak on this issue, speak on this issue.  Sometimes they were 

good debates and sometimes they were not.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

the fundamental freedom that they got when they discussed it 

was that the government of the day withdrew the motion to 

restrict bells.  They withdrew it. 

 

And you know what they did with it, Mr. Speaker, in 1989?  

They put it in the hands of the Rules Committee.  That's what 

they did, Mr. Speaker.  They put it in the hands of the Rules 

Committee so that the Rules Committee, outside of a session, 

brand-new people in it, could decide on process -- process that 

would evolve into a place where the Legislative Assembly 

could function in a fashion that was better than it was before, 

not worse; where the rights of individuals would be more 

enhanced, and the rights of the democratically elected people 

would be enhanced. 

 

And what have we got, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  The process 

evolved from the place where we went through, we've got 

agreement on about 18 or 19 items, and the process came to the 

place, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where a decision was 

made to have 50 sitting days on the changes in the Assembly. 

 

One of the things that was said by the chairman of the 

committee was that the decision reached would be unanimous 

and it would be a unanimous presentation in the Assembly.  

And, Mr. Speaker, I was asked to be the vice-chairman of that 

committee and as a vice-chairman of that committee, I 

seconded the motion to present the new rules to this Assembly 

and the process that evolved is dominant history in the 

province of Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first unusual item or 

event that occurred was when the member from Regina 

Victoria came to me and said . . . 



2138 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  The member should 

know better than to involve the Chair in his remarks. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Chairman, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

there was a member from this Assembly who came to me and 

said, would you be prepared to second a motion that would 

change some items in the rules that were there that weren't of 

benefit to the media in the province of Saskatchewan?  And he 

came to me after the bells rang and he said, would you move 

this as a seconder?  And I said, what's it about? Tell me.  Most 

of the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is all done in the 

committee.  Most of the time it's supposed to be done in the 

committee. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was what should have happened 

on that occasion.  And I said, no, I'm not.  I would have been 

prepared to do it if the process would have been followed.  But 

no -- a big, overpowering government says, we can do it just 

like we want and nobody can stand in my way. 

 

It's like this Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like this Bill.  Just 

because I made a mistake, I'm going to make everybody pay.  

Everybody's going to pay for my little mistake from the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose.  And all of you are going to 

pay for that when you stand and vote in here to snub the nose 

of the court.  Those are the principles involved, Mr. Speaker, 

and that's process.  And how can you eliminate one and uphold 

the other? 

 

Another item that was brought forward is that the decision was 

made in the Rules Committee unilaterally -- unilaterally 

without any option for change whatever, that the rules would 

be changed in the bell-ringing.  And what have we got, Mr. 

Speaker?  We have a decision on the part of an overpowering 

majority in government to say, we're going to change the rules.  

We're not going to do it this way.  We're going to make, Mr. 

Speaker, the rules so that you have to live by them.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we've got here, Mr. Speaker.  The 

process of the Rules Committee in dealing with the kinds of 

things that we have here today is wrong, Mr. Speaker, totally 

wrong. 

 

I want to point out to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the Government 

Deputy House Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- With leave, I'd like to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(2115) 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is an 

individual by the name of Eldon Johnson with whom I've had 

the pleasure of working over a number of years. 

 

Although I believe his brother was in politics, Eldon always 

showed just a touch more sense than that.  He has been very 

active in the Saskatchewan Archaeological 

Society and has contributed a great deal to this province and 

the preservation of our archaeological records.  I'd like all 

members to join with me in welcoming a citizen who is both 

distinguished and has given long service to this province. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 (continued) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, the involvement of the 

Rules Committee in room no. 10, as we went through the 

dealing with the change of the rules, spelled out some very, 

very serious changes in the way this House is going to run -- 

very, very serious changes, Mr. Speaker, on the way this House 

is run.  They had serious implications as to the things that were 

going to happen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we went through the process of debating 

whether that was the right thing to do. And nowhere, Mr. 

Speaker, nowhere, Mr. Speaker, was there consensus and 

compromise ever in the process involved in the time that it took 

to deliver a unilateral change to the rules. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we deal with this issue in the process, 

in the rules, the rules were disregarded as it related to 

consensus and compromise.  There was no compromise, Mr. 

Speaker.  There was absolutely none. 

 

And as we go through this debate, Mr. Speaker, the reason why 

we're here today on this Bill is because the unilateral changes 

made by the government opposite without the consent of the 

opposition.  And, Mr. Speaker, you know why that's 

unprecedented?  Because it is.  It has not had history.  History 

does not record that it's happened before.  Rule changes are 

based on consensus.  Rule changes in this House are based on 

consensus.  And when this issue was discussed and debated and 

the Bill was suspended and the suspension was lifted, all of that 

was due to process change that did not involve consensus and 

compromise on the part of the government.  It did not involved 

any of that. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we're here debating this 

today at all.  Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this group of 

people who are the government here today hadn't rammed 

through their unilateral changes in the Rules Committee, they 

wouldn't have got this Bill forward.  They wouldn't have. 

 

And the reason is, the reason is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I've 

outlined earlier, it is against the law.  It is against the law.  In 

fact, the minister had to take and remove all court action, so he 

could put this Bill forward.  He had to void all the incidents 

that happened after January 1, 1991.  And that's what the leader 

of the . . . the House Leader of the government and the House 

Leader in this government should have . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the Associate Minister 

of Finance on his feet? 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2139 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Point of order.  The point of order is 

that the amendment is a fairly narrow one.  The member from 

Morse occasionally sweeps past the subject, but it is an 

occasional sweep.  Much more often, he's not dealing with the 

substance of the amendment itself, and he's already spoken on 

the Bill. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I've been 

listening very carefully to the debate.  And when one takes a 

look at the amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and says that: 

 

 this Bill not be read a second time because the House leaders 

have not reached agreement on the principles involved and 

the process in which it has been brought forward. 

 

I've been listening very, very carefully to my colleague, and 

that's what all he's been talking about, is the process through 

which this has been brought forward and the parameters 

wherein.  And it would seem to me that the Opposition Deputy 

House Leader here is kind of out of his, out of his . . . 

(inaudible) . . . and so that certainly the point of order, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, cannot be well taken. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I thank . . . Order.  I thank the 

Associate Minister of Finance and the member for Rosthern for 

their contributions.  I've listened with interest to the member 

for Morse.  And I read the amendment, and I must confess 

there are times that I'm having difficulty in understanding the 

relationship between remarks and the amendment but would 

rule that at this point that he's on the amendment.  But certainly 

he will help his cause if he makes it clear from time to time 

how his remarks pertain particularly and strictly to the 

amendment before us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There are 

two things that are basic to what the amendment reads.  And I 

want to say this to the member from Churchill Downs because 

the House leaders have not reached agreement on the principles 

involved, and the principles, Mr. Speaker, are exactly what I 

was talking about.  And, Mr. Member, the process is what I 

was talking about, the process that brought us to this place. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the kinds of things that I was talking 

about deal with the process of getting here because the two, the 

Bill and the process of the Rules Committee in dealing with the 

functions that we are going through here today, dealt with the 

kinds of things that I've been talking about.  And the process is 

just so fundamental to this discussion . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Mr. Finance Minister, I am not struggling.  

What I am doing, as a matter of fact, is I'm going to get into the 

real process, and then I'll get into the principles. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the process involved made unilateral 

changes that were far in excess of what was necessary to deal 

with this Bill.  We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 

offered compromise after compromise to the House Leader on 

the other side in order to resolve the issue.  And what did we 

have, Mr. Speaker? 

 

I want to point out where the compromise existed.  The 

compromise existed on setting a different time line to have this 

Bill go out for hearings to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I want to point out precedent in that, Mr. Minister.  

Precedent was established at . . . last year the budget in Ontario 

was allowed to go to committee to be dealt with by the public 

of the province of Ontario.  And what did they do?  They took 

it upon themselves to take it out.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

what we were asking.  Allow us an opportunity to take it to the 

people of Saskatchewan to have them make a decision. 

 

And, Mr. Finance Minister, I believe that you were hanging 

your Agriculture minister out to dry so high and so far out that 

you are the problem in this.  Mr. Minister, you are not prepared 

to move one single inch.  And yet, Mr. Minister, I'm going to 

point this out to you, that the Minister of Agriculture, who's 

also the Minister of Highways, changed his mind about tearing 

up tarred roads.  Make them gravel; they're better. 

 

And then the people from Beechy . . . we're talking about 

compromise and process and the principles of change.  And, 

Mr. Minister, I am going to tell you this. You had the 

opportunity to send this Bill out and to have the people talk 

about it and tell you exactly what it was that you should 

change. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I doubt very, very much that they would 

have liked the part that says to make void all of the incidents 

that happened from January 1, 1991 and forward, so that you 

could make regulations to deem whatever you want to have 

happened, to have it happen.  And those are the principles 

involved in this, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Those are the principles 

involved in the debate that we have today and what we're 

bringing forward.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why we on 

this side of the House are against it. 

 

I want to point out another area on the basis of principle, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think we should be debating.  One of the 

principles in the discussion that the minister had . . . and said 

that the people who made the report to the minister were all in 

agreement.  They signed it, he said.  They signed it.  But there 

was a caveat on it, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There was more than 

one caveat on it.  Mr. Gil Petersen had a caveat on it, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

This is principles, Mr. Finance Minister.  Nettie Wiebe had a 

problem with it, Mr. Minister.  These are principles involved 

and why you brought this forward.  Mr. Minister, I want to 

point out some of the other people who had a problem with it. 

 

One of those people was SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities).  I want to point out what SARM said 

about this.  And I point out to you, Mr. Minister, seven 

principles that they said are wrong.  And what our House 

Leader would have conveyed to the House Leader over there . . 

. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- If he was interested. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Right, if he was interested.  It would have 

been prepared to make up some reasonable consensus so 



2140 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan could have become 

involved in the democratic process. 

 

This is a letter sent to all of the reeves and councillors from the 

SARM.  And I want to point this out.  This is the caveat they 

put on the Bill, Mr. Speaker.  And these are some of the 

discussions we would have liked to have had, not only with our 

House leaders, but in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The SARM has representation . . . This is the statements that 

they made, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

 The SARM was represented on the GRIP review committee 

by director Harrison.  We are one of twelve participants.  The 

committee submitted their final report to the minister on 

February 15, 1992.  As of that date, the input from the review 

committee as a whole was complete.  At that point in time the 

government would not give any indication of what level of 

premiums would be necessary. 

 

What does that say, Mr. Speaker?  The principles of what it 

would cost the farmers on the February 15 was not available.  

And these are the things that we would have asked our House 

leaders to discuss so that we could take out to the people of 

Saskatchewan so that they could talk about. 

 

On February 10, director Harrison made a final attempt via 

conference call with a balance of their GRIP review committee 

to get the committee to defer any changes for one year, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, for one year. 

 

We wanted to have our House Leader provide an option with 

the House Leader over there to reach a conclusion.  One year, 

Mr. Minister, defer for one year.  SARM is asking for that.  

And you go around the province and say, oh they signed it.  

They signed it.  They had a caveat, Mr. Minister, a big caveat.  

Take it around for a year.  And then tell us what you like about 

it.  And tell us what you don't like about it. 

 

Major support from the balance of the committee was absent.  

That's what SARM found out.  They said, well the other guys 

are going with it, except Nettie Wiebe and Gil Pedersen.  And 

you know what, Mr. Minister, you know what, Mr. Minister, 

I'll tell you why they were against it.  Because you weren't 

keeping your word on cost of production.  You weren't keeping 

your word on cost of production. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is another principle that should have 

been discussed around the province -- principles that our House 

Leader should have had a chance to discuss so that the people 

of the province of Saskatchewan could have become involved.  

But that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're talking about. 

 

After the committee report had been drafted, the SARM voiced 

five major concerns with the recommendations of the report, 

and by written letter as well as a meeting with the minister 

February 13, 1992.  At that point the five concerns that SARM 

had were added to the GRIP review committee report. 

You never talk about that, Mr. Minister, in your report.  You 

never talk about that in speaking about your report.  They had 

five concerns -- five concerns.  SARM had five concerns and 

they were added to the GRIP review committee report. 

 

(2130) 

 

These are the kinds of things that our House leaders should 

have had an opportunity to discuss, so that we could take it out 

to the people of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Minister, are the 

principles that we should have involved. 

 

And I'll tell you what those concerns were, Mr. Minister.  

Those concerns were time limitations, bankability of the 

program, federal and provincial agreement, lack of broad-based 

producer input, and significant change violates the contract. 

 

Mr. Minister, the people of the province of Saskatchewan had a 

right, Mr. Speaker, to deal with these principles.  They had a 

right, Mr. Minister, to deal with these principles that SARM 

pointed out to you. 

 

One of the things they said on February 13, Mr. Minister, is 

you weren't going to have time to put it all together.  And then 

you have the nerve to say, oh there somehow we'll get around 

it.  Somehow we'll get around it. 

 

And we discovered today what it is you're going to do to get 

around it.  They say that we're going to get around it, Mr. 

Minister, by making void the incidents that happened from 

January 1, 1991 and on.  That, Mr. Minister is how you get 

around it.  That, Mr. Minister, is where you've got a problem. 

 

The report was then signed by SARM as a participant, as a 

participant, Mr. Minister.  And I don't believe that says 

anything about supporting.  The letter was signed as a 

participant.  And that is what they signed, Mr. Minister.  And 

this is a letter from SARM with their own letter-head.  They 

signed as a participant, not as a supporter.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, are the principles that should have been taken around 

to the people of Saskatchewan, that our House Leader should 

have had an opportunity to discuss. 

 

And then they submitted it to the Minister of Agriculture.  Item 

no. 4, on March 4, SARM representative met with the federal 

Agriculture minister, the Hon. Bill McKnight, to again express 

our concern.  Again he wanted to say that there is something 

wrong with process here, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- something 

wrong with process.  Director Harrison briefly described the 

above course of events at the GRIP rally in Regina on April 6. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture was at that 

meeting when Mr. Harrison read that letter that gave him the 

reasons why he was not a supporter of the report, he was only a 

participant.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason why 

we're here discussing it.  Because people who are the 

fundamental backbone of the province of Saskatchewan, like 

the rural municipalities, don't support it.  They don't support it.  

They were a participant, not a supporter.  And there is a 

significant difference -- a very, very significant difference. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2141 

On April 16, the SARM board as a whole again went back to a 

meeting with the minister to once again point out that the 

concerns expressed by SARM were the precise concerns that 

were causing the major problems with the producers.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, in the process and in the principles of the Bill, 

and the principles involved in the Bill, and why it was brought 

forward, were a major concern to producers.  And they pointed 

that out to you on numerous occasions.  They were not 

supporters, Mr. Minister, they were participants.  Just a huge, 

huge difference, Mr. Minister -- huge. 

 

On April 23, 1992, President Kirwan brought forward another 

letter to the Minister of Agriculture addressing the 

shortcomings of the new program and the premium increase 

coupled with a coverage decrease. 

 

Mr. Minister, and to the members of this Assembly, we have 

talked long and hard about the principles that are involved here 

over the past few days.  I outlined some of them earlier and the 

things that I thought should be there.  The member from 

Estevan has reviewed them in a serious way.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, as we talk about the principles involved, those are 

some of them.  I want to point out another one.  I want to point 

out another principle that is significant, why this should be 

taken out to the people of the province of Saskatchewan; allow 

the farmers a reasoned approach to what's going on. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of items that I want to 

bring to the attention of this Assembly as it relates to the court 

case that was heard -- principles that should have been 

discussed by the House Leader in the opposition and the 

Government House Leader for reasons of principle; the 

principles, the reasons for principle. 

 

And the principle is this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there was a 

serious error on the part of the Minister of Agriculture in 

dealing with the items that he brought forward as a part of '92 

GRIP and that they were in breach of the contract.  They were 

in breach of the contract.  Those principles should have been 

laid out with the Minister of Economic Development, the 

House Leader from the government, and the member from 

Rosthern.  Those principles should have been laid out as the 

principles that we should be discussing.  And I want to point 

some of them out.  One of the things that was said in an 

affidavit presented to the court -- presented to the court, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker -- and these are the words: "I have been 

advised by the Minister of Agriculture . . ." this is the words in 

the affidavit signed by the deputy minister of Agriculture, and 

he said this in a sworn affidavit in the court in Yorkton. 

 

 I have been advised by the Minister of Agriculture and Food, 

the Honourable Mr. Weins, that he has obtained the verbal 

agreement of the Federal Government and a sufficient 

number of . . . other provinces participating, to amend the 

Agreement and therefore to effect the changes to the 1992 

Program . . . 

 

That's article 4 in the affidavit that was given to the court. 

Item 5, Mr. Speaker, was this: 

 

 I am aware and do verily believe having been advised by the 

Honourable Mr. Weins that in addition, he intends to 

introduce legislative amendments in the current Session of 

the Legislature.  These amendments will include a provision 

in which notice of the 1992 changes will be deemed to have 

given . . . Producers by March 15, 1992 as required in their 

individual contracts. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the principles that needed to be discussed 

were those that stated that this was an illegal action being taken 

on a breach of contract.  And that is a principle that's the most 

significant thing of all.  And this, Mr. Deputy . . . and this is 

what the justice said: what is clear from the affidavit of Kramer 

is that notice was not given to the farmers on or before March 

15, 1992.  It was absolutely clear to the justice that the contract 

had not been lived up to.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

should have been a part of the conversation.  But no, it wasn't.  

It wasn't for a number of reasons. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Because the Minister of Agriculture was 

being hung out to dry by the Minister of Finance.  And I don't 

know the reason why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there is 

significant resentment for the actions taken by the Minister of 

Agriculture and the things that he did -- a significant 

resentment. 

 

What is clear, from the affidavit of Kramer, is that notice was 

not given to the farmers on or before March 15, 1992, as 

required by their individual contracts of revenue insurance 

under the GRIP program. 

 

Further, the federal-provincial agreement has not been 

amended to provide for the changes to the '92 GRIP program, 

as proposed by the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are principles in this Bill that haven't been 

followed.  There are principles of the action of the Minister of 

Agriculture that have not been followed, either by ethics or law 

or morality.  You name it.  It hasn't been followed by this 

Minister of Agriculture, not in any way, shape, or form.  That 

is why the minister . . . or the member from Rosthern and the 

member from Elphinstone, Regina Elphinstone, should have 

had the opportunity to discuss this.  I really believe that it 

should have been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I find in the process was that this process 

was done in the middle of a session that dealt strictly, in my 

view, with this Bill and only this Bill.  This Bill was the 

culmination of the process that the individuals opposite decided 

to take to eliminate all opposition from the members on this 

side of the House. 

 

And as the Premier said in a statement earlier this spring, he 

said, the PCs (Progressive Conservative) are right in principle, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  He said that.  They have a right to walk 

out and ring the bells.  This is about process. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the process involved and the 



2142 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

evolution of what we have here today is right on the head this 

Bill.  This Bill is the fundamental reason why the process was 

set up the way it was.  It is my belief that that is the absolute 

truth. 

 

Another principle that should have been discussed between the 

House leaders is this, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  As to the first . . . 

And this is a statement by Her Honour, the court: 

 

 As to the first criteria, the plaintiffs had made out a prima 

facie case.  They have a case before the law to present and go 

to trial. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture should 

have asked his House Leader and said, we have a court case in 

here, and we should do something about it.  And that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is exactly what should have happened.  It has 

been acknowledged in the affidavit of the deputy minister that 

the federal-provincial agreement has not been amended in 

accordance with article no. 23 in the agreement. 

 

And that also should have been identified as one of the 

principles talked about by those two people. 

 

I want to point out something else: 

 

 And accordingly, the changes proposed for the '92 GRIP 

program are not incorporated as a part of the 

federal-provincial agreement.  Further it is clear the 

individual contracts of revenue insurance with the '91 

participating farmers requires notice of changes to have been 

given to the farmers prior to March 15, 1992. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And it's pointed out here.  It is 

clear on all of the evidence before me that this -- Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, Mr. Minister, and to the Premier and to the Minister 

of Justice -- it did not occur.  It did not occur.  That's what the 

judge said in relation to establishing whether the farmers in the 

province of Saskatchewan legitimately had a case.  It did not 

occur. 

 

You know what the justice goes on to say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  And this is why it's so important. 

 

 There is no assurance that the Crown will pass legislation or 

that whatever legislation they propose to pass will in fact 

remedy the defects.  And therefore, based on the evidence 

before me, the plaintiffs have established a prima facie case.  

They have established enough fact to have a case go before 

the court. 

 

(2145) 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we were talking about.  

We have heard it over and over and over again.  The process 

was flawed right from the beginning.  The principles involved 

had been flawed right from the beginning, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

And in putting together the dynamics of the process and putting 

together the dynamics of the principles and putting together the 

dynamics of the politics, it should have been, in my opinion, at 

least tried to have the House leaders agree 

with it. 

 

But you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  And I firmly 

believe this, having sat in this House for 11 years and followed 

with a great deal of interest the activities in this place, that I 

believe that the House Leader, the Government House Leader, 

didn't have to make a decision on the things that he was doing 

because he knew.  He knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that 

process would give him the benefit.  The process as it came to 

the place where the committee met gave him the advantage.  

He didn't have to make up his mind.  The process involved in 

the committee work in the Rules Committee gave him an 

advantage.  He did not have to make up his mind about making 

alternative arrangements.  He didn't have to, and we say, on 

this side of the House, he should have. 

 

And that's where the principles involved in this Bill are 

seriously flawed because they haven't been dealt with in the 

fundamental fashion in the proper fashion in this House. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the House Leader and the government did 

not have to do anything about it at all and he knew.  He knew 

beyond a shadow of a doubt that it would go through exactly as 

he wanted.  Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Because process had 

given it to him.  Process had given him the principles that I'm 

talking about to allow the Minister of Agriculture to place 

before the court, no evidence.  No evidence that he could 

defend in the court that was held in Melville.  No evidence of 

any of that did the Minister of Agriculture present. 

 

In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the court was told that they 

were going to appeal to the Appeal court, the Appeal court 

threw them out of court because they had not provided 

evidence.  Because the House Leader, the House Leader on the 

opposite side of the House, knew that process, he knew that 

process would do it for him.  And the Minister of Agriculture 

knew that process would do it for him.  That, Mr. Minister, is 

exactly what happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, process, in my view, is the problem in this place, 

and the principles involved. The people sitting on that side of 

the House and the House Leader on this side would have had 

an opportunity to discuss it but the process did not allow equal 

competition for the process to do its work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out this fact, and this is a 

fact: that process was not infringed on in 1989, and that's why 

the principals had to get together -- the House Leader and the 

opposition, who was the member from Elphinstone and the 

member from Melfort had to get together -- and decide that 

process was going to evolve, and that the principles would have 

to be deferred.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what 

happened.  And that is why this process did not evolve. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is exactly why this minister . . . 

the House Leader from . . . the member from Elphinstone did 

not have to proceed on this.  And that's why we moved this 

amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That's why we moved this 

amendment because the 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2143 

process needed to be dealt with by the House leaders, and it 

wasn't.  It wasn't.  It wasn't necessary because the Rules 

Committee unilaterally could change. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out some other principles 

of process that need to be addressed.  One of the items that was 

brought forward states this: 

 

 . . . that if I have suffered damages for the next five years as a 

result of decisions I must now make as a result of the 

defendant's breach of contract, those damages will be 

incalculable by reasons that it may be necessary to change 

crops and farming practices, making these calculations 

hypothetical and the defendants will not keep records if I opt 

out. 

 

That's one of the farmers making a statement and a declaration 

to the court. 

 

And this is what the judge says, and these are why the 

principles needed to be talked about and the process was so 

directly involved. 

 

 As to the issue of irreparable harm, Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance argues that if plaintiffs are successful at trial they 

can be adequately compensated by way of money.  There is 

no question but that Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is in a 

position to pay any monetary compensation that might be 

ordered. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the principles in this case were very, very 

significant.  The process was even more significant because the 

principles did not have to be dealt with in the matter of a 

political sense because the process was going to do it for them. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason 

why we're raising this point. 

 

I want to go on, as it stands, and make another point about the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is in a position to pay.  And that 

is not to those five farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It is to the 

50,000 contracts that the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance holds 

in revenue insurance.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why 

we feel so strongly about it, because the principles are being 

infringed on. 

 

And you, sir, stand here in the House and raise with a Bill, and 

say none of that, none of that is going to impact on this because 

I have decided.  I have the ultimate decision.  I will make a 

decision about who gets what, where, and when, without 

anyone asking. 

 

And what should have happened is the people in this side of the 

House and that side of the House should have gotten together 

to provide the opportunity to send it out to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's the reason.  That's the reason why the 

House leaders should have gotten together.  Because the House 

Leader on the government side did not have to do anything. 

And process would have evolved to make the difference. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, process and the principles involved are 

absolutely necessary to consider,.  Because the process 

infringed on the principles.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly 

why we have a problem.  That's why we've had a problem all 

the time. 

 

As it stands -- this is a report by the justice -- as it stands today 

there are only proposals as to the terms of the '92 GRIP 

program.  According to the affidavit filed by Kramer, both 

legislative amendments and amendments to the 

federal-provincial agreement are required to implement the '92 

proposed changes. 

 

Those are principles that are involved that should have been 

discussed with the two House leaders.  The agreements in the 

federal-provincial agreements have not reached a conclusion.  

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why the House leaders should 

have done it. 

 

We have process in this Legislative Assembly being changed in 

the middle of the stream.  We have the House Leader on the 

government side not needing to do anything because he knew, 

he knew without a shadow of a doubt that time would lend him 

the benefit. 

 

And you know what the principle there was, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker?  The fact is that the bells were stopped from ringing.  

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, members of this Assembly on the 

opposite side spoke long and hard about that process in 1989.  

And each time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, each time those people on 

the opposition side spoke when they were on this side of the 

House, each time, they raised the arguments about democracy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's the kind of thing we're talking about 

and that's the fundamental reason why we put this amendment 

forward.  Because we on this side of the House feel that 

process infringed on the principles.  And the principles being 

two separate items, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- the principles of the 

Bill and the principals involved, being the House Leader and 

the Government House Leader, our House Leader on this side.  

Those two principles, the principals as being the people 

involved and the principles of the Bill. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we can only say that on this side of 

the House that process was not fair.  We have said it over and 

over again that process wasn't fair.  We have said it many times 

that process wasn't fair.  We said it in committee; we said it in 

this Assembly, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we still believe that.  

And I believe that every one of the speeches that was presented 

by the members opposite when they were on this side of the 

House in 1989 said it wasn't fair to take bell-ringing away.  It 

wasn't fair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In two times that we had closure on process, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, the world said, no don't have closure.  And you know 

what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've had it three times this week.  

And, Mr. Speaker, they will glibly pass off that this one will 

probably go for closure too.  Do you know why?  Because the 

process was not fair. 

 

And I want to point this out to you, Mr. Speaker.  Why was the 

process not fair?  Because the ball game changed the rules 

half-way through.  They changed the rules in the ball 



2144 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

game half-way through.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rules were 

changed in the process half-way through and therefore the 

House Leader on the opposite side didn't have to negotiate a 

change in the principles involved in the discussion. 

 

And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason why we're 

standing here today, because the process was infringed on.  

Because the rules were changed.  When the batter went to bat 

and it was strike three, no you got a walk instead.  And when 

you hit a home run on this side of the House, oh no that's a foul 

ball. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is process, and the 

process was flawed because the Minister of Economic 

Development did not have to deal with process.  And that's 

why the two House leaders ought to have been meeting, but 

they didn't.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we have 

a serious, serious problem. 

 

The process was flawed because the rules changed half-way 

through.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I stand here today, in 9 

years or 10 years of being in this place, not once has it 

happened other than this time.  Not once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

has a rule change occurred in the middle of the ball game, 

when things are tied -- especially when they're tied. 

 

And what's the balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  What does the 

balance weighing for 50,000 contracts have in relation to this 

government getting its will?  Fifty thousand contracts are 

broken and made void today.  Void; they didn't happen.  The 

farmers, the 50,000 contracts, the farmers did not sign their 

names to them.  They didn't sign.  Not one of them signed; do 

you know that, Mr. Minister?  Not one of them signed their 

name because you said they didn't.  You said they didn't, Mr. 

Minister.  They didn't sign their names.  And yet, Mr. Minister, 

I know that every one of them did.  Fifty thousand of them 

signed the contracts.  Mr. Minister, the contract for crop 

insurance and GRIP was signed by the individuals who were 

there.  And, Mr. Minister, when they filed their seeded acreage 

report and all of the things related to that, they were in the 

contract.  They made an agreement. 

 

(2200) 

 

Mr. Minister, you might even remember this, when you used to 

go to your neighbours and sign a deal on a handshake, on a 

handshake.  And, Mr. Minister, now you're going to say that 

you never did.  You never did it.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the 

political sensitivity that you have to face today.  You never did 

it.  And who else, Mr. Minister, is at risk?  Who else, Mr. 

Minister, is at risk?  That's the big question. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's why process was 

seriously, seriously in a problem.  Process in this place was not 

adequately addressed at the beginning of the session.  I'll agree 

with that, but if we would have played according to the rules all 

the way through this ball game, Mr. Minister, this Bill would 

never have been introduced.  Because you, sir, have eliminated 

all of the agreements, every one of them, with every one of the 

farmers.  You have said they did not exist. 

And, Mr. Minister, I'll point this out to you.  Mr. Minister, 

when you go to collect on the premiums owed by individuals, 

will you have the authority to do that?  And what authority will 

you use, the voided one or the one that you will build into the 

regulations?  That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason why this 

opposition said the process was flawed, because the process 

dealt with making inequity in the system.  Inequity in the 

system, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- that's why the process was 

flawed.  That's why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a serious 

problem. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we had a prime example of this in the 

Olympics and I haven't heard one person that has said different.  

But why, why did the U.S. (United States) shotput thrower get 

four throws at the shotput?  Why?  Because somebody changed 

the rules.  Somebody changed the rules, and I haven't heard one 

person say that he should have got four shots with the shotput 

and win the gold medal.  But what we have here today is 

exactly the same.  You change the rules in the middle of the 

ball game.  If every one of them would have had an opportunity 

to do it four times, nobody would have complained. 

 

But process has evolved so that we have change of the rules in 

the middle of the ball game.  And, Mr. Minister, process did 

that.  And you know what process did?  It said that the 

minister, the minister responsible for the House, did not have to 

negotiate a change.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why we 

are here today.  He did not have to negotiate a change.  He 

could just sit there and wait for process to happen. 

 

And you, sir, are going to make absolutely of no significance a 

contract that was made valid by an agreement between the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, and the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You will make it void.  You will make it void.  

I might have ignored it.  They could have taken me to court, 

Mr. Minister.  They might have taken me to court, and I would 

have never have denied them access to that, Mr. Minister, but 

you have. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will repeat it as often as it takes to make 

my point heard.  And as many times as I have heard members 

opposite talk about things that had no relevance in the 

discussion, I would at least take this into consideration because 

it is relevant. 

 

Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have people from all 

over this province who have said that process was not right.  

They said process . . . keep those bells ringing.  I have lists and 

lists of names of people from all over the province of 

Saskatchewan, from every constituency except . . . well, no, I 

even have them from Regina and Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the Associate Minister of Finance might 

think this is a flippant kind of a thing.  That's probably why he 

will never be a judge, because he would have to, Mr. Minister, 

and Mr. Deputy Speaker, he would have to make some rational 

decisions about process in a legal sense and he wouldn't have 

the capacity to do it.  That's the reason why. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2145 

I want to talk about another thing about process.  This minister 

doesn't have an agreement with the federal government yet.  

Has he had agreements signed by other provinces, agreements 

to his changes?  And why doesn't he table them then?  Why 

doesn't he table them in this Assembly?  And when has process 

evolved so that he can go around and say, we can get an 

agreement through the middle of the summer, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and then ridicule us for making an agreement and not 

have all of the principles in there. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wouldn't have taken those people to 

court, and they wouldn't have likely taken me to court either 

because I went to listen to them.  You, sir, haven't gone to 

listen to anybody yet.  You say that you've heard 10 people.  

Well my goodness' sakes, 10 is a lot in your view of 

consultation, but not in mine.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

another reason . . . and that, sir, is another reason why process 

was infringed on when the rules were changed. 

 

I want to point this out because it's important for the people of 

Saskatchewan to hear this:  The question of irreparable harm 

must not be interpreted too narrowly -- Mr. Minister, it must 

not be interpreted too narrowly -- in this case.  This is not a 

situation of private rights as between two equal contracting 

parties, but rather involves contracts affecting nearly 50,000 

farmers in this province, and the Crown is represented by its 

agent, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  Individuals must be 

given the opportunity to challenge government conduct which 

they believe is unlawful and a right to interim relief so that 

their rights are not abolished prior to a decision on the merits. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the principles involved in this.  

It's not just the opposition.  It's 50,000 contracts, Mr. Minister.  

What about those people out at Melfort or Tisdale that have no 

crop?  They are in very, very serious straits, Mr. Minister. 

 

And as the member from Estevan read the letter from Mr. 

Hookenson, the people will get . . . some people will get 50 

bushels to the acre on canola and get a payment.  And the 

person who has it dried out will get hardly anything.  He'll get 

80 per cent of his coverage. 

 

Mr. Minister, the farmers in Medicine Hat, the farmers in 

Lloydminster, the farmers in Provost, the farmers in Brandon, 

the farmers in Swan River -- all will do better than the farmers 

in Saskatchewan because of your incompetence, sir, your 

incompetence.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the reason 

why. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Minister, that I'm going to move a 

subamendment to this motion, at a later time.  I will, Mr. 

Speaker, at this point, move that this House adjourn. 

 

The division bells rang from 10:11 p.m. until 10:22 p.m. 

 

The motion negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Devine Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

 

Martens D'Autremont 

-- 8 

Nays 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Scott 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Penner Kujawa 

Hagel Crofford 

Bradley Carlson 

Lautermilch Renaud 

Calvert Langford 

Hamilton  

-- 25 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, there are some things that have become very obvious 

in this debate over the weeks and months that this House has 

had to deal with this motion, and one of them is that there is a 

very serious problem in this Legislative Assembly on process. 

 

And the problem I guess, unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

hinges a lot on . . . perhaps on individuals.  It hinges on the 

inability of this Legislative Assembly to come to any type of a 

consultative approach to anything.  The devastation will come 

a little later to the member opposite.  And I would say to the 

members of this Assembly, that by what's happened here in the 

last 60 days means that this Legislative Assembly, this 

Legislative Assembly has deteriorated further than at any time 

in its history, at any time in its history. 

 

There are members in this House that have been here for many, 

many years, that always have boasted about their ability as 

members of this Legislative Assembly to make this place work.  

But that boasting is hollow, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it's 

hollow because it hasn't worked.  It's hollow because this 

amendment that we have put forward, this amendment, that this 

process that should have happened hasn't happened.  This 

House has been desecrated in the last 60 days, time and time 

again, by this government.  And that's because they have 

absolutely refused to let process, a proper process, take place. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, normally House leaders get together and 

solve 90 per cent of the work that goes on in this Legislative 

Assembly on a day-by-day basis.  And instead, we haven't had 

that happen.  Instead we have had the rules of this Assembly 

changed unilaterally.  We've had closure brought in day after 

day and we have had members of this Assembly who spoke 

with such great eloquence about how this particular place 

should work in days gone by, now absolutely refuting their 

own words, their own deeds, their own messages that they gave 

to their constituents over the years.  And it's meant that we've 

come to an absolute impasse in this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have read into verbatim, time and time again, 

the words of the members of the New Democratic Party in this 

legislature.  And obviously that's all they 



2146 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

were, was words.  There was never any substance, there was 

never any feeling, there was never any reality to those things.  

They were simply words. 

 

Words that were spoken in here so that they could get the 

attention of the TV cameras.  Words that were spoken in public 

places in this province simply to convince people that they 

should be allowed to exercise political power.  The words had 

nothing to do with reality.  The words had nothing to do with 

morals.  The words had nothing to do with substance.  They 

were simply words and nothing but words. 

 

And I would say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they have, 

by this diametric flip-flop that has occurred with these 

members, that they have probably, in the view of many people, 

sullied some very long parliamentary service in this province 

beyond repair. 

 

I mean, it's like the minister's piece of legislation that talks 

about a void occurring, a big, black void.  All of a sudden the 

words and deeds of these members of this House, who spoke so 

eloquently, have passed into this void, this void that will never 

come back.  And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that we say that the 

process, the process around this Bill is flawed, that the process 

that this House has undertaken in the last 60 days is indeed 

flawed. 

 

(2230) 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I can remember when people like the 

current Premier used to come and sit in the gallery here and 

watch the proceedings of the House.  The current Premier was 

the House Leader for approximately 11 years.  And he dealt 

with a number of House leaders on the other side. 

 

First of all, in the early '70s there was the Liberal Party as the 

official opposition.  After 1978 it was the Conservative Party.  

And you often saw people like the former member from 

Lumsden, Gary Lane, and the member from Riversdale going 

at it tooth and nail in this Assembly.  You saw them very 

argumentative in here.  But I think as House leaders you often 

saw resolution of events afterwards.  You saw people like Cy 

MacDonald who was elected to the Liberal benches for a 

number of years, was a cabinet minister; you saw people like 

that able to do process and make it mean something. 

 

And obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something in the 

intervening years has gone wrong.  The process doesn't work 

any more.  And the process doesn't work any more because I 

think members of the New Democratic Party who always have 

spoken so eloquently in this legislature over the years, have 

always spoken so eloquently, at one time actually believed the 

things that they said. 

 

And what we have now, what we have now when one reviews 

1989 in particular with the reality of 1992, is that that's all they 

were, was words.  Because the soul that used to back up 

members of that political party doesn't exist any more.  The 

words were spoken in this Assembly and they were spoken 

outside of this Assembly for one thing and one thing only.  It 

wasn't the process of making this place work or making the 

province work -- the process that used to govern this place on a 

day-by-day 

and year-by-year basis -- they simply spoke those words for 

one thing and one thing only evidently, Mr. Speaker, and that 

was to exercise political power.  To be able to hire your friends 

I suppose, and to do things that they in some way believe will 

punish the former government over and over and over again. 

 

Now I say to you, Mr. Speaker, when we're talking about the 

fundamentals of democracy, about processes that have been in 

this House for many decades, the ability of House Leaders to 

get together and iron things out, when we compare that to what 

is happening, I would say to you, sir, that we have a serious 

flaw. 

 

And it really makes one, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sort of 

sad to think that it's come to that, that there was so much 

animosity and so much political bile built up in the government 

members that they would be willing to sacrifice a long-standing 

tradition in process in order to bring forward this particular 

Bill. 

 

And I guess it's kind of disheartening to listen to the members 

opposite, some of whom know of the things that I speak.  They 

were actually here. They saw that process work time and time 

again.  They saw some of the most acrimonious debates in this 

legislature's history take place without unilateral rule changes 

and without closure being brought in day after day after day. 

 

You know, I just can't believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it's 

come this far, that these people who spoke so eloquently, who 

said to the people of Saskatchewan that our hearts and souls 

were in the defence of democracy, our hearts and souls believe 

that unilateral rule changes should not occur, our hearts and 

souls believe that closure is a terrible, terrible instrument in a 

democratic process . . . And now to find that there was no heart 

and there was no soul.  There was simply, in the words of the 

Minister of Agriculture, a void, just a big, black hole -- a void 

that was with the New Democratic Party.  There was nothing, 

that this process that normally occurred between House leaders 

of the official opposition and the government should cease to 

function in our province some time after November 1991, a 

process that had been in place since 1905. 

 

And that's why I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

amendment was right and proper to bring into this debate.  It's 

important, I think, that the government members be reminded, 

be reminded of some history, be reminded of the process that 

was in place for so long, be reminded of their own words, over 

and over again. 

 

And I wondering how they're going to get that back.  I'm 

wondering how they're going to get back any of that credibility 

that used to exist there.  I'm wondering if we'll ever see a New 

Democrat in this legislature stand in his place some time in the 

future and speak against closure, speak against rule changes, 

speak against the things that used to be strongly felt by all 

members of this Assembly.  Or are we going to have now a 

precedent set?  Instead of House leaders ironing out the 

business of this legislature in a well-defined and time-honoured 

process, instead of that, I guess what we will see is New 

Democrats always operate in the mode that they are now, 

where they bring in legislation that says you can't take me to 

court.  I can 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2147 

create a void in a province with 60,000 people, like some 

things never happened.  The unilateral rule changes will 

become the norm instead of the exception; that closure will 

become the norm not the exception. 

 

And if one listens to the Government House Leader in his chats 

with the media, one would have to believe that closure will 

become the norm.  That this . . . and I fully expect, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, given the government's track record, that we will see 

more unilateral rule changes in order to allow closure to 

become that normal functioning creature of this House. 

 

And that tells me that whatever soul, whatever soul there was 

in the New Democratic Party about democracy will have 

ceased to exist, will be extinguished because they don't believe 

in process any more.  That the time-honoured processes of 

House leaders will never work, because I can never imagine an 

instance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where a House Leader from the 

official opposition will want to have any truck with the New 

Democratic Party House Leader. 

 

Because he knows, he knows that he'll be dealing with an 

individual who believes in unilateral rule change and believes 

in closure, who speaks words that mean nothing, who speaks 

words in defence of democracy that mean nothing.  Because 

one can draw no other conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Absolutely no other conclusion can be reasonably drawn. 

 

So it could be any political party over here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  It won't necessarily be maybe this political party or 

the Liberal Party or the Reform Party.  Anybody dealing with 

an NDP government and an NDP House Leader knows that 

that process is fraught, is fraught with suspicion, is fraught with 

danger because it is simply words.  It is simply words -- words 

that are spoken to attain political power and nothing else.  

Because all that matters is the exercise of political power.  And 

that is a sad, sad day, Mr. Speaker, when this House, when this 

House sinks to that low.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a Bill 

before this House that has set unprecedented lows -- 

unprecedented lows in dealing with the people that we are 

supposedly to serve. 

 

Now as has been pointed out a little bit earlier, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, in this case we're only dealing with 60,000 farm 

families -- 60,000 farm families that actually believe that New 

Democrats spoke more than just words; 60,000 farm families 

that said, we expect fair and honest and equitable treatment 

from people who in our province have taken pride in the fact 

that our Premier was one of the people that brought home the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982, a charter that 

guaranteed each and every one of us our day in court; a charter 

that guaranteed each and every one of us our freedoms in 

religion and many other areas -- a charter that we hope was 

more than words; a charter that actually had people that were 

ready to stand up for it; a charter that people were ready to go 

to the wall for others; a charter that said that no longer will the 

executive branch of government be the only recourse for 

individuals.  Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously that is as 

hollow a belief by New Democrats in this province as is their 

words spoken in this legislature on closure, on bell-ringing, on 

democracy. 

Because today and yesterday, and days and days and days in 

this legislature, we have seen this government determined, 

absolutely determined to bring forth a Bill in this legislature 

that goes against all of those principles -- a Bill that says to 

individuals in this province, you don't have your day in court.  

You never will have your day in court.  As long as the New 

Democratic Party is in power in this province, you as an 

individual are stripped of your rights. 

 

(2245) 

 

If you are a farmer in this province, you are no better than a 

serf in medieval Europe.  You do not have a right to take the 

king to court.  You do not have a right to challenge the dictates 

of Executive Council.  And Executive Council can now change 

your life arbitrarily, I would say by this legislation, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, on a monthly basis.  And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that that rings hollow with what I have heard in my seven years 

in this Assembly, come from the mouths of New Democrats 

session after session after session.  The time-honoured process 

of House leaders working out the proceedings of this 

legislature have gone the way of rights of farmers. 

 

In all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many people in this 

province whose ancestors a short two and three generations 

ago, as the member from Morse pointed out, who absolutely 

fled from tyranny, who put everything on the line to come to a 

place, to come to a place where they would have an 

opportunity, an opportunity to raise their family, to have a farm 

where the king or the lord . . . where someone could dictate to 

them on a daily basis what crops they were going to grow, how 

they were going to market them.  And when they signed a 

contract or they shook someone's hand, they would know that 

there were people there ready to protect them through English 

common law, knew that they were going to protect them no 

matter what. 

 

You know it was interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I read a 

book last year that talked about the involvement of the Right 

Hon. John George Diefenbaker, and it talked about his early 

trial period before he entered the political realm.  And in it he 

talked about his early law practice in the Wakaw area. 

 

And while there he was involved in a number of fairly 

sensational cases that often involved murder, involved very 

serious family situations. And it talked about his defence of 

people primarily from eastern Europe, people who didn't 

necessarily believe that this system of justice that we had in our 

country would back them up.  It uses the term Ruthenian quite 

often.  Now Ruthenia was a province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 

the edge of the old Russian empire.  But a lot of people that 

were very fearful that they would get their day in court, that 

they would get justice with the system that was in place in 

Canada. 

 

And one of the hallmarks of John George Diefenbaker as he 

defended people in very serious circumstances, was that he 

proved to them that in our country, when you prove to them 

that a jury of their peers, when the evidence was presented 

fairly, would adjudicate the problem and come up with a fair 

solution.  And of course one of Mr. 



2148 Saskatchewan Hansard August 7, 1992 

Diefenbaker's hallmarks, I guess, as a barrister in our province 

was the fact that he defended so many people from eastern 

Europe, of eastern European origin, successfully in a system 

that they didn't fully understand, that they didn't fully trust, and 

was able to keep a number of people from the death penalty in 

our province who might otherwise have been adjudicated 

differently. 

 

And the reason I raise it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because it has 

become a part of our tradition in this province, a part of our 

being because we are of such diverse backgrounds, that people 

will have that confidence in the judicial process.  That they will 

feel absolute security, absolute security in their knowledge that 

as individuals their inherent rights cannot be trampled upon. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we are seeing now is that 

trampling.  What we're seeing now is people who, from their 

very earliest origins as a political party, have always ascribed 

themselves as the ultimate defenders -- the ultimate defenders 

of the little guy, the defender against the multinational 

corporation, the defender against people who would take 

advantage.  That they were the defenders of the processes in 

this House, the defenders of the processes in this House that 

allowed dozens of House leaders over the decades -- Liberal, 

Conservative, CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), 

New Democrat . . . they were confident that that process would 

keep their freedom, that that process would keep their 

democratic rights; that that process would guarantee that day in 

court; that that process that had been here would say to people, 

no matter from whence they came, that this province, this 

province would above all, give them that day in court.  It would 

give them that freedom as individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I know the members of the government like 

to make light of this, that this is a very small, small thing and 

you shouldn't be worried about it.  You, the official opposition, 

who have just recently suffered electoral defeat shouldn't be 

worried about what we do, that you should let us sort of do 

whatever we want in this province because we attained some 

divine right because of an electoral process.  That we have the 

ability to speak words that are nothing but words, that we 

should be able to have access to the king's money without 

grievance, that we should be able to change the legal rules of 

our land . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'm listening patiently 

to the member from Thunder Creek, and although the remarks 

he makes may well be relevant to the amendment and to the 

motion that's before the House, the member fails to make that 

connection and I encourage him, I encourage the member to 

make his remarks relevant to the questions that are before the 

House. 

 

Order, order.  The Chair doesn't need the assistance of the 

government members in this ruling. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Well, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I appreciate your ruling, and I think when 

talking about Government House leaders in this Assembly, 

when talking about House leaders in general and the process 

that have been traditional here, that we 

are speaking about the Bill in question and the amendment 

posed because the Speaker of this Assembly over the process 

of the last 60 days has twice intervened as never before in this 

Assembly's principles and process. 

 

And one of the things that was enunciated at each of those 

interventions was that there should be a process for the 

government and the opposition to work out this problem.  And 

every time that this particular piece of legislation was set aside, 

it was always with a very public pronouncement that there 

should be some type of negotiation, some type of process 

entered into.  And I think the Speaker did that -- and this is 

only my own opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- and it was so that 

some of the principles that have governed this place for so 

long, through so much trial and error, through so much 

tribulation, would stay in place.  I think that's why it was done.  

That's why we had the Speaker of this Assembly out into land 

that had never been ventured into before, so that the principles 

of this place would have an opportunity to be protected, would 

have an opportunity to be protected. 

 

And that was clearly predicated each time on the fact that a 

negotiating process was supposed to take place.  He believed 

that there were certain irrefutable principles at work in this 

place here.  It said that those negotiations should come to come 

kind of a reasonable conclusion. 

 

And instead of that happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, instead of 

those government and opposition House leaders getting 

together, as I believe were ordered by the presiding officer of 

this Assembly, it didn't take place.  All it was was this feeling 

by the government that they simply had to wait a certain period 

of time and then it was just a simple matter of carrying on the 

heavy-handed process. 

 

And it didn't matter that the presiding officer of this Assembly 

had gone out where no other Speaker had gone before, so to 

speak, and come up with alternatives to a problem that was 

viewed as impassable.  And each time that he went out beyond 

where anyone had ever gone before, the impression was left, 

the impression was left that the time-honoured process and 

principles of this House would take effect, that there would be 

a negotiating process, that here would be some give and take, 

that there would be the ability of members of this legislature to 

come to some kind of reasonable agreement, without putting 

asunder the things that had been here for so long. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Before the normal 

time of adjournment, I wish to make a ruling.  During 

second-reading debate on Bill 87 this evening, the hon. 

member from Morse spoke as the seconder to the amendment 

proposed by the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

When speaking to the amendment, either as the proposer or the 

seconder, a member is speaking not only to the amendment, but 

also to the main motion, and I refer members to Beauchesne's, 

6th Edition, citation 465(10). 

 

Under our rules, a member is allowed to speak only once to a 

question.  See rule 31.  The hon. member from Morse had 

already spoken to the question of second reading yesterday and 

consequently was ineligible to second the amendment. 



August 7, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2149 

It is not out of order for the member for Morse to speak to the 

amendment once it has been moved and seconded by other 

members, but he cannot propose or second an amendment or he 

would be speaking twice to the main motion. 

 

A remedy for this situation is to name another member as 

seconder, that is, another member who has not yet spoken in 

the debate.  I remind members that this seconder will be able to 

speak in debate on the amendment but in so doing he will also 

be speaking to the main motion. 

 

So the question I have: is there another member who can be 

named as seconder for the motion? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I would second that motion, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member for Thunder Creek then 

will be named as the seconder for the amendment; therefore the 

amendment is in order, and debate can continue.  And the 

member for Thunder Creek can speak to the amendment and to 

the main question.  It now being 11 o'clock, this House stands 

adjourned pursuant to special order, until 9 a.m. on Monday. 

 

The House adjourned at 11 p.m. 

 

 

 


