




















































Hansard: July 03, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1183 

 July 3, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Trew: -- I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Today I'm pleased to 

report more STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company) 

good news, as the Crown corporation continues to brighten our 

Saskatchewan future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- The Retail, Wholesale Department Store Union 

organized the Regina cafeteria staff at the Regina depot.  After 

the sign-up the first collective agreement was not reached.  In 

fact, a work stoppage lasting nearly six months ensued. 

 

Immediately after the post-election changes, with the active 

participation of the Retail, Wholesale Department Store Union, 

the cafeteria reopened under new management and with a 

collective agreement.  The union is very actively involved in 

the Regina and the Saskatoon depot.  Both cafeterias are 

providing food service to the travelling public, and both 

cafeterias are profitable. 

 

It is wonderful, Mr. Speaker, that after six months without a 

regular pay cheque, workers at the STC cafeterias have a good 

working relationship with a Crown corporation that is 

committed to fairness and to service. 

 

It is my pleasure to report this further good news as STC 

continues to turn the ship around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today in regard to 25 

Saskatchewan reservists who are in Victoria today training for 

eventual duties overseas in Yugoslavia.  I have a couple of 

neighbours who are from Yugoslavia and came to Canada in 

their lifetime, and they have very, very serious concerns about 

the incidents that are occurring in their homeland.  And they 

are concerned about it from a number of reasons.  And one of 

them is that their families are fighting against families and it's a 

very serious concern of theirs. 

 

And Canadians are known internationally as world 

peacekeepers and Saskatchewan sons and daughters have 

figured prominently in that reputation.  It is my sincere hope 

that our presence there will help to restore peace and bring 

much-needed aid to thousands of innocent civilians caught in 

this tragic conflict. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe all members of this Assembly, indeed all 

good citizens of our province, should join with me in wishing 

these brave and patriotic Saskatchewan Canadians Godspeed 

and safe return home. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Recently members of 

the Legislative Assembly paid tribute to honour citizens 

who were recipients of the Order of Canada, the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit, and the Medal of Bravery.  The tribute 

ceremony was conducted in the ballroom at Government House 

and was followed by a tea and tour. 

 

Mr. Terry Bzdel and Mr. Andy Bucko of Mozart were 

recipients of the Medal of Bravery.  Andy and Terry saved two 

children who were trapped inside a burning house trailer in 

Mozart on April 12, 1991.  Unable to enter the trailer through 

the front door due to dense smoke, the two men raced to the 

side door and quickly removed it from its hinges.  Hearing 

screams from within, Mr. Bzdel broke a back window but was 

unable to enter.  He returned to the side door, crawled into the 

trailer, located one of the victims lodged in the doorway and 

pulled her out.  Then Mr. Bucko entered the burning trailer, 

crawled to the rear bedroom, found the second victim 

unconscious on the floor, and dragged her out.  Seconds later 

the trailer was engulfed in flames. 

 

When news of the act of bravery was first heard it touched 

everyone's heart, and I can certainly say the same was felt by 

all at Government House.  It was definitely an honour to pay 

tribute to Terry and Andy as recipients of the Medal of 

Bravery, an honour they certainly deserve. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to congratulate Display 

Systems International, the Saskatoon regional community bond 

corporation, and the people of Martensville who have formed a 

partnership to build their community.  A partnership that was 

kicked off last night with the announcement of a community 

bond offering that will raise $700,000.  That money will be 

raised locally and invested in a local company, Display 

Systems International, a small Martensville business that 

produces low cost, high-performance systems to generate video 

characters that display information on news, weather, local 

events, and promotional advertising. 

 

Although it is a small company in a small community, it has 

cracked world markets for its products.  Its client list includes 

Louisiana Power & Light Company in New Orleans; the Drug 

Emporium drug stores in Virginia Beach; Hartsfield 

International Airport in Atlanta; and hundreds of cable 

companies across the U.S. (United States) and Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the drive and determination of community 

leaders like Mayor Friesen and business leaders like DSI 

(Display Systems International) president Dale Lemke, I have 

no doubt that the people of Martensville will meet the goal of 

this community bond.  And I'm sure all members wish to join 

with me in congratulating the people of this hard-working 

community and extend our best wishes for a sold-out bond 

offering. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me much pleasure to tell you and the members of the Assembly 

today about a very special event taking place in Fort 

Qu'Appelle this July .  A community play, the 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

Calling Lakes Community Play, Pa Co Pi Ci Walk, The 

Gathering.  This is a first in Saskatchewan.  No other 

community in the province has put on such a play before. 

 

To mount such a play requires great dedication and the diverse 

skills of many, many people. Thus talented writers, costume 

designers, set decorators, actors, managers, technicians and 

other workers have co-operated to produce a history of Fort 

Qu'Appelle and the surrounding area that will delight all who 

see it. 

 

The entire community is involved: young and old, large and 

small, aboriginal and white.  Workshops have been held since 

September in all areas of production, and professionals from all 

over Canada have been involved. 

 

While this project will boost tourism in the valley and thus 

bring many welcome holiday dollars to the businesses there, 

much more important it is a testament to the community spirit 

of the Fort.  While the play describes past co-operative 

achievements in the valley, the play is a marvellous 

demonstration in itself of those values that have made 

Saskatchewan a great place to live, that have been embodied so 

often in the communities across this province, and make 

Saskatchewan people with their warmth and friendliness so 

very special. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to ask the 

members of the Legislative Assembly here in the province of 

Saskatchewan to join us, to join me and other members in 

extending our very best wishes under very difficult 

circumstances to the cod fishermen of Newfoundland.  We 

heard yesterday that up to 20,000 people will be not only out of 

work but potentially and possibly even out of a whole way of 

life. 

 

And for people in Saskatchewan who deal with resources and 

deal with farming and the land, it's very similar to those who 

make their living on the sea.  And to find out that the fish don't 

swim or in fact this so-called renewable resource is not there, 

can be devastating to families in communities all across 

Newfoundland, as a drought is to the people of Saskatchewan.  

And for those of you in the House and those across the 

province who have combined with a cultivator and realize the 

devastation to families, I believe that the people of 

Saskatchewan understand and have some empathy for those in 

Newfoundland and what they're going through. 

 

So I would just like the people of Newfoundland to know that 

those families in Saskatchewan that deal with the land and deal 

with resources and deal with Mother Nature, reach out to them 

and provide them as much moral and spiritual encouragement 

as we can, and wish them the best and Godspeed in the months 

and years ahead. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, on 

the past weekend the community of Harris celebrated the first 

annual Ruby Rush Days.  The Yukon had its gold rush, and in 

1914 for two weeks the community of Harris had a ruby rush.  

An eight-tonne stone was located 

north-west of Harris and was discovered and thought to contain 

rubies.  The rush was on and for two weeks 3,000 people 

converged on the community. 

 

Enterprising business men set up food and beverage tents and 

provided transportation -- $3 for the trip out to the rock and $5 

return trip, depending on your size. 

 

The rubies proved not to be, but the community of Harris 

decided to commemorate the local history.  The stone was 

moved into Harris, next to the local museum, and the 

community celebrated the events with a series of plays 

depicting the events of history and other activities pertaining to 

the era. 

 

The Ruby Rush Days attracted many visitors which will 

continue to be an annual event, and the hard work of the 

community made it a great success.  And I wanted to bring it to 

the attention of the House some of our local history that exists 

in Saskatchewan.  So again thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to GRIP 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question, Mr. 

Speaker, is for the minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  

Mr. Minister, for weeks now the Conservative opposition has 

been arguing that the government should not proceed with 

retroactive GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

legislation.  And, Mr. Speaker, over 80 per cent of the public 

believes the government has acted improperly and that farmers 

should have their day in court.  Even the government's lawyers 

and House Leader have said legislation is not really needed. 

 

Mr. Minister, why then is your government poised to introduce 

this legislation, unchanged, in the face of this overwhelming 

public, legal, moral, and ethical opposition?  Does your 

government have so little regard for people's democratic rights 

that they're ready to trample over them at any chance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it rather strange 

that the opposition is condemning a Bill that they have not yet 

seen.  I think if they have problems with the Bill they should let 

it be introduced to the House and debate the Bill in the normal 

fashion as is usually done.  And they can point out to the public 

and to us and to others what they think is wrong with the Bill.  

But I think they should let us introduce a Bill in the House and 

we will debate it at that time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, that minister knows very well why 

we don't want that Bill introduced in this House, because it will 

tamper with the evidence before the court case.  That's why 

we're opposed to this Bill being introduced into this House, sir.  

That's why the people and the farmers of this province are 

opposed to you and your 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1185 

government's actions in the court . . . in this action today. 

 

If the statements are true that this information, this legislation, 

isn't necessary in the court, why then do you want to continue 

to press this legislation forward? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, this legislation is 

necessary to introduce the changes to the GRIP, and for us to 

be able to enter into the federal-provincial agreement.  And 

therefore it's necessary to introduce this legislation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, we have asked and asked and asked 

time again to have a look at that legislation -- to be able to see 

it before you introduce it into the House -- so that we can see 

and all the farmers of Saskatchewan can see whether or not 

that's indeed what you're trying to do, is tamper with the 

evidence before the court.  We would ask you again, sir, will 

you show the farmers and the opposition in this province the 

legislation, so we can see whether or not you're trying to 

tamper with this evidence? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we were prepared to 

table the legislation in the House, so that everybody in the 

public, including the opposition, could see the Bill.  The 

opposition walked out and rang the bells.  We cannot introduce 

the Bill if you won't let us introduce it.  We are ready any time 

to introduce that Bill to the House, and you can see it and the 

farmers can see it as well. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you haven't been concerned 

about showing other legislation to people, with respect to 

things like the environmental legislation.  That hasn't been a 

concern to you to show it around the province.  You're afraid of 

the farmers.  That's what's wrong with you, Mr. Minister.  

You're afraid the farmers will find out that's exactly what 

you're trying to do. 
 

Your government has been stumbling through agriculture like a 

bull in a china shop.  Every time you turn around, you destroy 

another piece of this agricultural industry. 
 

Mr. Speaker, another question for the minister of Crop 

Insurance.  On June 24 a judge gave your government leave to 

appeal the injunction that farmers were granted to extend the 

opting-out time deadline date for GRIP.  Your government 

chose to interpret this decision as an overwhelming rule, 

overwhelming rule of injunction that would quash the rights of 

the farmers. 
 

Mr. Minister, do you intend to slam the door on farmers in this 

province and not allow them an option to opt out of this 

program? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think if the member 

opposite would listen, we've said that we are prepared even at 

this late date to extend an option to opt out.  We're not trying to 

force any farmers into anything. 

We need to have the Bill in the House to do that.  Let us bring 

the Bill in and we will see whether there's an opting-out clause 

in it or not. 

 

If we can get that Bill in here before the crop is in the bin, we 

have at least a possibility of extending the opt-out. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, that is indeed not true, and the 

minister knows that not to be true.  On June 29 he instructed 

his vice-president of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance to send a 

letter out to the marketing agents throughout this province -- 

and I have a copy of it right here, Mr. Minister -- that you 

indeed said to the Crop Insurance agents that the farmers' 

deadline date was June 25, not in any kind of an extension like 

you're talking about now. 

 

How do you reconcile that, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the deadline for 

opting out of GRIP was May 15, which was the deadline.  The 

court date, they extended that indefinitely and the injunction 

has overruled that.  And that is where we're at with it right now.  

And if you want to have the date extended, just bring the Bill 

back into the legislature and we will proceed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have here now is the 

minister suggesting that the deadline date is open-ended.  That 

isn't the case, Mr. Minister.  Your vice-president of 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance said: 

 

 A decision handed down on June 25, 1992 by the Court of 

Appeal has granted the corporation leave to appeal a 

declaration regarding the buyout provision of GRIP.  This 

means that pending the final outcome of this appeal the order 

indefinitely extending the deadline is no longer in effect.  As 

a result, Saskatchewan Crop Insurance . . . advises that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows that he 

should not read at any length from a statement in question 

period.  I would ask him to ask his question.  Ask his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I would beg your indulgence for the 

last sentence. 

 

The Speaker: -- I ask the member to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, would you extend the 

deadline date for opting out until the court case is heard? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the original opt-out 

date was March 31.  We extended that to April 30.  We 

extended it again to May 15.  After that the court ruled that the 

deadline was open-ended.  The injunction has changed that and 

therefore we are back . . . we honour 



1186 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

anybody who opted out during that time between May 15 and 

the court ruling came down. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- And we are prepared to look at 

possibly even extending an opt-out longer if we can get the Bill 

back into the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Why then, Mr. Minister, did you instruct the 

Crop Insurance vice-president, Mr. Henry Schappert, to send a 

letter to marketing agents saying that the 24th was the deadline 

date?  Why did you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, that was what the 

effect of the court ruling was and we just complied with what 

the court ruling said.  The opt-out was extended by the court 

and was taken away by the court. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the letter that you sent out, it goes 

on to say that Saskatchewan Crop Insurance advises June 24 

was the final date for exercising the buy-out option.  Why then, 

sir, are you standing in the legislature here today and saying 

that the extension is open-ended, when your letter to marketing 

agents says that the deadline date is June 24? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, not listening to . . . 

the opposition is not listening to the answer.  June 24 was the 

court date which struck down the injunction and that ended the 

opt-out.  And if there is to be an additional opt-out, we can look 

at that through the legislation and the changes that are in the 

Bill.  And get the Bill into the House and let's look at an 

opt-out. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, not only is it an appalling-type 

letter to be sending out to them, it was dated June 29.  That was 

when it was sent out, Mr. Minister -- June 29 it was sent out for 

June 24 deadline date.  Another example, Mr. Speaker, of 

retroactive legislation by these people. 

 

Will you give your commitment today, sir, to the farmers of 

Saskatchewan, that the deadline date for opting out of crop . . . 

out of the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I remind the member from Turtleford 

not to interrupt during question period. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we are doing what 

the court has ruled.  We are certainly not going to disobey the 

court.  When the court said the deadline is extended, we had no 

choice but to obey the court order.  This is strictly a court 

decision and not us passing retroactive legislation, retroactive 

rules, or anything else.  It was the court ruled that the opt-out 

date was extended and it was the court that ended that ruling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the farmers of Saskatchewan 

want to know.  Is your letter that you sent under Mr. Schappert, 

the vice-president, is that the deadline date, June 24, or is it 

open-ended?  Simple question.  Do the farmers have the option 

to opt out until the court case is heard or don't they? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- The opt-out that was extended by 

the court has been discontinued.  If there's any further opt-out, 

it will have to come through the legislation.  I don't know how 

much more clearly I can say that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the media reports on 

your arrogance are greatly underestimated.  You didn't consult 

with farmers when you designed your changes to GRIP, you 

didn't talk to them when you implemented them, you failed to 

live up to the legal requirements to inform them of the March 

15 deadline.  Then you try to hide your bungling with 

retroactive legislation. 

 

Now based on your interpretation of the judge's ruling, you're 

retroactively forcing farmers to stay in a program they don't 

want to be in, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, if you did nothing 

for agriculture, it would be a step forward.  That's what it 

would be. 

 

The Speaker: -- Do you have a question?  Does the member 

have a question? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, would you at least keep your word 

and extend the deadline date till the court is heard? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, let's get on with the 

legislation and we can make the changes.  The deadline which 

was extended by the court was a court order and was extended 

by the court.  We extended the deadline from March 31 to 

April 30 and then again to May 15. 

 

And we had a very difficult time with a program that was a 

mess when we started, which is a contract which is made up of 

an application form made up of programs, made up of news 

releases.  And that's the way the program was administered last 

year.  And we are left with that mess to try to work with that 

program which was very much not a clear-cut contract, not a 

clear-cut program, which was one terrible mess.  And that was 

what we started with and that's what we had to work with.  And 

if we missed a deadline we also extended the opt-out for six 

weeks.  And we did everything we could to be fair to the 

farmers and worked with the mess we had.  I think we've done 

a reasonably good job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you say the only reason why you're 

holding things up is because the Bill isn't introduced.  And yet, 

Mr. Minister, you've extended the deadline date on two other 

occasions that didn't have any effect on anything as far as the 

legislation is concerned.  You weren't concerned about 

extending the deadline 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1187 

from March 15 to May.  What was the problem then? 

 

Mr. Minister, the farmers of Saskatchewan want to know, are 

you going to stand by the June 24 deadline like you sent out to 

marketing agents, or are you going to extend the deadline date 

indefinitely until the court case is heard?  That's all the farmers 

want to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, there is a limit to how 

long you can extend deadlines on an insurance program.  The 

court case, and all the legal advice and opinion that I have, is 

this court case will take weeks, probably months, and maybe 

years to be settled.  And if it's the opposition's wish that we 

should extend the deadline until the court case is finally settled 

and provide options for insurance after the crop is in the bin, I 

think that that's a very impractical solution. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Information on Government Hirings 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question this 

morning was to the Premier, but the Premier is in Ottawa.  And 

I would direct my questions to the . . . I will direct my question 

to the Deputy Premier this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On Tuesday, June 30, Mr. Speaker, ministers repeatedly 

refused to provide this side of the House with information that 

should be made public.  The ministers are standing in your way 

of your election promise to be a honest and open government, 

Mr. Minister.  Will you today, Mr. Minister, will you today 

answer the question that we've been asking for months?  We've 

been asking this for months and months, and you haven't been 

answering us.  Will you provide us with a list of individuals 

who have been hired by the NDP government since November 

1, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, this is an open 

government.  I find it strange that the member from Arm River 

would even suggest otherwise, considering the record of the 

former administration. 

 

And I want to tell the member opposite that whatever the 

House orders, this legislature and this government will provide.  

There was a debate the other day for orders for return, and 

whatever the House orders, this government will provide that 

information in full. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, another question to the Deputy 

Premier.  Yes, all of Saskatchewan are asking this question, not 

just the members of this House.  We want you, Mr. Speaker, to 

table all new hiring that this government has done since 

November 1, 1991.  And we've been asking this question on 

behalf of the people of Saskatchewan since that date, and 

you've given us no answer.  If, Mr. Minister, you want us to 

call you an open, honest government, please give us that 

information. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't know 

what the member is talking about.  All of this information is 

available now.  The member knows that he can go to the 

appropriate place in Executive Council and get information on 

presidents of Crown corporations, what their salaries are, what 

their benefits are -- something which never was available back 

in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It is available now since the beginning of the term of this 

government, and it will continue to be available because the 

information on people who are hired in various positions of the 

government should be public knowledge. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer that the Deputy 

Premier gives is simply not true.  You are ashamed to give this 

information in this here House, Mr. Deputy Premier, because 

you have so many contracts that are even verbal.  Don't tell me 

they're going to be available through Public Accounts and what 

not because they're not. 

 

My new question: what I want to know, Mr. Minister, is how 

many individuals -- this shouldn't be too hard a question for 

them to answer -- how many individuals your government has 

hired.  You should know that.  Throughout the entire 

government in the midst of your hiring frenzy, I want to know 

specifically the number of individuals.  Will you at least supply 

a list of the positions and salaries since November 1, 1991.  

That should not be a hard question to ask. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that certainly is not 

a hard question to ask and it's certainly not a hard question to 

answer.  I want to assure the member from Arm River that all 

of that information is available and will be available.  And if 

the member wants department by department to know what the 

hiring has been, what the contracts are, he's got all kinds of 

options available. 

 

One, there's the freedom of information.  That information is 

provided.  Two, in Estimates, particularly in Estimates, he can 

ask those questions and all of that information will be 

presented.  Ministers have been alerted that those questions 

will be answered.  I suspect that the ministers will have it even 

in writing to pass it over to the member when he begins to ask 

those questions in the Estimates in the Committee of Finance 

of the various departments. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the way how 

this minister answers all questions.  You said you'll get it in 

some other department or some other way.  He has never, since 

this House sat in the end of April, he has never stood to his feet 

and answered a question. 

 

My new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker.  Your Associate 

Minister of Finance stated on June 30, 1991, that it was 

impossible to provide a list because, and I quote: 



1188 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

. . . if we were to answer this it would be a book that would 

rival the New York telephone book. 

 

Now that is what he said in respect to those individuals hired 

since November 1, '91.  The associate minister's remarks are 

for concern to the people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Will you confirm, Mr. Minister, that you have hired so many 

individuals in SaskTel just since November 1 that it would fill 

a telephone book?  Will you confirm that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Speaker, I won't confirm 

that, if that is the member's question.  I simply want to repeat 

what I have said.  This government is one to be open with the 

information such as the member asks for.  He can ask those 

questions in Committee of Finance.  All of that information 

would be fully and completely available.  All of the positions 

in places like SaskTel are advertised.  There's open 

competitions for those positions, Mr. Speaker.  Everything is 

done differently than it was in the 1980s because this party, the 

New Democratic Party, said if the people elected us we would 

have open, honest, and accountable government.  And that's 

what we're going to do. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that's the kind of arrogance 

we've heard from that side of the House since this House has 

come in.  Absolute arrogance. 

 

The Associate Minister of Finance and the Government House 

Leader have repeatedly denied this public information.  I have 

asked and I have asked in Estimates to get this information 

from that minister responsible for Public Service Commission 

and he has denied those answers.  Now you say, go to this 

department, go to that department.  If the list of your patronage 

appointments would rival even the Wynyard telephone listings, 

the public of Saskatchewan has a right to know. 

 

I repeat, Mr. Minister, will you provide me today with a list of 

individuals hired since November 1, 1991?  Will you provide it 

as Deputy Premier of this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member wants 

that kind of information, he knows I don't have that information 

available.  If he wants that kind of information, one, he can put 

it on the order paper for an order for return; it'll be provided.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, he can ask it in the Estimates of the 

different departments and he will get it in detail for each of the 

departments that he wants. 

 

Now I hope the member is asking for positions that are 

appointed by the government in management positions and not 

positions that are an open competition through the Public 

Service Commission.  Because indeed if that's what he's 

asking, he will be asking for a voluminous piece of information 

which is really quite unnecessary because the process there is 

open on the competition basis.  And I hope that the member 

isn't going to that extent.  But if he wants some of that 

information he knows the right place to ask that, not at question 

period where the information 

isn't available, but in the Committee of Finance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the Deputy Premier: are you 

saying to this Assembly, Mr. Deputy Premier, that when we get 

to your ministers, are you saying we'll get that information?  Or 

are we going to be stifled like we have been in the past?  Will 

you instruct your ministers to give us all the information of 

every individual that has been hired by your government so we 

can tell who has been political and who hasn't been? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I invite the member 

from Arm River, and I invite any other critic of any 

department, to ask those questions in Committee of Finance.  

To the extent that those questions are in order, they'll be 

answered.  But I urge the member opposite not to get into the 

business of asking for all of the positions that are hired in 

government because he knows that over a period of a year, I 

don't know the numbers, but it's very large.  If he wants to ask 

questions about positions that the government appoints by 

order in council in management positions, that will be 

answered by the ministers without any reservations 

whatsoever.  I give him that assurance. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier knows 

right well, this opposition, what kind of answers we're trying to 

get from you, and that's been your political hirings.  Because 

you promised at election time there'd be no political firings and 

no political hirings.  Now you've broken that promise and you 

aren't men enough to stand in your front row and say so.  And 

we're going to keep on going till we find out. 

 

If I thought it would assist me, I would apply for a freedom of 

information request on this issue.  But this is what's happening 

with the freedom of information.  In fact there's an article in the 

Leader-Post yesterday, July 2.  This article states, and I quote: 

 

 . . . already, information that was promised under (the 

freedom of information) Act is being denied. 

 

In fact the government won't even release how many of the 133 

requests filed have been provided. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: will you today tell us 

exactly how many of the freedom of information requests have 

been filed, and how many of these requests have been denied? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, I don't have before 

me the number of freedom of information requests that have 

been filed, but I can tell the member opposite that all of the 

freedom of information requests within the freedom of 

information legislation have either been answered or are in the 

process of being answered -- those that are within the terms of 

the freedom of information legislation. 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1189 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, new question to the Deputy 

Premier.  You won't tell us how many have been hired.  You 

won't tell us how many's been fired.  You won't tell us how 

many questions have been answered through the freedom of 

information.  You won't tell us any of these things.  You just 

stand there, you sanctimonious bunch of ministers in the front . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Let's ask the question. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Isn't it true, Mr. Deputy Premier, that the 

requests that had been put on hold, they've been held back to 

save the NDP (New Democratic Party) government political 

embarrassment.  Is that not the truth?  You don't want to have a 

political embarrassment by naming all the people that you've 

hired -- the political hirings? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 

member from Arm River is no.  It is not true. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Ombudsman Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act respecting Arbitration 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Arbitration Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 65 -- An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I move that a Bill to amend The 

Homesteads Act be now introduced and read the first time, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

MOTIONS 

 

Granting of Leave for Members to attend Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 

day, by leave of the Assembly, I move: 

 

 That the absence be granted to the hon. member for The 

Battlefords and the hon. member for Regina North West from 

Monday, July 6, '92 to Wednesday, July 8, '92, inclusive, for 

the purpose of attending the annual meeting of the Canadian 

Council of Public Accounts Committees and conference of 

legislative auditors in Fredericton, New Brunswick. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to 

introduce for the consideration of the Assembly, The 

Community Bond amendment Act.  In keeping with our 

government's commitment to the Saskatchewan spirit of 

community and co-operation and to our pledge to represent the 

interests of everyone in the province, this Act will provide our 

communities, rural and urban alike, with a stronger program to 

support their economic development efforts. 

 

It is an understatement to say that we are facing tough 

economic times right now in the province of Saskatchewan, a 

situation made all the more difficult because of the legacy of 

debt left by the members opposite.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

Saskatchewan people have faced tough times before.  We have 

always pulled together, pooled our resources and skills, and 

met the challenge and found solutions that worked.  That is 

how the co-operative movement was started.  The movement of 

our grain was controlled by Winnipeg and Chicago grain 

traders and the co-op movement helped to keep the money and 

control right here in our communities and in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We couldn't get credit from eastern-controlled banks.  Financial 

institutions were insensitive to the unique needs of 

Saskatchewan.  And as a result we formed credit unions -- that 

is local people controlling their money and finances for the 

benefit of their communities. 

 

The community bond concept is built on that same tradition 

and this amendment will strengthen that tradition.  Mr. 

Speaker, there is ample evidence that the same spirit of 

community and co-operation that built our province is in fact 

alive and well and ready to be harnessed once again in the 

province. 

 

Since the original community bond Act was proclaimed 



1190 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

in 1990, 142 community bond corporations have been 

incorporated, 22 bond offerings have raised almost $10 million; 

it has been used towards economic development.  This has 

enabled 14 Saskatchewan businesses to create more than 250 

jobs.  And we expect, Mr. Speaker, with the improvement to 

the Act that we are proposing, hundreds of more jobs will be 

created for Saskatchewan residents and families. 

 

Successful, locally controlled economic development projects 

involving community bonds have included projects like the 

resort complex at Manitou Springs Hotel; Master 

Manufacturing, a firm that makes steel buildings in Moose 

Jaw; Perma Tile, whose roofing tiles are made in Lemberg and 

are sold all throughout North America. 

 

Many other communities have bond offerings in innovative 

projects in various stages of progress.  A couple of such 

examples of this are: the provincial review committee has 

given the Pheasant Creek Community Bond Corporation the 

go-ahead to proceed with a project involving the manufacture 

of a fibreglass products and components.  Another in 

Saskatoon that QCC Community Bond Corporation has formed 

to invest a company to manufacture and service advanced 

technological equipment. 

 

Just this week, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of attending the 

kick-off for the Saskatoon community bond as well the 

Saskatoon regional community bond.  It is expected, Mr. 

Speaker, that these two bond corporations could create 

hundreds of jobs directly and indirectly in Saskatoon and the 

Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill is in addition to the many other 

responsible measures that this government has already taken to 

stimulate economic development and to replace economic 

chaos and stagnation with planning and prosperity.  Measures 

for the small-business sector include reduced taxation burden;  

measures for the manufacturing sector to begin phasing out 

education and health tax in manufacturing and processing 

inputs to improve their competitive position;  measures to 

enhance the ability of tourism industry to attract tourists and 

entertainment dollars.  And finally, Mr. Speaker, I will be 

announcing measures for investment in small-business 

community to increase allowable annual contributions to 

Saskatchewan labour-sponsored venture capital corporation. 

 

(1045) 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, my department has made available 

this year another $20 million in guarantees for the community 

bond program which will stimulate investment and jobs in 

small business at the grassroots level.  Mr. Speaker, in response 

to the call to streamline government and reduce the number of 

agencies involved in economic development, we will be doing 

this in my department with fewer staff and a smaller budget. 

 

This Bill is an important part of our economic development 

plan.  The amendments the House will be considering flow 

from the same process that resulted in the first realistic 

provincial budget in many, many years.  That is we looked, we 

listened, and then we act.  And now 

the legislation is here. 

 

We looked at a promising community-based economic 

development idea, the community bond program, hampered by 

the previous government's secret deals, patronage, and just 

plain bad management.  We listened to the community bond 

corporation, the co-operative sector, industry, local 

government, and our own department and Crown corporations.  

We acted with this legislation designed to address the concerns 

and strengthen the community bond program. 

 

Under The Community Bonds Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 

the co-operatives in the province will become eligible to be 

involved in community bond funding.  As we have said, 

co-operatives play a vital role in Saskatchewan's economy, but 

they were locked out of the community bond program by the 

short-sighted policies of the previous administration. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, under this legislation, an acceptable 

independent third party, due diligence review process will 

become mandatory, and commercial viability will become a 

key requirement for all approved projects.  This will increase 

confidence of prospective investors in the bond offerings and, 

of course, protect the taxpayers who, in fact, guarantee the 

bonds for the public. 

 

Limits of liability for directors of community bond 

corporations will be defined.  This will give community 

representatives a greater comfort level with projects for which 

they are asked to serve as board members. 

 

Restrictions on the use of community bond funds by the project 

companies will be stipulated.  This will ensure that funds are 

used to help develop industry in Saskatchewan and not simply 

pay off debt or refinance existing businesses. 

 

The equity position of the community bond corporation will be 

limited to 50 per cent of any one project.  This ensures the risk 

equally shared among government, the private sector, and the 

local community. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the program cap for the maximum level of 

guaranteed debt will be set at $100 million.  As recommended 

by the Gass Commission, government commitments will be 

controlled within Legislative Assembly.  Now, Mr. Speaker, 

what this means is that if more than $100 million in community 

bond program is needed, the government of the day will have 

to come back to the legislature to be granted approval to go 

beyond the $100 million maximum. 

 

Provision will be made for a maintenance guaranteed fee.  

Corporations will be assessed this fee by the government to 

partially offset the cost of providing the government guarantee.  

In addition there are some small housekeeping amendments. 

 

This will not be the final review of this legislation, Mr. 

Speaker.  And in keeping with our commitment to be 

responsive, responsible government, it will be reviewed 

annually and fine tuned on a regular basis. 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1191 

Mr. Speaker, I'm confident that all members of this Assembly 

will work together to ensure speedy passage of the measures to 

clear up the anomalies, inconsistencies, and problem areas that 

have been identified by the public in the community bond 

program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in that spirit I now present The Community 

Bonds Amendment Act for second reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I make a 

few comments regarding the Bill as it's presented to the House 

before I would adjourn the debate on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt over the past number of years 

that many communities, many individuals and groups of 

people, have looked at this corporation and this idea and have 

certainly grasped the potential it has for our province.  We have 

seen over the past number of years . . . and I believe the 

minister has given an outline of a number of new organizations 

that have come to the community bond corporation seeking 

some help and allowing them to go to their local market 

seeking the financing and the equity needed for them to put in 

place an idea, whether it's manufacturing or processing, that 

allows them to strengthen their community and allows them to 

create jobs within their community. 

 

Over the past number of years we have seen communities like 

Kindersley and their Rotary Air Force Community Bond 

Corporation build a little company that has provided a number 

of jobs to the community, and I'm sure the community of 

Kindersley is appreciative of the community bond corporation 

and the concept. 

 

The small community of Lemberg . . . I'm not exactly sure of 

the population, but I know it's less than 500.  A group of 

individuals decided that they could get into a different form of 

roofing, and they've developed a roofing tile company, and I 

believe they have an excellent product.  And we're seeing more 

and more of that product appearing not only in the 

Saskatchewan market-place but I believe right across western 

Canada.  And it's probably a product that I believe really has 

the potential to develop right across the western hemisphere. 

 

And it began because people had an idea.  They needed a little 

bit of help on the equity side, came to government and through 

the community bond corporation were able to do a bond 

offering.  And people in their community believed that this was 

an excellent idea to not only enhance the community by 

creating jobs, but would give them an area and an avenue in 

which they can invest their money in.  There's no doubt in my 

mind that more people will take a serious look at community 

bonds and the community bond concept to invest in their 

communities in light of the fact that interest rates have dropped 

off so dramatically.  And it's probably a better investment to 

build your community and to build for yourself through the 

future rather than letting your money sit in a financial 

institution maybe drawing only 3, 4, or 5 per cent in interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're happy on the opposition side to see 

that the government is continuing this project.  And no doubt 

any time any idea comes forward such as the community bond 

corporations and you lay out the guidelines, a lot of times, Mr. 

Speaker, you will find sometimes the guidelines don't quite 

meet what the original intention of the program was going to 

be. 

 

And so at this time we realize too that no doubt the community 

bonds needed to be reviewed and reassessed and looked at and 

some new guidelines set in place.  We want to take a little more 

time to look at some of the guidelines that have been brought 

forward by the government.  We trust and we will offer 

suggestions as well that will strengthen this corporation 

because I believe, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a lot to offer 

Canada, more than just agriculture and oil and potash.  Mr. 

Speaker, I believe we need to look at ways in which we can 

become processors and we can diversify our economy so that 

we can strengthen the infrastructure in this province, 

strengthening our small and larger urban communities. 

 

So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 35 -- An Act 

respecting the Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale of 

Milk be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other concerns 

and issues we'd just like to raise at this time and I don't have all 

the information directly in front of me.  My colleague has been 

called to do some media . . . and at this time I would adjourn 

debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 21 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 21 -- An Act 

to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, to make certain 

consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from that 

continuance and to validate certain transactions involving 

SaskEnergy Incorporated be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, here again we have a Bill that 

certainly has a fair bit of content to it.  And we have entered 

into discussion with a number of people and we're still waiting 

for some information to come back to our caucus regarding the 

Bill.  We're looking for input from especially people who 

would be directly affected by the Bill.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

entered, SaskEnergy Act is the splitting off of SaskEnergy 

from Sask Power Corporation.  It's somewhat similar, I believe, 

to the Act that was presented back in 1989 although it does 

take . . . I believe it eliminated the privatization portion of the 

Bill. 



1192 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

But we would also like to mention that we believe . . . The Bill 

was originally introduced in 1989.  The idea was to give the 

corporation an opportunity to again go out and find equity and 

take some of the burden of taxpayers' money off the debt that 

was saddled upon the taxpayers of this province and put it in 

the hands of individuals who believe that this corporation could 

be a worthwhile corporation to invest in. 

 

And so we would suggest, and we will no doubt probably be 

bringing amendments forward that would suggest, and give the 

government an opportunity to allow this corporation as well to 

indeed go out to the private market and find some of the funds 

necessary for the corporation to operate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as we await further information and further 

contact from people involved or that would be affected by this 

Act, we would ask leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill 3 -- An Act to amend 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

have a number of questions and concerns about this Bill.  My 

main concern is similar to that stemming from changes being 

made to a number of Bills introduced into this House.  These 

Bills will give sweeping powers to the government cabinet 

ministers.  Mr. Speaker, these Bills will reduce individual 

rights for Saskatchewan citizens. 

 

Bill 3 is just another example of this dangerous trend.  In this 

Bill, the Minister of the Environment will be given powers of 

search that exceed any enforcement power, not only in Canada, 

but I suspect in the free world.  What I'm referring to is the 

section of the Bill which allows the Minister of the 

Environment or environmental officer or any designated person 

-- and I am quoting the Bill -- to enter onto any land or into any 

building of a private individual or group in the province 

without obtaining a warrant.  They can do so on speculation, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Further to this, the above-mentioned individuals, which 

basically means anyone, can use any force they deem -- that's 

the government's favourite word, it seems -- deemed 

appropriate to gain entry.  They can use any equipment, 

machinery, or materials that they feel are necessary to carry out 

this forced entry.  This is specified in the Bill.  This puts the 

minister, or any person designated by the minister, above the 

law. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I had a chat with a retired RCMP (Royal 

Canadian Mounted Police) officer who was appalled with this 

type of action.  He told me, Mr. Speaker, that the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms limit the action of the police to search for 

drugs which pollute and cause environmental damage to people 

in a much more direct 

way.  Yet the NDP are suggesting their environmental 

rent-a-cops be given powers of search which exceed that of any 

enforcement power. 

 

How can the government do this, Mr. Speaker?  How can the 

government be sure that it will not be in court over this action?  

The RCMP in this country do not have the power that the 

Minister of the Environment is attempting to gain with this 

Bill.  The government may barge onto any private land if they 

think they have a reasonable and probable grounds, nothing 

more.  They need not get consent, and I wonder if consent will 

ever be sought prior to these break-and-enters.  Maybe the 

minister can clarify this when she has an opportunity. 

 

(1100) 

 

Will they be seeking permission prior to their entries?  How 

can the damage sustained by these force . . . What about the 

damage sustained by these forceful entries?  Perhaps the 

suspicion initiating the forced entries is inaccurate.  Who is left 

with the repair bills?  Is the Department of the Environment 

and Public Safety to fix what they damaged, or is this left up 

the minister's discretion as well? 

 

I also have a problem with the section dealing with an 

individual's place of residence.  In section 2.3(7) and 2.3(8) the 

minister is changing who is allowed to issue search warrants.  

This change allows a justice of the peace to issue warrants in 

respect to searching a person's home, their castle, their 

domicile.  This is a change from a provincial court judge to a 

justice of the peace. 

 

Why is the minister including this provision in the Bill?  

Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I'm surprised she did not take this 

function solely onto herself.  Mr. Speaker, this power grab by 

the NDP government cabinet ministers is confusing.  Why do 

they need to accumulate additional power? 

 

The same principle is at play in other Bills introduced into this 

Assembly.  The Bills I refer to reduce individual rights and 

increase ministerial powers.  This is disconcerting and very 

troubling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what set of circumstances would make it 

necessary for a minister to release confidential information on a 

private resident of Saskatchewan? 

 

Two Bills give the minister the ability to do so.  People are 

losing their right to confidentiality, their right to privacy, their 

right for a just trial.  The NDP even tried to limit political 

satire.  It was only after being ridiculed that they changed their 

minds. They reversed the decision, and did so outside of the 

committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government is going too far.  We in 

opposition want the public to be notified of significant 

amendments such as the one this Bill contains.  The public 

should be made aware of what is happening.  They should be 

informed on what the NDP government is doing, that their 

individual rights are slowly being diminished and that the 

cabinet ministers' powers are being increased.  Some trade-off. 

 

The loss of individual rights is not the only matter that 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1193 

needs review in this Bill.  I'm also concerned about the section 

stating that no person shall pollute or cause pollution.  I do 

agree that actions which are adversely affecting our 

environment must be contained.  But, Mr. Speaker, some 

would feel that producers, farm producers' use of pesticides is 

polluting the environment.  How is this Bill going to affect our 

province's farmers?  Are they going to be stopped from using 

farm chemicals -- farm chemicals that are necessary to protect 

their crops, to protect their livelihoods?  Will farmers' barns be 

broken into?  Will their Roundup be seized by environmental 

police? 

 

This may sound silly, Mr. Speaker, but the Bill is not specific.  

Are there any guidelines?  Are there any guidelines on the 

amount of funds that must be deposited by owners or operators 

dealing with storage of hazardous substances in case of 

contamination?  The possibility of contamination is very real.  

The owners must be responsible if a clean-up is necessary.  

However does the amount of funding depend on the substance 

in question or the type of facility or the environmental history?  

Or is it entirely based on the minister's discretion?  If the 

minister happens to like you, is the deposit lower than if the 

minister does not hold you in high esteem? 

 

This is what it seems to be in reading the Bill, Mr. Speaker.  It 

states that -- and I am paraphrasing -- that: 

 

 . . . owners, operators, and persons installing, servicing, 

testing, and decommissioning storage tanks, containers or 

facilities for hazardous substances to obtain insurance or 

performance bonds, to deposit funds in any financial 

institution approved by the minister and in any amounts the 

minister may consider necessary (in any amounts the minister 

may consider necessary), to establish trust funds or to provide 

proof to the minister of financial soundness to cover possible 

contamination or pollution . . . 

 

The key words are "in any amounts the minister may consider 

necessary."  Surely the minister will not sit at a desk and pull 

numbers out of thin air.  Confirm to us, Madam Minister, that 

there is a process in place.  Confirm that there are guidelines in 

this regard and that it is not totally at the minister's discretion. 

 

This portion of the Bill pertaining to a deposit or bond 

coverage is similar to provisions found in British Columbia in 

their legislation.  In that province, insurance or bonds had to be 

provided to cover hazardous materials found.  Similar to this 

Bill, if during excavation hazardous substances are found, they 

must be disposed of.  The problem in British Columbia is that 

bond companies won't cover this.  Contractors are on the hook 

for the cost. 

 

As you know, contractors make a bid on the known costs.  If 

they have to cover the environmental clean-up costs of 

something found during excavation, should it not be up to the 

owner to pick up the tab?  Contractors should be protected 

from unseen circumstances such as these.  I would suggest that 

this part of the Bill be tightened up to protect contractors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received a copy of a letter from the 

Saskatchewan contractors association sent to the minister, and 

it reads, 

 

 The proposed new Section 7 could be a problem.  We are told 

that bonding companies in another province are putting 

exclusions in performance bonds so as to avoid this liability.  

We believe the responsibility for insuring the cost of 

handling, transportation and disposal of hazardous material 

should rest with the owner of the property or facility.  This 

would seem fair since the contractor frequently cannot 

predict what may be encountered, particularly in an 

excavation. 

 

I don't know how the minister can hold the contractor 

responsible for something that the contractor very likely does 

not know even exists.  It's the owner that should be liable for 

the clean-up costs, Mr. Speaker, not the contractors.  I would 

like some clarification in this matter and I'm sure that many in 

this province would also. 

 

This Bill clearly protects the environment.  But what it is not 

protecting is civil rights.  First we have the Bill allowing the 

environmental police onto property without a warrant.  All they 

need is cause or suspicion of pollution or even that there is 

information respecting the environment.  All of us, Mr. 

Speaker, have information on the environment in our homes, 

offices, or places of business.  Will this power and provision be 

used as a means to harass the citizens of Saskatchewan? 

 

Secondly, we have a Bill allowing for forceful entry.  Battering 

rams could be used, and the owner not protected from 

damages. 

 

And thirdly, we have the minister deciding how much of a 

bond should be put up without any guidelines. 

 

I'd like to say a couple of words about section 35 which allows 

the minister to receive information of potential violations of 

this Act.  Where there is an informant, the name, address, and 

particulars of the application for investigation must be filed on 

that informant.  Informants may well be vital to assisting the 

prevention of continued pollution.  However some protection 

must be provided to prevent an informant from harassing an 

individual or corporation.  Perhaps the name and address of the 

informant could be released if, after investigation, the 

accusation proves to be false. 

 

Madam Minister, informants are needed, but they must also be 

responsible for and in their accusations.  While the informants 

do not need to supply the evidence themselves, their 

accusations must have some substance.  They cannot simply 

use provisions of this Bill to harass innocent individuals or 

companies. 

 

Another issue that should be dealt with, Mr. Speaker, is 

confidentiality of business files.  Is business protected from 

release of confidential information they may have on their 

premises?  I am talking about technical information on how 

they run their businesses, technical information that they do not 

want to be made public because it gives them an edge over the 

competition. 

 

Where is their protection that their private business files 



1194 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

won't be confiscated -- protection from confiscation and release 

of information to their competitors or to the general public?  

They have none, Mr. Speaker, because the environmental 

police can seize any books, records, or documents that they 

want.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is up to the minister's staff 

to determine what should be taken.  This concerns me. 

 

This week in the House the Government House Leader refused 

to release information on NDP appointees -- people they have 

hired since November 1991.  They have decided that they won't 

tell us who they are hiring.  We won't know who they are.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, political appointees, patronage 

appointments, could be seizing the documents from businesses, 

and no one can stop them -- seizing documents simply on the 

pretext of using this environmental Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do not advocate that individuals should be 

allowed to break the law.  Not at all.  If someone is dumping 

oil into the Saskatchewan River, that is a crime.  Mr. Speaker, 

murder is also a crime.  The difference is that if someone is 

suspected of dumping oil into the river, the environmental 

police can barge in without a warrant and seize any 

information, books, or items that they deem -- the government's 

magical word again -- deem to be necessary. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if a police officer suspects there is a murderer in a 

building, he has to go out and get a warrant to investigate.  

How does the minister justify this?  The same happens in the 

suspicion of narcotics.  If a police officer suspects that there are 

narcotics in a building, even if he can tell you which office, 

which desk they are housed in, he still needs to go out and get a 

warrant to investigate. 

 

If the Minister of the Environment suspects that a farmer or 

even an urban home owner is using pesticides that may be 

harmful to the environment, she can send someone right onto 

the property for a look-see.  What is happening here?  

Saskatchewan is turning into a police state.  Political 

appointments are gaining more power than our police forces. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously some revisions to this Bill are 

necessary.  If the NDP are truly concerned about the people of 

Saskatchewan and the rights of these people, they will not 

introduce legislation like Bill 3. 

 

Madam Minister, this week we were discussing in the 

Assembly our constitution.  Our constitution is one of the 

pillars which supports our nation.  Another pillar is the charter 

of rights -- the charter of rights and protections for individuals.  

As I have discussed at great length here today, Bill 3 takes 

away some of the protection individuals have and hold 

valuable. 

 

Madam Minister, I would ask that you present this House with 

a legal opinion on the constitutional validity of these provisions 

of this Bill.  I do not believe that they would stand up to a 

constitutional challenge. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask that you withdraw the sections of this 

Bill which restrict and eliminate the rights of individuals.  The 

sections to which I refer to are: 2.3(1), 

2.3(2), 2.3(3), and section 8(c).  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1115) 

Bill No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 7 -- An Act to 

amend The Assessment Management Agency Act be now read 

a second time. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The Bill 

basically reduces the amount of funding to The Assessment 

Management Act.  We have some concerns and questions 

about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we would have no 

problems in asking those questions in the Committee of the 

Whole. So we would ask that the Bill be advanced to that 

committee. 
 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  It's my pleasure to speak to 

the changes of funding to the Assessment Management 

Agency. Everyone in this province understands that 

Saskatchewan is in a very serious financial position, and I have 

stated in this Assembly that the government gets top marks in 

explaining the urgent nature of the crisis to the residents of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

After years of political showmanship they should inevitably be 

good at what I consider to be public relations exercises.  

Unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is not enough for the 

government to excel at telling everyone that there is a crisis.  It 

is not enough that they travel the province explaining to 

everyone the sins of their predecessors.  This government must 

go beyond rhetoric and solve difficulties including our 

financial woes. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government may believe that by 

reducing its financial obligations to SAMA (Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency) it is helping to solve this 

problem, but problem solving involves a lot more than simply 

dropping the axe on funding. 
 

The slash and burn strategy used by this government that 

comes forward in this Bill is really no strategy at all.  When 

Saskatchewan people are looking for concrete plans for doing 

more with less, this government appears that it has been 

offering merely a ghost plan -- an apparition that is no more 

tangible than rhetoric.  I'm very seriously concerned, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, with the government's decision to abruptly 

reduce its responsibility for funding the Saskatchewan 

Assessment Management Agency. 
 

Where the past provincial government provided a basic grant 

and then covered 50 per cent of the costs of running the agency 

beyond that sum, the government of the day has decided that it 

will only provide a grant.  And this decision will inflict added 

burdens on the already overburdened municipalities of 

Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, should SAMA's expenses exceed the 

funding already allocated to it by the province and the 

municipalities, our local governments will be left to meet all of 

the extra expenses.  Now these municipalities are 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1195 

 just now finding ways to cope with this year's cuts and are still 

reeling from the loss of a significant share of fine revenues to 

the provincial government.  Local leaders across this province 

are hoping they can find ways to cope with the cuts that the 

Minister of Finance announced that they will be facing next 

year. 

 

Through this Bill the government will impose yet another 

burden on the resourceful local governments of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  This, Mr. Deputy Speaker, comes from a 

government that has promised it had a way of doing more with 

less.  We now know the details of this promise -- the 

government has decided it can have more and the 

municipalities will just have to do with less. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the government felt it had to cut 

funding -- and I'm sure it has felt this or it wouldn't have done 

so -- such cuts must always account for the tasks that each 

agency, each organization or department must fulfil. 

 

While SAMA does not stir up great emotions, it plays an 

important job in our province.  And as I speak, SAMA's staff is 

working hard to find a better system of assessing property so 

that the residents of our province can have a property tax 

system that is both fair and just.  It is to provide a means of 

changing the assessment system at arm's length from 

government and undue partisan interference. 

 

Property tax raises almost half as much money in this province 

as personal income tax, and it is imperative that we have a 

system that is fair, not just perceived as fair, but is fair for 

everyone.  The government unfortunately chose to cut its 

funding at a critical time when SAMA is asked to fulfil such an 

important and onerous task. 

 

This decision to cut funding not only threatens to undermine 

SAMA's ability to perform, but it also threatens the agency's 

autonomy that is so critical to ensuring that we have a just tax 

system. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government not only cut SAMA's 

funding at a time when it needs resources, but it did not bother 

to wait to give SAMA an opportunity to complete its own 

efficiency measures.  Once again the government has failed to 

consult the people who know these programs through lengthy 

work experience, the people who possess the expertise, the 

people who know more can be done with less. 

 

Had the government waited a few more months SAMA could 

have completed its own studies and found ways of reducing 

waste without government interference.  With patience, 

consultation, and good planning arbitrary legislation like this 

proposed today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in my view would not be 

needed. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of this province want more 

than a ghost plan.  They want a government that does more 

than simply cut and then walk away leaving behind a trail of 

rhetoric.  They want a government that shows that it has done 

everything to reduce waste before it asks for more taxes. 

 

Saskatchewan people certainly do not need to see a 

government arbitrarily cutting funding before allowing those 

who know where to introduce cost-cutting measures, giving 

them a chance to implement intelligent plans. 

 

Clearly this kind of action appears to state that big brother has 

returned.  And unfortunately while a big-brother government 

simply tells people what they should be doing, it appears not to 

fully understand what it is that really should be done. 

 

In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I urge this government to 

reconsider arbitrarily changing the funding for SAMA.  I 

implore them to follow the path of common sense and listen to 

and use the suggestions from the many people across this 

province who know where waste can be reduced, because they 

see it every day.  Given the chance, I know that people 

empowered to do it will strive to make the changes that are 

necessary in order to cut costs for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government has excelled at explaining 

the weight of the crisis before this province.  It is now time for 

them to transcend that concern to actually solving these 

problems by using the wisdom of the people of Saskatchewan.  

I ask them to reconsider this Bill and reform it with the 

principle of consultation as their guide. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 38 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 38 -- An Act to 

amend The Pest Control Products (Saskatchewan) Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to allow 38 

and 39 to go to committee.  I just want to make a couple of 

observations regarding that, that we will be asking a number of 

questions in committee about the extent to which the permits 

and the licences will be initiated, or the regulations in relation 

to those licences, and what they will be doing.  And we will be 

asking information regarding that when we come to that in 

committee.  And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will just allow 

that Bill to proceed. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 39 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 39 -- An Act to 

amend The Pest Control Act and to enact a consequential 

amendment related to the enactment of this Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 



1196 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 27 

-- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  There are a lot 

of things in the Bill that are of concern, particularly to the 

SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 

people.  Things that have come to our attention are that parts of 

the Bill give the minister the power to amalgamate 

municipalities.  That's never been part of the Bill before and it's 

of concern to us. 

 

We are still consulting with the SARM folks on other areas 

within the Bill and, Mr. Speaker, we'd want to continue those 

consultations and we'll be doing that in the near future. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Certainly, Mr. Speaker, 

a number of concerns raised by SARM and the rural 

municipalities in Saskatchewan have been brought to our 

attention.  And we also have a number of our members who 

wish to speak even a little further to this Bill, and so at this 

time I adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I 

introduced the officials who are with me yesterday so I won't 

go through all of their titles, but it's Mr. John Wright and Mr. 

Len Rog who are here as the officials from the Department of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I had a number of 

questions that I wanted to ask the minister with respect to a 

border community in my constituency.  And I'm sure it's of 

concern to them.  They have raised it with me a number of 

times, and I've said to them that I'd certainly ask the Minister of 

Finance when we had the opportunity to do so. 

 

The community of concern in my constituency is Alsask.  It's a 

small town on the Alberta border.  I think it's something like a 

half a mile from the border, maybe even less than that.  In fact, 

there's one business that is about a hundred yards from the 

border, a fuel dealership there. 

 

And the concern obviously is with respect to the different tax 

structure.  They don't feel that they are being dealt with very 

fairly with respect to the difference in the taxation levels 

between the two provinces.  Lloydminster has had an 

arrangement with the government for a number of years, and 

they feel that their case is just as just as the situation in Alsask.  

So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would give us some 

indication of whether or not you're willing to look at the 

situation with respect to Alsask. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, as I indicated 

yesterday when we had this discussion with other members, 

we're certainly willing to look at any 

alternatives that may be workable.  And if the member has 

some proposals that he wants to forward to me, we'll consider 

them.  The situation in communities like Alsask or any 

communities down the line isn't different today than it was a 

year ago. 

 

(1130) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Well no one is saying it is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm not saying it is either.  I'm not 

arguing.  I think the fact that this situation has existed for some 

40 years really shows the difficulty that faces anybody who 

tries to deal with it.  But that doesn't mean we should ignore it.  

And if there are some alternatives that are workable and are 

reasonable that can be brought forward to us, we will deal with 

it.  We've already dealt with it in one major way when this 

government, after taking office, moved to do away with 

harmonization. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Boloney. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, the member from Kindersley 

says, well, boloney.  Well it's not boloney.  You've got to keep 

in mind that harmonization would have really aggravated the 

situation in a very dramatic way because it would have applied 

the sales tax on every single item purchased other than 

prescription drugs and groceries and restaurant meals.  People 

from Alsask would have been driving . . . or people passing 

through who normally might stop in Alsask for a meal were 

driving straight across the border into Alberta to have their 

meal. 

 

I don't use this for argumentative purposes, but that's a fact.  

That has made a significant difference.  Hasn't solved the 

whole problem.  If there are any options that are worth 

considering, I can tell the member opposite without any 

reservation, we're prepared to consider them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I think it shows an appalling lack of 

knowledge with respect to some of those border communities.  

Most of the businesses in those border communities, sir, are 

dealing with businesses like the oil and gas sector, operations 

like farmers, who all under harmonization got the tax back.  So 

when you say that harmonization hurt those businesses, that's 

simply not true, sir. 

 

Those businesses, the oil and gas sector . . . now what we're 

seeing is the oil and gas sector, because they are not getting the 

tax back under harmonization, they're bringing in their supplies 

from Alberta.  The oil and gas sector in the Kindersley area is 

trucking fuel in from their operations in Alberta into 

Saskatchewan now and buying all of their parts and all of their 

everything else that goes into their operations, are buying them 

outside of the province. 

 

Under harmonization they'd have been buying them locally in 

towns like Alsask, Macklin, Kindersley, Coleville, places like 

that.  That's what they'd have been doing.  They had been doing 

it all along, buying them in the communities.  And now with 

harmonization they would have continued to buy them.  But 

they aren't buying them now as a result of your tax increase. 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1197 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this government is 

not prepared to ignore the consumer.  The average taxpayer has 

to pay the tax.  The member opposite talks not about the 

consumer, the person who works for a living in the local store 

in Alsask or in a neighbouring community, earns a wage, who's 

not going to get any rebate.  But that individual, that family, 

with all of the families in Saskatchewan, under harmonization 

was being asked to pay an additional $440 million of 

consumption tax with harmonization -- $440 million.  That's 

not a small amount of money. 

 

People were going to be taxed on clothing, going to be taxed on 

the restaurant meals, snack foods.  Residents of Alsask would 

have been taxed on all of those items, creating a further 

incentive to go to Alberta to purchase these kinds of goods that 

they buy.  The fact that harmonization is no longer there has 

reduced some of that pressure. 

 

There still is a problem.  It's been a problem that's been there 

for 40 years.  We recognize the problem, and we're prepared to 

seek solutions if they're available. 

 

If the member wishes, he might forward to me the solutions he 

might have in mind.  I'm not saying this just to be flippant; I'm 

saying this seriously.  And I heard a solution yesterday, well 

let's move the border 10 miles back.  That's not a solution.  You 

move the border 10 miles back; you create another border; and 

people on the east side of the border are at disadvantage with 

the people on the west side of the border.  The only difference 

is that that border is then in Saskatchewan.  And you're making 

businesses in Saskatchewan, in the single province of 

Saskatchewan, having unfair competition with each other.  So I 

don't think that's the answer. 

 

But if there are other options that are reasonable as potential 

answers, I can assure the member opposite we're willing to 

look at them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Would you be willing to look at them by a case 

by case situation -- Alsask, Macklin -- singularly, community 

by community, rather than moving the border as has been 

suggested, look at them on a case by case situation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no.  

We have to look at a generic solution.  We can't do it on an 

individual basis unless there is something really unique about 

it, as is the case of Lloydminster which is a city sitting on the 

border -- one city, same community.  It so happens that by 

some quirk of geography, or those who drew provincial 

boundary lines ran the border line through the middle of the 

city.  That's a unique and a special case. 

 

But if the member wants seriously to talk about solution in the 

context of the province of Saskatchewan, we need to be 

looking at a generic solution. 

 

Part of the solution has been provided.  And I know that the 

harmonizing tax did not last long.  But let's look at Alsask.  

With harmonized tax as the former government had proposed, 

because the tax was going to be on 

services, a person in the community or in the farm community 

who normally would repair their vehicle in Alsask or some 

other community along the border would have no longer done 

it because there was a harmonized 7 per cent provincial tax as 

well as the federal GST (goods and services tax) on the service 

charges, the labour charges. 

 

Having eliminated harmonization, we've rectified that problem 

and at least have contributed that much to the solution. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not sure whether you've 

ever been to Alsask or not, but Alsask is a service related town 

for primarily agriculture and a little bit of oil industry.  Under 

harmonization, they would have got the tax back on the service 

work that they were having completed. 

 

So your argument doesn't hold for them.  The town is sitting 

right on the border and it is a service related town for 

agriculture.  The people in agriculture that were going to be 

going in and having their work done on a farm related vehicle 

would have got the tax back on it.  There are very few 

consumers in Alsask.  They're all farmers out there, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

So I can't help but think that under harmonization they would 

have been better off on it.  And I think they recognize that.  

The oil and gas dealer that I talked to that's sitting 100 yards 

from the border that can throw a stone over the border, he says, 

I don't see why I am any different than someone sitting in 

Lloydminster who can't throw a stone over the border. 

 

There's service stations in Lloydminster that are further away 

from the border than he is, and yet he can't . . . you won't look 

at his situation.  I would ask you, sir, why can't you look at his 

situation on a case by case study? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well because, Mr. Chairman, it's 

not just the border, it's the closeness of the proximity of the 

competition.  I don't have the map with me so I don't know how 

close the nearest competition is.  But if you apply this in a 

community like Alsask, the nearest community further into 

Saskatchewan is going to find themselves in the same situation 

as Alsask and you will not have solved the problem. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the nearest community is about 30 

miles back in. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- These days, that's not very far. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well these days it isn't very far, granted.  No 

question about that.  But you're suggesting that the next 

community was only a couple miles down the road, and it isn't.  

The next service related community is Kindersley, and it's at 

least 30 miles in from the border. 

 

So I can't help but think that they have a very legitimate case 

when they ask for the same sort of recognition that 

Lloydminster has. 

 

Well we'll maybe move on to something a little bit different.  

I've been asked by a number of businesses 



1198 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

particularly in the town of Kindersley to raise this concern with 

you.  It's with respect to . . . Kindersley is becoming a large 

service centre for an expanding area. 

 

I would suspect because of the oil industry there's a large 

number of businesses there that have been able to grow and 

prosper over the years as a result of the oil industry.  And 

because of that there is a huge service centre related to the 

town of Kindersley.  And that extends into Alberta, 

incidentally.  It's closer, for example, for some of the folks on 

the Alberta side of the border to go to Kindersley than it is to 

the next largest service centre which would probably be the 

Medicine Hat region.  So they have a concern about their 

customers that are in Alberta coming into Saskatchewan and 

paying the provincial PST (provincial sales tax). 

 

In a number of other jurisdictions -- Ontario I believe is one of 

them -- and several states in the United States, they offer 

people from outside the jurisdiction coming into the 

jurisdiction the opportunity to have a rebate on the provincial 

tax. 

 

Now I can think of one business off the top of my head in 

Kindersley, a large farming implement dealership that has a 

great number of farm folks from Alberta using their business.  

And they're wondering whether or not . . . and automobile 

dealerships are another one that have customers from Alberta 

coming into Saskatchewan, buying their vehicles there.  But 

now they are not interested in buying it with the increase in the 

sales taxes, essentially because of the low margins in it . . . has 

driven it away.  And we're wondering whether or not there's 

any consideration been given to a rebate on things of that 

nature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I'm prepared to be corrected 

on this, but as far as my understanding goes, non-residents 

purchasing a vehicle in Saskatchewan do not pay the sales tax.  

So there is no disincentive for the Alberta resident to come and 

buy a vehicle in Kindersley.  If the dealership is a good 

dealership -- and I suspect it is; I have no doubt about that -- 

then certainly that's not a hindrance. 

 

But as far as the matter of what impact that the sales tax will 

have, I remind the member opposite that in 1987 when there 

was a different government in office here, the sales tax was 

increased from 5 per cent to 7 per cent.  That was a 40 per cent 

increase.  And the oil service industry still remained in 

Kindersley.  In fact I happen to know that to some degree 

during that period of time, it probably increased some degree. 

 

So I know that there are these kinds of pressures.  But to 

suggest that somehow it will drive or shut down businesses and 

industry I think is really not quite accurate. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, are they not paying the tax -- 

they're not paying it on the new purchase; I'm aware of that -- 

but are they not paying it on the repairs and work orders done 

on vehicles? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well certainly they don't pay it on 

new cars.  They don't pay tax on the service, as was the 

case under harmonization.  They will pay the tax on parts, yes. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well that was what I was asking you, sir.  Often 

they come in and have large work orders done in that 

automobile dealership or several of the ones in Kindersley as 

well as the farm machinery dealerships, large work orders done 

on it with a huge component of parts in it.  And that's the 

concern that they have, that their customers now are not 

coming to them any longer.  Is there any consideration given to 

an out-of-province rebate for that sort of thing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, at this point in time, 

no, we have not considered that.  But if that's one of the options 

that the member would like us to look at, we're prepared to 

look at that in the context of the fiscal framework of the 

province and the budget, and trying to determine what impact 

that will have not only on the financial situation of the treasury, 

but also what impact that would have on other communities 

who are surrounding the community of Kindersley. 

 

I don't think there's a dealership in Alsask.  I could be wrong.  

But I suspect in Alsask, which is not far from Kindersley, there 

are people who do repairs on vehicles.  If you exempted this for 

the dealership in Kindersley it would have an unfair advantage 

to the dealership . . . to the garage operator in Alsask or some 

community to the east of Kindersley.  So in the consideration 

of this proposal, all of that would have to be taken in 

consideration. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I'm not asking specifically for an 

exemption for Kindersley.  I'm asking for an exemption for 

out-of-province people coming into Saskatchewan to have that 

sort of work done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've indicated that I'd be quite 

prepared to look at it and see what kind of implications that 

would have. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well thank you.  Now we're making some 

progress, sir.  I think that the same sort of consideration should 

be given to the community of Alsask.  I think we're talking 

about, Mr. Minister, in the community of Alsask, I think there's 

about four or five businesses that we're talking about.  We're 

not talking about a massive funnel draining revenue out of 

Saskatchewan.  We're talking about four or five small little 

businesses that are struggling to keep themselves going, that 

are seeing their customers eroding day by day into 

communities like Oyen in Alberta. 

 

So I would think that if you're going to give the consideration 

to looking at something with respect to a rebate on tax or 

out-of-province people, you should also be giving that same 

kind of consideration to those four or five businesses in Alsask.  

Mr. Minister, you're not going to give them any consideration 

at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I've said we're prepared to consider, 

I've said earlier -- this is for about the third time now -- any 

alternatives that are reasonable that fit within 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1199 

the fiscal frameworks of the province and the budget that don't 

provide unfair competition to other parts, that don't create the 

other problem of moving the border in some way.  Even if it's 

in an individual community, you still move the border. 

 

The member may want to argue on behalf of one community, 

and as an MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) I don't 

deny him that or suggest that he shouldn't do that.  As Minister 

of Finance, I have to look at the whole province as a whole.  

And if any suggestion fits within the interests of the total 

population of Saskatchewan, I'm prepared to consider them. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, how many communities now have 

the tax-free status?  Is there any besides Lloydminster? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, it is just Lloydminster and . . . 

Onion Lake?  I'm not sure about Onion Lake but just 

Lloydminster, only on certain items -- tobacco and gasoline. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What is the difference between the situation in . . 

. was it Cactus Lake?  Onion Lake.  Onion Lake different than 

Alsask? 

 

Incidentally, Mr. Minister, the term Alsask comes . . . it's a 

border community.  It comes from Alberta-Saskatchewan.  

That's how they come up with the name for the place.  They 

don't see any difference than Lloydminster with respect to their 

situation, particularly that fuel dealer who's sitting right on the 

border.  He doesn't see any difference from his situation to 

anyone else's situation. 

 

You talked earlier about the difference where his competition 

is.  Well his competition's about probably four or five miles 

down the road at Sibbald, Alberta.  The next closest gas 

dealership would be there.  So could you tell us, Mr. Minister, 

what is the difference between the situation at Onion Lake to 

Alsask? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the situation in 

Lloydminster is that here we have a city which is one 

community situated on the border, and that is the uniqueness of 

Lloydminster which does not apply to any other community 

near the border of Alberta. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A couple of 

questions to the minister with respect to his tax increases. 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the things that I want to get at is your 

rationale for the way you're taxing and tax increasing as 

opposed to harmonization, and that will be one sort of series of 

questions. 

 

The second one will be if you will consider harmonization in 

the future and under what kind of conditions you might 

consider that, because I'm pretty sure that you would. 

 

And number three, I'll be asking about various other kinds of 

measures that you might be able to take to get the equivalent 

amount of saving or the equivalent amount of revenue as you 

plan to generate from your sales tax increase plus some other 

tax increases that you have 

there. 

 

So first of all with respect to the taxes going up, could you 

explain to the House why you want to raise taxes, you thought 

you had to raise taxes?  Given the fact that over and over and 

over again -- and I can give you the quotes - 

_ you said that it wasn't necessary, the Leader of the NDP Party 

said it wasn't necessary, the newspapers carried the stories, tax 

increases would not be necessary.  In fact what you obviously 

campaigned on were significant tax decreases. 

 

And clearly I campaigned on tax increases with harmonization 

and you campaigned on tax decreases.  And people make their 

judgements on that and we end up with a situation where you 

obviously decided that you were going to increase taxes, even 

the PST, which from '78 is probably 15 or 16 or 17 per cent, 

which is diametrically opposite to what you campaigned on 

prior to the election. 

 

Now I'll just give you a couple of quotes.  But maybe you can 

just describe to us why you are increasing taxes when you 

campaigned on cutting taxes.  And that would be a good start.  

And then we could get into the role of how you might increase 

taxes and harmonization versus just generally sales tax 

increases or income taxes and other forms of revenue. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Let there be no doubt about it, Mr. 

Chairman, that harmonization was a sales tax increase.  It was a 

massive sales tax increase on the Saskatchewan consumer.  It 

was a sales tax increase of $440 million.  One per cent increase 

on the sales tax as it is now in Saskatchewan will this year be 

an increase of $65 million.  That's a very significant difference.  

It does not have that great of an impact on the competitiveness 

of Saskatchewan business which this harmonization did; major 

impact on competitiveness because of the impact it would have 

on the consumer. 

 

That was a major shift in taxation from some sectors in the 

economy directly to the wallet of the consumer.  Let me make 

one other point of clarification, Mr. Chairman.  At no time 

during the last election campaign did the New Democratic 

Party say that we would decrease taxes.  We didn't say that 

because we want to be quite open with Saskatchewan people.  

We said that the finances of this province were in a crisis 

situation.  Under those circumstances it was unrealistic to talk 

about decreasing taxes.  We knew that and so we did not say 

that. 

 

Now I want to say to the member from Estevan something 

which he already knows.  The former government, in the 

budget that they refused to have this legislature pass said the 

deficit of this province would be $265 million.  That's what he 

said.  As a matter of fact, we got a letter from the former 

minister of Finance in the midst of the election campaign 

saying that he had every assurance or he was prepared to give 

every assurance to the people of Saskatchewan that the deficit 

was $265 million. 

 

What they failed to say is that the government had $250 million 

of dividends from the Crown Investment Corporation which 

wasn't there.  They failed to say that in fact the deficit was 

going to be $960 million rather than 



1200 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

$265 million.  And further to that we discovered that under 

existing tax systems and policies and programs that were in 

place, our deficit for this year would have been $1.2 billion. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, that would have increased the interest on 

the public debt by over $100 million.  That's unsustainable, 

unrealistic, and would have been a great disservice to our 

children and their children and future generations.  You can't 

continue accumulating that kind of debt situation on what is 

already the highest per capita debt of any province in Canada.  

So the government had to make some choices. 

 

First of all, we said we would find as much saving as we can on 

the expenditure side.  And we cut something like $344 million 

worth of expenditures, and the only province in Canada which 

actually reduced the expenditures of the government.  Every 

other province saw the expenditures of the provincial treasury 

increase. Saskatchewan saw a decrease of 3.1 per cent other 

than the interest on the debt, which is a separate item. 

 

But having done all that, Mr. Chairman . . . And members in 

the opposition say we went too far; we shouldn't have cut all 

these things; we shouldn't have cut these expenditures.  But 

having done that, we found that our deficit would still have 

been $850 million.  And so we were forced then to look on the 

revenue side. 

 

And admittedly, as difficult as that may be for any government 

to do, and it's something that the taxpayer doesn't like to see, 

we had to increase some taxes.  And we did.  So we were 

therefore able to bring the deficit down to $517 million which 

is now manageable and has set a trajectory where we will be 

able to balance budgets of this province in the next four or five 

years.  I think that's something that no government with any 

sense of responsibility could ignore in Saskatchewan in this 

time.  Ignoring that would make the interest on the public debt 

grow in such huge amounts over the next few years that there 

would be no money left for some very major social programs 

which we fund today. 

 

And so that's why we had to make the decision we did.  We 

made them.  Generally the public of Saskatchewan supports the 

initiatives of the government in getting the deficit under 

control.  I don't think anybody . . . You would find very few 

people who would disagree. 

 

And we have said to the people of Saskatchewan, our first and 

foremost commitment is to bring financial responsibility and 

financial management back into the government and the 

province of Saskatchewan, and that's what we intend to do. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to read you your 

promises of tax cuts, live on television.  And you just said that 

the PST was worth 400 million gross.  You had an idea that 

that's what the PST was worth. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Four hundred and forty. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Four hundred and forty.  All right.  You know 

harmonization is worth that to the province.  And it wasn't very 

difficult for you to figure out that's what 

harmonization was worth to a Tory administration or an NDP 

administration.  Correct?  That's what it's worth. 

 

And despite that, here's what you said and your leader said.  

He's on television and he's in a debate and he's talking to the 

public and he said, and I quote -- this is in the debate between 

the three leaders -- the PST is not going to be around after 

October 21 if we're in power.  That means it's gone. 

 

Now even if you give them the benefit of the doubt and say the 

expanded PST because that's what's harmonization, it's $440 

million.  You've just admitted that.  But he promised that it's 

gone. 

 

Now in our budget which we talked and debated in this 

legislature, as you know . . .  And we debated on it and we even 

voted on it.  We even voted on it.  We voted on it.  Did we . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well we'll go back and I'll get you 

the records.  We debated it for the 5 days or 10 days, had a vote 

on it, then went into Estimates.  That's a fact. 

 

You said it's 265.  The estimate was $265 million deficit, which 

included harmonization.  Now if you knew that harmonization 

was worth 440 million and you knew the deficit was 265, how 

could you promise tax cuts which you know would then run 4 

or 5 or $600 million in the hole, when you knew harmonization 

was worth that? 

 

Now all right then, you've got to tell us what it is worth.  What 

is it worth net then, harmonization?  If it's net, it's 190 to $200 

million.  Okay, now we've got you on a couple of other figures.  

If it's 190 to 200 million plus 265, you know then you've got at 

least 465 to $500 million deficit with your promise of tax cuts.  

And your leader says on television . . . This is what he said: the 

PST is not going to be around after October 21 if we're in 

power.  That was his closing statement. 

 

You promised to cut harmonization and PST, and you knew it 

was $200 million you'd add to the deficit.  And you knew the 

forecast was for 265.  But you add that up, and it's $465 million 

easily.  And you promised that.  Now the minister sits there 

from his place and says . . . Well I won't read it.  I'll let him say 

it, eh?  Mr. Romanow says, the PST is not going to be around 

after October 21 if we're in power. 

 

(1200) 

 

Now I'm going to just add to this so that you know what you 

promised.  And you knew that the deficit was forecast to be 

265 with harmonization.  You knew that.  And I quote, 

September 21, Star-Phoenix: Romanow says he would cut, not 

increase, taxes.  Now he knew that the deficit would be 265 

plus harmonization. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, September 21: The party has also promised 

to abolish the provincial flat tax.  Moose Jaw Times-Herald, 

October 17, '91: But we're not going back to taxing people -- 

Roy Romanow.  This is a letter from Brian Oster, October 8, 

1991, copies attached: The PST comes off October 21.  Vote 

NDP. 

 

Now everybody in the province had gone through the 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1201 

exercise of knowing what harmonization was about.  We 

debated it in the House.  We talked about it.  You spoke on it, 

because we had debate in the House here about our budget '91.  

So you knew what it was worth -- 190 to $200 million.  

Financial officials knew.  I knew.  You knew.  And yet you still 

went on to say, oh we'll tell the public we won't have to have 

PST.  We know the deficit's 265 including PST.  And if we get 

rid of that, that'll be 465 million.  Oh we'll tell them that if we 

clean up the management, we'll still be able to cut taxes.  That's 

the fact. 

 

The Star-Phoenix, October 12, 1991: Creating more jobs will 

also stimulate revenue without raising taxes, Romanow said.  

Now the candidates put that in their brochures.  They were all 

over the province and indeed maybe all over the country 

saying: creating more jobs will also stimulate revenue without 

raising taxes, Romanow said.  This is the Star-Phoenix, 

October 12, 1991. 

 

So we have the two questions.  Why did you decide all of a 

sudden that you didn't need the $200 million when you were 

campaigning, and then after the election, you say, whoops, I 

guess we need 200, 300, 400 million?  That's a pretty big 

question. 

 

And then we're going to get back at the question, well why not 

harmonization, because it's much more logical than increases in 

income tax and sales tax without the rebate for businesses and 

farmers, and the co-ops and chambers of commerce and mining 

people and others have recommended harmonization and 

continue to recommend harmonization to you. 

 

So clearly, what we get into on both those accounts is you 

knew that it would increase the deficit but you promised it 

anyway.  And number two, you can't do harmonization because 

it would go against something that you campaigned on even 

though you know it would save up to $5 million a year in 

administrative costs. 

 

And often you mentioned something like, well there's Supercart 

and GigaText and it might have cost $5 million.  You know, 

you're losing 5 million a year just by not harmonizing.  And 

your own officials will tell you that.  That's why they 

recommended harmonization.  And other provinces are.  

Manitoba's just getting finished with great co-operation on the 

border because of harmonization.  So . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . well, we'll read you the release: co-operation 

and managing the results in Manitoba with the federal 

government, cross-border shopping -- all of those things that 

would help. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I've read you one, two, three, four, five, six 

quotes and the exact verbatim from the Leader of the NDP 

Party during the campaign that said, and I quote: The PST is 

not going to be around after October 21 if 

we're in power.  Now what does that say?  That says there's no 

PST in Saskatchewan if you vote NDP . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Oh, get out. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well I'll read it again so the member from Quill 

Lakes can kind of enjoy this.  The quote is:  The PST is not 

going to be around after October 21 if we're in power. 

This is the leader of the NDP promising this during a live 

television debate: vote NDP and there's no PST. 

 

And you know what?  People across the province thought 

maybe he'd be telling the truth.  They thought maybe he'd be 

telling the truth.  If they said, if a leader of a political party said 

the PST is gone, maybe he'll tell the truth. 

 

Well today we're in a Bill that's talking about adding PST.  The 

provincial sales tax went up with the NDP, not down.  For 

Heaven's sakes, it went up, not down.  And the opposition said, 

we'll get the difference.  Do you know what?  There was no 

difference when the NDP were talking about it during the 

campaign.  They said the PST is not going to be around after 

October 21 if we're in power.  And that's what the NDP leader 

said. 

 

And you know, senior citizens and moms and other people the 

next day went out and said, well I thought you said it was 

going to be gone.  I'm sure the member from Quills ran into it. 

Seniors said, well you promised that it would go.  But it's still 

there.  And now the seniors know it's not only there, but it's up 

-- it's up.  And the NDP knew, the leader of the NDP knew, the 

MLAs knew, that if you take harmonization off, it's a couple of 

hundred million dollars that you're going to have to add to a 

deficit.  And they did it anyway.  Imagine that. 

 

You see the problem the public has, Mr. Minister, with your 

logic that you found out that you had to have some money after 

the election. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I've read you five quotes where you promised 

or your party leader promised that you were going to cut the 

PST; you were going to have lower taxes, not tax increases. 

 

Could you explain again, and to be a little bit specific, explain 

how you didn't know that harmonization was worth 190 to 200 

million net.  Tell us how you didn't know harmonization was 

that. Because I think we could even go back in the House here 

and look at the records when we talked about what it was 

worth.  Because the member from Regina, your Associate 

Minister of Finance said, well actually harmonization makes 

sense; we should have one tax.  That's what he said when we 

first introduced it.  It was a couple hundred million dollars; it's 

one tax, administration. 

 

So would you please explain to the House and to the public 

why you thought no harmonization, the loss of $200 million, 

would be insignificant at a time when a campaign was on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I think, Mr. Chairman, we've 

just seen a display of why the member of Estevan is sitting on 

that side of the House today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In order to describe sort of the 

games that the member from Estevan is using with numbers 

and figures, Mr. Speaker, would be unparliamentary and so I 

will not get into that. 

 

But let me just make some corrections for the record and 



1202 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

for the public who might be viewing this debate in the 

legislature today.  The member from Estevan says that the net 

revenue for the province would have been 180 to $200 million. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, I have here, February 20, 1991, Reform of 

Saskatchewan's Provincial Sales Tax published by the Hon. 

Lorne M. Hepworth, minister of Finance under the former 

administration.  And that minister said, Mr. Speaker, that the 

net revenue from the harmonized sales tax in 1991-1992 would 

have been $105 million. 

 

Point number one about being not quite accurate with the 

public of Saskatchewan or the legislature.  Not 180 million or 

200 million -- 105 million.  That's what your minister of 

Finance said. 

 

Secondly I want to address the $440 million.  I heard the 

member from Estevan say that the $440 million would have 

been of benefit to the treasury.  That's what the member from 

Estevan said.  That's not the case at all -- 105 million.  But the 

Saskatchewan consumer would have had to pay $440 million 

even though the net benefit to the treasury would have been 

$105 million. 

 

Now if the member from Estevan wants to stand up and 

describe how that is a fair tax system to the consumer, I want to 

hear it, and I want him to correct why he was alleging a 

moment ago that the $440 million is going to be a benefit to the 

treasury.  His words in Hansard will show that to be the case. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, with a deficit of $960 

million, is what the deficit was in 1991-92, $105 million off of 

that would have made a very insignificant impact on that 

deficit -- almost negligible. 

 

The member says, you promised that you would do away with 

the PST.  Well, Mr. Chairman, let me clarify again.  The New 

Democratic Party said we would do away with the provincial 

GST and that is the harmonized version of the PST.  That was 

made very clear.  The public knew that and that was published 

and that's the way the public understood it. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, I am proud to be 

able to stand up in the House today on behalf of my colleagues 

who are on the government side and say, we kept the promise 

to do away with the harmonized PST. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because it was not an appropriate 

tax and because the people of Saskatchewan said by a very 

large majority that tax has to go.  And we did away with it.  

And we did away with it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now let me correct the member from Estevan because he did a 

lot of inaccuracies here today.  He said that the legislature 

passed his budget in 1991.  Well hearing this from the former 

premier who ought to know how the legislature worked since 

he was the premier for almost 10 years, this surprises me. 

 

The legislature passed a vote on the debate on the budget 

speech, the six-day debate.  But the member from Estevan 

knows that that does not authorize the expenditure of one 

single penny.  Because the only way you can authorize an 

expenditure of money is if you pass an appropriation Bill after 

the budget debate, after Committee of Finance of all the 

departments, and that's what the member from Estevan, when 

he was the premier, refused to allow the House to do. 

 

In June he adjourned the House.  In June he fled from the 

House because he did not want the legislature to question his 

ministers about the budgets in their departments because he 

knew that although he had said that the deficit was going to be 

$265 million, that number could not stand up to scrutiny. 

 

And so instead of letting the legislature debate that and having 

members question the ministers and their departments, 

questions to which they would have no answers, he shut down 

the legislature, governed by special warrants, walked out from 

the House as they did for 18 days just a little while ago -- now 

that they're in opposition they continue the same kind of an 

approach -- and would not allow the budget to pass and instead 

waited several months, governed by special warrants without 

authorization from the legislature, until finally there was an 

election called for October 21. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I just would like the member opposite to 

think about the way he uses numbers and misinformation in the 

legislature because it doesn't do him any credit.  I really want to 

say that with some sincerity.  It doesn't do him any credit at all. 

 

What impact would the harmonized PST have?  Well I want to 

say to the House and for the record, in 1971 when PST, 

harmonized PST and the GST were brought in, retail sales in 

Saskatchewan declined by 7 per cent -- 7 per cent decline.  For 

1990 to 1991 . . . I'm sorry, correction.  In 1992 the Conference 

Board of Canada is predicting that there will be a positive 

growth in retail sales in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now anybody who can look at those kinds of statistics and 

somehow think that the PST, harmonized PST, was of benefit 

to the economy has got to be dreaming in Technicolor.  Seven 

per cent decline in retail sales is a major blow to the economy 

and in no way is it of benefit. 

 

This year, 1992, even with the 1 per cent increase in the sales 

tax . . . I have an article written out of Ottawa, Canadian Press, 

in which the headline says: Saskatchewan leads rebound in 

department store sales in Saskatchewan today.  You think we'd 

have this leading of the rebound of department store sales 

leading all of the rest of the provinces if we still had the 

harmonized PST as proposed by the former government?  Of 

course not.  We know that. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I don't think I need to say any more.  It was, as 

it was being proposed, a misguided, a misplaced, a mistime tax 

that this party in opposition said was inappropriate, and if the 

voters of Saskatchewan elected us we would eliminate it.  We 

did.  We eliminated it.  And that we would provide fiscal 

accountability, open and honest government, and we'd get the 

financial affairs of this province back in order so that we didn't 

saddle our 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1203 

children and their children and future generations with an 

ever-growing debt which they would have to pay and have to 

pay dearly for. 

 

(1215) 

 

Oh if only the former government had thought about that in the 

1980s when they increased the debt of this province by over 

$10 billion so that it is now the highest per capita debt in all of 

Canada.  That's the kind of dilemma we face today, Mr. 

Chairman.  And that's why today we have to increase the sales 

tax by 1 per cent. 

 

If it wasn't for the huge debt that this province faces today, 

made mainly in the 1980s under a Progressive Conservative 

government; if it wasn't the fact that in this year we had to pay 

$760 million in interest on this debt -- almost all of it out of the 

province of Saskatchewan where it'll benefit no one -- we 

wouldn't have to have any tax increase in this budget today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, one other point I want to make.  On November 

1 when this government took office, we said we'd open the 

books.  We did.  We had independent evaluation of all of the 

finances of this province; the government put them aside to an 

independent commission.  And that commission said that the 

finances of the province were in such bad state that there was 

no option but to begin to address them. 

 

If the deficit had been $265 million, as the former government 

alleged -- if it had been -- and if this government had done in 

its budget on the expenditure side, as we have done, a saving of 

$344 million, even with the $760 million in interest charges, 

we would have had a surplus of $90 million.  That's the 

difference.  And $265 million, had it been real, would have 

been very manageable, and we wouldn't have had to have any 

tax increases.  It would have been very manageable. 

 

But because there was some dishonesty in that number because 

the deficit was not 265, it was $960 million, we have had to 

make some tougher choices, one of which we're considering in 

this committee when we're considering this E&H (education 

and health) tax Bill. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, all I want to get back at is I quote 

the Star-Phoenix, and the Star-Phoenix says, September 21: 

Romanow says he would cut, not increase, taxes.  So you said 

you were going to cut taxes.  You said, with a little 

improvement in management, we can cut taxes and balance the 

budget.  That's what you said.  And that's what he said on 

television, there'll be no more PST.  You will cut taxes. 

 

Now when you got elected, you increased taxes.  And that's 

what we're talking about today.  There's been a huge increase in 

taxes.  Murray Mandryk in the Leader-Post today said: after 

the campaign, guess what happened. 

 

 . . . since (that time in) forming government (the NDP have) 

gotten away with one of the biggest tax increases, one of the 

largest deficits and one of the biggest political purges in the 

civil service this province has ever seen. 

So you've got one of the largest tax increases, one of the 

biggest purges, and one of the biggest flip-flops in 

Saskatchewan political history.  and I'm just asking you to 

justify your tax increases.  You knew that the PST was worth 

$190 million.  You know it's 105 million until you harmonize 

the services and then it's $190 million, which was due January 

1.  So come clean on all of that. 

 

Now you campaigned and said, I don't need the PST -- 265 plus 

harmonization is 4 or $500 million in the hole; we'll promise it 

anyway.  And then you said, but there will be no tax increases.  

And as well you knew without harmonization you're out $5 

million a year just in administrative inefficiencies.  Because all 

the officials across Canada, our own officials here in 

Saskatchewan, and Finance said, well at least that makes sense 

-- you've got one government collecting both sales taxes and 

you split it up.  It makes sense -- efficiencies. 

 

The chamber of commerce recognizes that. The business 

community, the boards of trades, co-operatives, farmers, 

automobile manufacturers, and others are saying, well for 

Heaven's sake if you need the money to balance budget, they'll 

probably vote for a plebiscite to have balanced budget 

legislation -- do it with harmonization, not with other taxes. 

 

So you've got two problems that you run up against.  Two 

problems.  Number one, you said you didn't need tax increases 

and you certainly didn't campaign on them. 

 

Now if I list all of the tax increases since the election and I put 

them on a brochure, you'd have trouble getting elected.  You 

couldn't have your leader, the Leader of the NDP, going into a 

debate and saying:  I'm going to increase income tax, I'm going 

to increase sales tax, I'm going to increase the surtax, and I'm 

going to increase this to the municipalities, and I'm going to 

increase this tax and this tax and this tax and this tax as of July 

1.  He wouldn't get elected. 

 

But you didn't do that.  You said and he said, and I quote:  we 

will not increase taxes, we'll cut the PST -- remove it -- and we 

will reduce other taxes, and we'll balance the budget. 

 

Now you knew in 1990-91 our forecast was 365 and you knew 

we met that forecast.  And in 1991-92 we said it's 265 and 

harmonization, we can meet that.  So if we met the one before, 

you knew after the debate in here . . . and your own inquiries 

said the books were always open -- Public Accounts you can 

always get them from the year before.  And that's what the 

commission said: the books are open. So you knew and the 

public knew that you needed harmonization and the equivalent 

to balance the budget to meet the 265 and a balanced budget 

for 1993-94 and you still went out and you promised no tax 

increases. 

 

And now what do we have?  We're sitting here debating a 16 

per cent sales tax increase and other taxes that we've seen in 

your budget, when you promised the opposite.  So you see the 

problem that the public has, and the members of the legislature, 

and even your own colleagues who are out there campaigning 

on tax decreases -- you didn't tell 



1204 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

the truth. 

 

You had to know then that it was 105 million if you 

harmonized with the things that we harmonized with. And then 

when you do services on top of that, it nets out to 190 million 

on an annual basis.  And you said:  oh we'll just wipe that out.  

We don't care if it's a hundred or $200 million, we'll campaign 

no tax increases -- in fact tax decreases. 

 

So here we are, we're facing it.  So we want you again to 

explain to the public why you changed your mind and you 

decided to, in this House, raise the provincial sales tax, raise 

income tax, and raise all these taxes when in fact you 

campaigned over and over and over again that you were going 

to eliminate the PST. 

 

And I'll quote again: Romanow says he would cut -- cut -- not 

increase taxes, in the Star-Phoenix, September 21, 1991. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all let 

me speak about management.  In 1991 on November 1, after 

this government took office we discovered that the deficit was 

going to be $960 million -- not $265 million as had been 

indicated by the former administration before the election -- 

$960 million.  Well, Mr. Chairman, good management reduced 

that deficit from $960 million to $845 million in the short 

period of some six months.  That's what good management is 

all about.  And we accomplished that. 

 

And I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, had the deficit been truly 

$265 million as had been alleged by the former administration, 

by good management we would have been able to balance the 

budget this year.  But it wasn't $265 million, Mr. Chairman, it 

was $960 million because the former government misled the 

public of Saskatchewan. 

 

The member from Estevan talks about things we didn't need.  

Well we didn't need a debt of $15 billion in Saskatchewan.  We 

didn't need a debt which is the highest per capita debt of any 

province in Canada.  Mr. Chairman, we didn't need a $960 

million deficit in 1991-1992.  We didn't need an interest charge 

on the taxpayer of $760 million, is what the taxpayer has to pay 

in interest alone this year. 

 

But because we have those things created by the former 

administration, we have to deal with them.  We have to deal 

with them through good management.  We're doing that.  We 

have to deal with them with program reductions and reduction 

in costs.  We're doing that.  We reduced expenditures of 

government by $344 million.  We have to deal with increased 

revenues, and therefore there has to be some increase in 

taxation. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other choice is not to do this and run 

higher deficits.  I can tell you and I can tell the public of 

Saskatchewan, this government is not going to run higher 

deficits.  This government is going to manage the deficits and 

bring them down to a balanced budget in a very few years 

because there is no other choice.  If only the former . . . 

An Hon. Member: -- Harmonization.  Share offering. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the member from Estevan 

says harmonization.  Well, Mr. Chairman, if it wasn't such 

frivolous comments, I would spend some time commenting on 

it. 
 

But I don't think it's really worth the effort to spend a lot of 

time commenting on it because harmonization was going to 

take $440 million out of the Saskatchewan consumer.  It had 

reduced the amount of retail sales by 7 per cent.  It was 

damaging the economy in a huge way.  It was a bad tax.  That 

was not going to bring the deficit down when you have that 

kind of a blow on the economy that does nothing for reducing 

the deficit. 

 

What we have done is responsible.  It's necessary.  It's the right 

thing.  It's important for the future of our children.  I stand by 

it.  If the member of the opposition, the Leader of the 

Opposition disagrees, that's his choice. 

 

He can stand and defend his harmonization all he wants.  I 

invite him to do that.  All I can say to him is that the public of 

Saskatchewan on October 21, 1991, categorically, without 

reservation said to him, we don't want it.  We listened.  We 

acted, and they don't have it. 
 

The Chair: -- Order.  I wonder . . . order, order.  I wonder if 

the members might keep their discussions down to a reasonable 

level. 
 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, that's the whole 

point.  They don't have harmonization.  They have uglier tax 

now and higher and higher.  So we're just going to make sure 

the public knows what you've done. 
 

Number one, you promised no PST, and you promised sales tax 

cuts and tax decreases.  In the legislature you're now bringing 

forth all kinds of tax increases, and you don't even get the 

numbers right.  You started out with $440 million today, the 

PST, and says we only net a hundred.  Now that's not accurate.  

It's like your crop insurance numbers the other day.  They're 

not accurate. 
 

I'll take the reform of Saskatchewan provincial sales tax, and if 

you look at it on page 16, it will outline all of the numbers.  For 

'92-93, the total harmonization revenue is $216 million.  The 

family tax credit is 35 million, for a net revenue of $181 

million to the province.  Now you knew that, annualized -- 

$180 million. 
 

Now you knew that the harmonization from this thing that was 

published -- and you were in the legislature -- was $181 

million.  You knew our forecast deficit was 265.  So you put 

that with $181 million, and you've got yourself over a $450 

million deficit, and you still did it.  You still went to the public 

and said tax decreases.  And you had this document.  As a 

knowledgeable member of the legislature, you promised tax 

decreases. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, you've used 440, 105, and whatever other 

numbers you might have.  I want you to talk about these 

numbers -- page 16, 1992. 
 

We implemented the sales tax in July, so you had half a year.  

You can't count that as a full year.  The services 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1205 

would be implemented in January.  You can't count that until 

you implement them.  The total for '92-93 is 181.  And then it's 

on a full for '93-94 . . . would be whatever that full 

harmonization system is.  That's the first. 

 

Now the second thing is, you didn't talk about $5 million in 

administrative efficiencies. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's not a tax increase. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the member from Swift Current says, that's 

not a tax increase.  Of course it is.  That's what we campaigned 

on.  We told the truth.  This is what's necessary to balance the 

budget.  The NDP and the NDP member from Swift Current 

said no, no, we'll have tax decreases.  And people believed him.  

They believed you, sir. 

 

And now what have you got in here?  You've got tax increases 

coming out our ears.  Worse than harmonization ever thought 

was because harmonization saved you money efficiency-wise.  

There's no double taxation for small business and farmers.  And 

you can stop the cross-border shopping.  You can stop all of 

that. 

 

And the consumers have a choice.  You want to talk about 

consumers?  Consumers now pay telephone rates and power 

rates and SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) rates 

right up to here, and they have no choice because the NDP love 

monopolies.  And you stick it to them.  Now there's no choice 

at all.  The consumer can choose when he's out there in the 

market-place, but not with you folks. 

 

So harmonization made sense for people because of choice, 

because of efficiencies, because of business, because of the oil 

and the gas industry, because of manufacturing and co-ops and 

boards of trades and chambers of commerce.  And what did 

you do to them?  You told them you didn't need any taxes at 

all.  You didn't tell them the truth.  And this information was 

available in the legislature.  You're going to throw out $180 

million and you know the deficit was forecast to be 265.  That's 

at least $450 million.  And you say, I don't care, I'll tell it to 

them anyway. 

 

(1230) 

 

What the people want to know is why and how that man and 

your leader could promise $180 million tax break during a 

campaign, knowing the deficit was forecast to be 265, and then 

come in this legislature and have tax increases like we've never 

seen before, as Murray Mandryk said today. 

 

How do you look at your constituents and say oh well, surprise, 

we didn't know there was a deficit in the last 10 years.  Come 

on.  The Public Accounts were always open, the books were 

always open; the Gass Commission said they were open.  You 

can add it up; you can look at it. 

 

Why do you think we went into harmonization?  Because we 

liked to see tax increases?  No, we said to the public, if you're 

going to have them we recommend it, along with the associate 

minister of Finance.  If you're going to have tax, have one tax -- 

one tax.  One tax.  And businesses and 

the province of Saskatchewan for business -- small business 

and farmers -- can be sales tax free.  No double taxation. 

 

Now you pay it twice.  The farmer pays it when he's a 

consumer and the farmer pays it as a farmer.  The business 

community pays it twice.  They pay it as a consumer, then they 

pay it to run their business.  If you want to be competitive in 

the North American market you at least want to reduce their 

taxes.  Why do people shop in the States?  Lower taxes for 

business.  You know that.  And the consumer can be reflected 

in that attitude and they go there to shop. 

 

We said there will be sales tax free in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You get all your federal tax back and your 

provincial sales tax back, and you have a choice as a consumer.  

You can choose not to get it out of utilities.  That's the most 

cowardly way to get it, is out of utilities.  You've got the little 

senior citizen, you've got poor people, you've got others that 

have to pay a 30 per cent increase in utility rates.  Ridiculous.  

And you won't help business at the same time. 

 

There is no defence for this, gentlemen . . . ladies and 

gentlemen, no defence at all.  You didn't tell the truth at 

campaign time.  You're getting caught with it now.  And it's a 

bad tax.  It's a combination of ugly taxes across the board and 

people are deceived.  They said, you did not tell the truth.  And 

you knew it was near $200 million, and you still said, we'll do 

it to get elected. And you'll tell your own constituents that. 

 

Our constituents are out there talking to your people and said, 

well we kind of knew, but you know, we'd get elected.  

Anything to get elected.  Because you would not get elected on 

this as a brochure.  So, Mr. Minister, you knew this 

information. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you comment on this piece of paper that 

you were aware of because you were in the debate, that said it's 

$181 million then to '92-93 and how you could just say we 

don't need that amount of money. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'd be more than pleased to 

comment on that information, Mr. Chairman, because it gives 

me a chance to about maybe the seventh or eighth time correct 

the member in some more misinformation he's provided to the 

House.  And he does it while he's reading out of the same piece 

of paper as I have before me.  Now it takes a lot of gall to do 

that, Mr. Chairman.  It takes a lot of gall. 

 

Oh, I don't know what it is.  But it's not $180 million and the 

member from Estevan knows that.  And if he doesn't know that, 

then I think that speaks for itself.  The fact of the matter is, Mr. 

Chairman, and I want to make it very clear to the viewers out 

there, that the net in an annualized basis when you had full year 

impact would have been $150 million, not 180. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Then why have you gone from 105, 440 

to 150? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Oh well, see, the member opposite 

has a confused mind.  Because in 1991-1992 the 



1206 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

net gain to the treasury would have been $105 million.  That 

says it right in the paper he's got in front of him -- from 

harmonized PST, from that component. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What page are you on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Same page as you are on, Mr. 

Member from Estevan, page 16 -- $105 million on the 

harmonized PST.  Now what the member from Estevan is 

doing is adding into that corporate tax increases and other tax 

measures; playing that kind of a game, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And he's done the same thing with the $180 million figure.  

He's added up all of the numbers, some of which have nothing 

to do with the harmonized PST, which is not $180 million on 

an annualized basis, it's $150 million.  Because he's added also 

into that the corporate tax increases and other tax adjustments 

and higher income surtax increases and so on, all three of 

which this government has implemented in this budget. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, the net in an annualized basis revenue 

from the PST -- even though the consumer would have paid 

$440 million -- the net revenue to the treasury would have been 

only $150 million.  And the member from Estevan either 

knows that and is trying to twist the numbers for his own 

political argument, or doesn't know that.  And if he doesn't 

know that, then this is a rather interesting debate. 

 

The member from Estevan also says that everybody knew what 

the deficit was.  He says the Public Accounts said it all.  Well 

the Provincial Auditor said that he couldn't report on 50 per 

cent of the expenditure of the former government because the 

former government wouldn't provide him the information he 

had to have in order to provide that information. 

 

So I say, Mr. Chairman, nobody knew what the size of the debt 

of the province of Saskatchewan was because how could 

anybody know when the Provincial Auditor couldn't audit 50 

per cent of the expenditures that the government was making.  

Not my words; the Provincial Auditor's words -- a servant of 

this legislature, Mr. Chairman.  It is on record in the Provincial 

Auditor's report. 

 

No one knew the serious financial problem of the Crown 

Management Board.  No one knew.  The legislature didn't 

know, the public . . . Oh, the former premier knew, but then he 

wouldn't tell anybody.  No one knew that the financial debt of 

the Crown Management Board was $2.9 billion, a large amount 

of it which was not serviceable, did not have any 

income-earning assets in order to pay the debt -- two reasons 

why it was not possible to know what the deficit was. 

 

Let me give you a third one, Mr. Chairman.  All good things 

come in threes.  Even in the middle of the election campaign, 

the former government was running up hundreds of millions of 

dollars of additional debt by making decisions in an election 

which no responsible government ought to make -- decisions 

that should have waited until the election was over so that a 

new government, in case there was a new government, had the 

ability to make those decisions on behalf of the people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The former premier decided he was going to blow off several 

hundreds of millions of dollars for some ideological or 

scorched earth reasons, and sold then Cameco shares at a loss, 

$166 million, now part of the debt; sold off additional Potash 

Corporation shares, part at a loss -- $442 million lost in the 

Potash Corporation privatization. 

 

All of those things happening in the middle of an election 

campaign while the member from Estevan was going around 

the province saying, our deficit is $265 million.  That was 

deception of the worst kind, Mr. Chairman.  That's one of the 

reasons why the people of Saskatchewan decided they wanted 

open, honest, and accountable government.  They chose.  I 

think the members of the opposition should learn one very 

fundamental thing about politics and public life.  The voters are 

always right. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the voters are 

always right.  They believed you when you said you were 

going to cut taxes.  They believed you.  And you didn't tell 

them the truth.  And now they're saying, well what happened to 

the tax increases that the members campaigned on?  For the 

record, so that you know and the public knows, on page 16, 

sales tax harmonization at 7 per cent is $140.2 million in 

'91-92, because we initiated it halfway through the year; and 

for '92-93, it's $185 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Not true. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- That's what it says, the top line . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, Minister, read . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Read the rest of it . . . (inaudible) . . . tax 

credit. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- All right.  And then he goes on to say, 

corporate taxes are 3.8 and 15.  Other adjustments are there, 

high income.  Total harmonization revenue -- what does that 

say?  Total harmonization revenue is $216 million.  Now we 

provided low income people . . . low income people got a break 

under harmonization.  They don't get a break under you guys.  

You charge them for utilities and charge them for all kinds of 

things.  We gave them a break, and there was a family tax 

credit of $35 million that went out to low income people.  You 

took that away too. 

 

Imagine that.  You increased taxes for the poorest of the poor, 

double taxed the businesses, and at the same time didn't tell the 

truth to the general voting public.  So we want to go back to 

this.  Corporate tax increases, other tax adjustments, high 

income surtax increases.  When you look at services and you 

look at harmonization, that line says total harmonization 

revenue -- $216 million.  Just the revenue itself in sales tax 

harmonization was 185. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, you knew that it was at least $185 million, 

and by the time you finished with services, up to 216 million.  

And you could have made the choice to pick 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1207 

on the poor and not even give them a family tax credit, and you 

could have had it in the ballpark, a couple hundred million 

dollars.  And you knew that.  And you said, we'll promise no 

tax increases anyway.  That's what you promised. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you knew.  We debated this.  We used it.  

You had all these figures.  Now you quickly got off the tax 

increases, and you were saying, well but we didn't know there 

was a debt. 

 

Listen to the Gass Commission.  Quote: Blakeney used the 

same accounting principles and the figures were correct.  The 

main reason for the increase in deficit is due to accounting 

principles, and under the accounting principles, the main 

element is unfunded pension liabilities.  End of quote. 

 

Well, well, well, Mr. Minister, you used the same accounting 

principles.  The premier . . . Allan Blakeney used the same 

principles.  The books were always open to look at.  And then 

you went and said well, but no, no, that's not the problem. The 

real problem is associated with the fact that the Crown 

corporations weren't doing well. 

 

Well how about the net income and the retained earnings in the 

three major utilities in '91-92?  Was it 2 or $300 million, $400 

million?  Did you talk about that?  No.  So that isn't fair.  The 

privatizations, you'd say, oh, but it's below book value.  They're 

out there trading in the market below what we paid for it, 

below what the NDP paid for it.  Well, well, well, well.  What 

does that tell you? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You sold at the wrong time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- No, in the 1970s you bought it at the wrong 

time and you were nationalized and you got it in the ear.  Every 

NDPer knows that, that you went out to nationalize the potash 

industry, borrowed money at 20 per cent interest rates in the 

United States and paid way too much for it, brought it home 

and put it on the books, and say, well look at the house of 

potash that we bought.  Holy smokes! 

 

And nobody had to question it because the companies got you.  

You just borrowed money from Americans and paid off 

Americans at really high prices. Then you put it down on our 

books and said, look at the asset that we have on the books.  

Well when you put a little bit of it out into the market, the 

market says, well really, the NDP made a big mistake, paid 

way too much.  This is what it's really worth. 

 

Well everybody knew that.  It's like your land bank policy.  It's 

like your other nationalization policies.  It was the biggest 

mistake in provincial investment history in the country of 

Canada.  Every time you nationalize and go in there and try to 

buy them out, you think they're going to give it to you?  You 

got charged all kinds of money and then you put it on the books 

as if it was worth that.  What fools.  Every accountant, every 

financial market, everybody else in North America says, what a 

mistake.  What a mistake that was. 

 

Now if it isn't in the Crowns . . . because the utilities are 

making lots of money under us, and then you even raised taxes 

on the poor.  And it isn't in the privatizations because those 

share offerings are doing well, thank you very much.  And as 

those shares do improve over time, your asset value improves.  

You know that because as they trade up, the stuff that you own 

trades up. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The shares go up. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Exactly.  Saskoil is doing well.  Cameco is 

doing well.  Potash is doing well.  Westbridge, IBM, you 

know, they're on the market.  And as those shares improve 

obviously your values improve.  You're still a shareholder in 

those and you can measure it.  It's not just your fictitious 

number. 

 

The public can actually buy and sell them to know what's going 

on.  And believe me there's no NDP patronage now in Saskoil, 

NDP patronage in the potash industry, NDP patronage in the 

uranium industry, and NDP patronage in the computer 

industry.  You're out of the patronage business because it's in 

the public sector and it's publicly traded.  And the public says, 

well, thank goodness; now if they'd only told us the truth at 

election time we wouldn't have to put up with these tax 

increases. 

 

And then what did you do?  To justify these awful tax 

increases, you bring forward the worst accounting principles 

that nobody will recommend.  You go back and look at any 

loss or every loss you can find over the years in SEDCO 

(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), the bus 

company or something else, and you bring it all forward and 

you lump into 1991; don't implement harmonization, don't 

bring the retained earnings and the profits of the utilities 

together and say: well surprise, there's a $900 million deficit.  

Oh my gosh, look what these guys did. 

 

(1245) 

 

Isn't it . . . I mean it's a farce; it's a sham.  Nobody believes you, 

Mr. Minister.  You can't play all these games.  Only the 

uninformed would be fooled by this.  So we're going to get into 

it in these Estimates and in these sales tax increases because 

you didn't tell the truth.  Your deficit is a sham.  It's accrual 

accounting.  The big-bath theory for 20 years; bring it forward 

and take it in one lump sum, and now go cash from here on. 

 

If you used the same accounting system as the Gass 

Commission said, the deficit isn't nearly as high.  And this 

false, principal accrual accounting and then cash accounting to 

cut it off in the middle is nonsense, unacceptable, 

unprofessional.  This is just to cover up huge tax increases 

when you got elected on tax decreases.  That's the point. 

 

And you know we met our deficit targets in 1990-91 right on.  

Publicly, there they were, 365 and they're there.  What were 

they?  And in 1991-92, 265 including harmonization and share 

offerings.  And you ask, well how can Crown corporations do 

this?  If you allow, for example, TransGas to be publicly 

traded, you save yourself a couple or $300 million in borrowed 

money.  It's equity. 



1208 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 1992 

And your leader said in the debate, no, he's not against share 

offerings.  But why don't you exercise some of that.  So you're 

just politically hidebound to this old philosophy, well I can tell 

a little fib but gee I can't do the smart thing in harmonization 

because it would go against our political campaign.  

Harmonization makes money; it cuts costs; it's good for 

business; we've become sales tax free -- not only the Alberta 

border and the American border and the Manitoba border, but 

across Canada.  It makes us money and allows you to balance 

the budget, and you won't do it. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Minister, as Mandryk says today, 

you've got all these ugly tax increases and you've got a $517 

million deficit, which is higher than last year and higher than 

the year before and higher than most years in the last 10 years. 

 

And on top of that, with these ugly tax increases, 

unco-ordinated, unprocessed, no efficiencies, your credit rating 

is going down and down and down and down and down.  In 

fact it's caught up with you because you go to New York and 

the people say, well if you want us to believe all this stuff, 

maybe we will.  You want all this accrual accounting to pile up 

and we're going to have to take the hit now and the market 

value and the book value and eat all that in one fell swoop.  

Well we will.  And it's going to cost you.  And it costs the 

taxpayers. 

 

Now the consequences of you not telling the truth at election 

time are going to be discussed in this legislature because you, 

Mr. Minister, were right in there.  You said, we're going to cut 

taxes and a little bit of management lets us balance the budget.  

That's what you said.  And you said, if we just didn't do the 

GigaText or we didn't do Supercart we'd have $5 million here 

and 5 there. 

 

The efficiencies at harmonization alone are $5 million a year 

and you've just thrown them out the window.  So that's a 

GigaText every year on your shoulders because you won't 

harmonize.  And the business community, the chamber of 

commerce, just wrote you. 

 

Here's the chamber of commerce -- represents small business in 

the province of Saskatchewan -- it's June 5, 1992.  What do 

they say to you, Mr. Minister?  Have you read the letter?  Well 

I guess you've read the letter.  The chamber of commerce wrote 

you.  What does it recommend, Mr. Minister?  The smart thing 

to do for small business in Saskatchewan -- farmers and co-ops 

-- is to harmonize.  No, it can't do that. 

 

Well they got the letter.  What did you write back and say? it's 

too complicated?  They say no, one tax is simpler.  Consumers 

are going to be in trouble?  No, no, consumers have a choice, 

it's better than utilities.  They're getting ripped with utilities.  

Every senior citizen has to pay higher telephone rates, power 

rates, utility rates -- they have no choice.  And you get them. 

 

How about a competitive advantage in the North American 

market?  Our exports to the United States are at an all-time 

high and we're trying to compete in potash, oil, uranium, coal, 

gas, processing, livestock marketing, processing meat.  And 

what do you do?  You increase their taxes, not decrease them.  

They could have been sales tax 

free.  And you said no. 

 

Sales tax free.  They get all their GST back and all their E&H 

back -- 100 per cent.  The average guy buying a half-ton truck 

doing business or farms would pick up a $3,000 cheque on a 

$20,000 truck -- 14 per cent back, 14 per cent back.  They get 

all their GST and all their E&H back and you said, no, we 

won't do that.  We will reduce taxes on top of the reduced PST. 

 

And do you know what you did?  You didn't tell the truth. And 

we're in here today finding out that you have no rationale for 

this except to say, well we found the Crowns weren't doing as 

well.  Well the utilities were doing very well, thank you -- $400 

million in taxes and retained earnings. 

 

And you had to balloon the market versus share value stuff and 

bring it all forward to say, well . . . And it's not even a 

permanent impairment, and you know that. As prices go up, 

you can make money.  The government can make money.  You 

might end up with a profit, not a net book loss. 

 

Five years from now what are you going to do?  You're going 

to . . . well we'll lower taxes now because we've got a net book 

gain; the prices are up and the value of the Saskatchewan 

shares are doing well due to good management.  We can just 

hear it all now -- nothing to do with good management. Interest 

rates are at 6 or 7 per cent.  Retail sales will reflect that.  It has 

got zero to do with your tax increases.  Who do you think 

you're kidding? 

 

So, Mr. Minister, we just want to know how you can say to the 

public and say to all your constituents, well we just had to 

increase taxes, when you promised the reduction of taxes. And 

secondly, you've got to explain over and over again why 

harmonization is bad for small business and farmers and 

co-ops.  Why is that true?  And three, why is a choice bad?  

Could you explain the advantages to senior citizens of having 

to pay 30 per cent increase in utilities versus harmonization? 

 

Would you just . . . would you go through those three questions 

again so we can have some understanding of your logic in 

justifying this huge fib or untruth or falsehood that you 

perpetrated on the public last fall and now it's caught up with 

you and we have to sit here in this legislature and watch you 

agonize through tax increases. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, Mr. Chairman, all I'm 

going to do here is correct some of the misinformation the 

member has been talking about.  First of all, under the 

harmonized Progressive Conservative PST, senior citizens had 

no benefit.  Low income senior citizens had no benefit because 

the benefit was that people with children . . . senior citizens 

were left out and were having to pay the huge burden of 

additional taxes.  And if the senior citizen wanted to live in 

their own home and that home needed some repair . . . for that 

member, who is the former premier, Mr. Chairman, was saying 

to the senior citizens that that seniors . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  All members had the opportunity to 



July 3, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1209 

enter into the debate, but we can only entertain one person at a 

time.  And that goes for the member from Estevan and the 

member from Quill Lakes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I 

was saying, that the member opposite is exaggerating once 

again.  He knows very well that senior citizens were among the 

hardest hit with the harmonized PST that the former 

government brought in.  The senior citizen who wanted to live 

in their home, for example, needed a repair done on the home, 

that senior citizens would have had to pay a 7 per cent 

provincial sales tax under harmonization for the labour even of 

the work that's done on that home to bring it to the status where 

they could continue to live in their community and their home.  

Just to give you one example, Mr. Chairman -- a great increase 

in the costs. 

 

Now I want to make some other corrections.  The member 

opposite says that the accounting principles used in the 1970s 

and the 1980s were the same.  He's right.  For the first time 

today he's right.  Those were the same accounting principles, 

but there was a difference.  The difference is that in the 1970s 

all of the expenditures of the government was publicly known.  

In the 1980s the Provincial Auditor has reported that he could 

only report on 50 per cent of the expenditures of the 

government.  That's the difference between accountability and 

no accountability, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The member opposite said that the sale of the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan was such a great thing.  Well he 

knows, and there's documentation that has been made public, 

that his own advisors who he hired advised him in writing that 

the Potash Corporation should yet not be sold at that time 

because it would be a great loss of money.  And in spite of the 

advice that was given by some of the best experts in North 

America, he decided to sell it and lose it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, during the election campaign the former 

premier sold PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) shares 

at a loss -- $18.  Now any . . . it doesn't take much of a business 

mind to understand that you have to sell at a right time.  If he 

had sold them today, he would have got $25, wouldn't have had 

the loss.  Cameco shares, the former government sold in the 

middle of the election campaigns at 13 to $14; today they're 

$17.  Made no business deal. 

 

Well listen to this, Mr. Chairman.  The member from Estevan 

says, good.  Well that shows the business acumen of the former 

premier of Saskatchewan who says it's good for the people of 

Saskatchewan to sell shares at $13 for Cameco and take a loss 

of $166 million which the taxpayer has got now to pay, instead 

of selling them at 17 when the taxpayers of Saskatchewan 

could have made a profit on them.  Now if that's good, Mr. 

Chairman, I'd like the member from Estevan to explain it. 

 

The member said opposite that his deficits were on target.  I 

remind him of 1986.  1986, before that election, the former 

government said the deficit was going to be $365 million.  

Immediately after the election, his minister of Finance had to 

announce to the media it's not $365 million; it's $1.2 billion.  

And when the press asked them, well how could you make that 

kind of an error, he says, 

well it's only politics. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, what a shame.  That's not what politics is 

supposed to be all about.  Politics is supposed to be about 

accountability, about open and honest government, about 

deficits that are honest and deficits which are not going to 

jeopardize the future of our children and their children down 

the road. 

 

I want to correct the member on one other point, Mr. 

Chairman.  He said that this budget is on accrual accounting.  

This budget is not on accrual accounting.  This budget is a 

modified cash, as always has been the case in Saskatchewan for 

the last number of years.  Accrual accounting won't come into 

place until 1993-1994. 

 

So I simply ask the member opposite, deal with accurate 

information and accurate numbers because I think the public 

has a right to get that kind of an approach by elected 

representatives in this Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 

 

 


