




















































Hansard: August 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2399 

 August 13, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 

 

Motion for Time Allocation 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, after a few short 

remarks I intend to move a motion along the following lines: 

 

 That, notwithstanding the Rules of the Assembly, and 

following the adoption of this motion, when the order is 

called for resuming the adjourned debate on motion for 

second reading of Bill No. 87, An Act respecting 

amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation, 

not more than one sitting day shall be allocated to debate on 

such order and that at fifteen minutes before the set time of 

adjournment, unless sooner concluded, the Speaker shall 

interrupt the proceedings and put every question necessary to 

dispose of the order; and, 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in Committee of the Whole, and 

that at fifteen minutes before the set time for adjournment on 

the second sitting day, unless sooner concluded, the 

Chairman shall put every question necessary to dispose of 

every section of the Bill not yet passed, and shall report the 

Bill forthwith to the House, and the question for first and 

second reading of any amendments shall be put forthwith and 

decided without amendments or debate; and (Mr. Speaker), 

 

 That there shall be two hours allocated to consideration of the 

motion for third reading of the said Bill, and at the expiration 

of the two hours, unless sooner concluded, the Speaker shall 

interrupt the proceedings and put every question necessary to 

dispose of the order for third reading of the Bill; and, 

 

 That consideration of the Bill, pursuant to this motion, be a 

special order of the assembly to be called immediately after 

orders of the day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to explain the rationale for putting this 

motion forward at this time.  The people of the province are 

very much aware of the fact that early in the spring of this year 

the Minister of Agriculture announced that there would be 

significant changes to the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program in the province of Saskatchewan, the reason 

being that the existing program was very, very expensive for 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that the major off-loading of 

funding for agriculture programs which was being developed 

and undertaken by the federal government -- that is, on the 

GRIP program, the amount, percentage being paid by taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan -- was horrendous.  Hundreds of millions of 

dollars for farm programs that had up to that point, in terms of 

western grain stabilization, in terms of 

the rebate on fuel, the two-price system for wheat, 

transportation programs, all off-loaded onto the backs of the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

That it was a decision made by the new government in 

Saskatchewan, that to lay that kind of an onus, burden, on the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that very area that was 

experiencing very, very significant hardships and recession as a 

result of world grain prices and as a result of right-wing 

governments' export enhancement programs that was 

undermining the price of wheat at the world level, that to 

expect the taxpayers in the very jurisdiction that were being hit 

the hardest to pay more and more and more, left the taxpayers 

and the Government of Saskatchewan no option but to say to 

the federal government, enough is enough when it comes to 

off-loading onto the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Therefore we announced to the public very clearly that we 

were going to make major changes to the GRIP program, and 

we did announce and indicate to the public in this session in 

every way publicly that we were going to bring a Bill to change 

GRIP. 

 

We made it public.  We were up front with the public, unlike 

changes made to GRIP in the past that were done very quietly 

and secretively by the former government, outside of the 

legislature.  We indicated we were going to make the changes.  

Some people will not like the changes.  Some people will like 

them.  That's fair.  That's the way legislation should work. 

 

The debate should take place in this House and it has.  And for 

three months now, since we first announced we were going to 

make changes, we have debated the GRIP legislation in one 

form or another -- on the streets, in the coffee shops, in the 

press, in question period, in the House.  And for three months 

we have allowed debate.  It is now day 65 of the session and 

we are still debating the Bill. 

 

Now the time comes, Mr. Speaker, when debate ends and 

filibustering and obstruction starts.  It's the opinion of the 

public, the opinion of many farm groups, the opinion of the 

members of the government, that we are now no longer in 

debate but we are into obstruction by a small group of 

desperate opposition members struggling to maintain political 

support in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I maintain this has 

nothing to do with the best interest of farmers and certainly not 

the best interest of taxpayers, but has to do with political 

agendas -- political agendas.  And I'll tell you why. 

 

We introduced a motion in this House in the first week of this 

session, calling for $500 million from the federal government.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, the public know full well that if those 

members of the opposition were interested in the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan or in the farmers of Saskatchewan, they would 

have supported that motion and we would have probably had 

the $500 million for farmers from the federal government. 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

But what did they do?  Mr. Speaker, every one of them who 

were in the House at that time stood in their place and voted no 

to the $500 million for the farmers of Saskatchewan.  That's 

what they did.  The member from Kindersley argued against 

the $500 million from the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We've only taken seven or eight 

minutes and already there is too much interruption in debate.  I 

ask members to please not interrupt to the extent that they are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I want to take only a few short minutes and I want to say that I 

haven't interfered or tried to interfere in the many, many days 

of debate that the members opposite have launched against the 

government on Bill 87.  And in trying to explain this motion 

for just a few moments, I really would like the members to pay 

attention to the position being put by the government, because, 

I would argue, it is a very rational and logical position being 

put by the government. 

 

That is the off-loading of federal responsibility for agriculture 

from the federal government, that is the other taxpayers in the 

rest of Canada, for an area that is very, very hard hit as a result 

of world grain prices that come as a result of right-wing 

governments, policies in the United States, in Europe, and in 

Canada at the federal level -- that is the massive export 

subsidies on the European grains moving into the world market 

and the export enhancement program by the American 

government that has undercut and, in many ways, killed the 

spirit and the economy of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Now the federal government has a responsibility to pick up a 

bigger share of the GRIP program, and that is why we 

announced that we were going to make changes in order to 

make the program work better for farmers and to put the 

burden of onus on the federal government to pick up their 

share. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I say again that there is a point where 

debate, legitimate debate, becomes obstruction.  Now the 

public will judge whether that was today, whether that was a 

month ago, or whether in fact we are being too rushed in 

moving this motion that will put time allocation on Bill 87 that 

deals with GRIP. 

 

The opinion of the members of government is that we have 

gone far beyond legitimate debate into bell-ringing -- still at 

every opportunity, even though the House has voted to end 

bell-ringing.  We saw the other day, instead of debating, for 

about four hours the bells rang on very, very non-consequential 

motions in order to delay the working of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is not debate; that is obstruction.  We have 

seen day after day -- And we have had many phone calls to our 

office from people watching the debate -- watching members 

opposite repeat themselves, what they call debate.  The people 

calling us are saying, look, enough is enough, get on with the 

working of the House; the budget is being held up; we have not 

had a budget in this province for two years, and it simply isn't 

right that a band of angry Conservative members who are still 

desperate as a result of their massive defeat last October should 

hold up the workings of the House. 

 

They're more specific than that.  They say that in October of 

'91 we believed we voted the member from Estevan out of the 

premier's chair in order that the member from Riversdale could 

carry out the workings of the province.  They say it's 

inappropriate that that member from Estevan still continues to 

try to run the agenda of this province that for 10 years led us to 

rack and ruin and $14 billion in debt. 

 

So today, Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite that we 

introduce a motion that is reasonable, allows for debate.  They 

are still allowed to hoist the Bill for three days which will give 

them a number of days to continue the debate both here in the 

Assembly and in the rural community if they so wish. 

 

And I would argue that the members opposite, unlike the 18 

days they rang the bells, that this period when they hoist the 

Bill, if they do and I really expect them to, that they take the 

time not to golf, as was the case in the last bell-ringing 

incident, but go out and visit with farmers.  Tell them the truth 

about the Bill.  Tell them about the off-loading from your 

colleagues in Ottawa; tell them about the off-loading, the 

hundreds of millions of dollars that the federal government has 

shifted to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan -- and ask them their 

opinion whether that should continue. 

 

I say to the members opposite as well, and in particular the 

member who yells from his desk, from Thunder Creek, that 

what we need here is some legitimate debate in this Assembly 

for the next few days, and then allow the democratic process to 

take place -- that is a vote by elected members of this House -- 

as to whether or not we as legislators will decide Bill 87 should 

be passed or not. 

 

Now if the members opposite say they don't have enough time, 

even though there will be time allocation, I know the members 

in government will allow to stop the clock this evening to allow 

them further debate if they want -- and I make that offer to 

them very sincerely -- or tomorrow night at 11 o'clock or the 

next night or the next night or the next night.  Of if they would 

like to sit Saturday and Sunday in order to get their point 

across, we are very willing to be here any time between now 

and when the Bill finally is passed, in order to allow them time 

to move amendments and allow them to speak. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I say that we were more than a little surprised 

on Tuesday of this week on private members' day when we 

offered up several times during the day to allow them to debate 

GRIP, they refused to go to it.  It was based on that premise, 

that they were not willing to debate GRIP, along with the 

public pressure, that we introduce the motion today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 

Swift Current: 

 

 That, notwithstanding the Rules of the Assembly, and 

following the adoption of this motion, when the order is 

called for resuming the adjourned debate on the motion for 

second reading of Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting 

amendments to 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation, not more than 

one sitting day shall be allocated to debate on such order and 

that at fifteen minutes before the set time of adjournment, 

unless sooner concluded, the Speaker shall interrupt the 

proceedings and put every question necessary to dispose of 

the order; and, 

 

 That there shall be two sitting days allocated to the 

consideration of the said Bill in the Committee of the Whole, 

and that at 15 minutes before the set time of adjournment on 

the second sitting day, unless sooner concluded, the chairman 

shall put every question necessary to dispose of every section 

of the Bill not yet passed, and shall report the Bill forthwith 

to the House, and the question for first and second reading of 

any amendments shall be put forthwith and decided without 

amendments or debate; and, 

 

 That there shall be two hours allocated to consideration of the 

motion for third reading of the said Bill, and at the expiration 

of two hours, unless sooner concluded, the Speaker shall 

interrupt the proceedings and put every question necessary to 

dispose of the order for third reading of the Bill; and, 

 

 That consideration of the Bill, pursuant to this motion, be a 

special order of the Assembly to be called immediately after 

orders of the day. 

 

I so move. 

 

(0915) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I had some notes I 

dropped down last night, but after listening to the House 

Leader's opening remarks, I got two or three hours just from his 

nightmare that he had last night. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure that the statements coming from the 

House Leader this morning, the member from Elphinstone, that 

that's exactly what has happened to him.  He's had a loss of 

memory.  He doesn't know what's happened in the past.  He 

doesn't know that they won an election last fall on a bunch of 

promises they have broken, and so he must have been dreaming 

last night when he comes out and saying all these things here. 

 

You know, he said I wonder if we're paying attention.  Well, 

Mr. Speaker, we're paying attention all right.  There's no doubt 

that we're not paying attention.  That's why we're here.  That's 

why we're here, fighting for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan over this here  GRIP Bill and other Bills that has 

come down from this government with a dictatorship model to 

it.  That's what's happening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he talks about the three-day hoist and going out to 

play golf.  Well that's an insult -- that's an absolute insult on the 

members on this side of the House when probably today there's 

maybe 20 of them out golfing now, maybe 30.  It's an absolute 

insult. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where does the House Leader think that we 

got all our information from, that people are against this?  On 

the three-day hoist . . . on the 18 days when we were out there, 

we were out talking to people.  Where do they think that I got 

that list of all the towns the other night?  I got that list and it 

came from the province of Saskatchewan in 18 days.  

Goodness!  And if this heavy-handed . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I'm not ridiculing 

the speaker.  I just want to say, look, we just started a few 

minutes ago.  I think we should cut the interruptions to a 

minimum.  We've got a long day ahead of us and I would like 

to keep everybody in the House that we can. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a long day 

ahead of me and the more they sit me down to rest my legs will 

be the better I guess, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, just a few more comments on the House 

Leader's comments.  He's saying, but we have to do time 

allocation and shut this opposition up.  It's not shutting us up -- 

it's shutting the people of Saskatchewan up.  It's their voices 

that we're having heard in this legislature.  It's their voices, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we should be doing this at 120, 130 days, not at the 60 

days.  That's when you do closure, time allocation, or whatever.  

This GRIP Bill is one of the most important Bills that ever hit 

the legislature, and we're not saying that . . . at election time, 

when they said they were going to do changes in GRIP,  that's 

fine.  And they have the right to do that.  They have the right. 

 

But they haven't got the right . . . And he says, Mr. Speaker, 

that they were going to . . . they promised a Bill last fall at 

election time on GRIP.  They didn't promise a Bill.  They had 

no intentions of a Bill of this nature until the farmers started to 

win their case in court in Melville.  And that's when they had to 

come in with this here retroactivity Bill that makes part of the 

Bill void, and then takes the right of the courts away.  We've 

heard that so many times from my colleagues. 

 

But you'll have to listen and listen -- you'll have to listen to that 

for four years.  And you're going to be.  It's going to haunt you 

for the rest of the eternity for the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

in this province of Saskatchewan  

_- is having a Bill void, a part of section of a Bill which is 

important and it's . . . you're just voiding it out of people's life.  

And then taking the rights away afterwards: you can't go to 

court and sue.  I mean it's never happened.  It's never happened. 

 

The member from Elphinstone also said this morning that this 

off-loading onto Saskatchewan farmers . . . Well I'll tell you, 

the federal government didn't off-load onto any Saskatchewan 

farmers.  The federal government, Mr. Speaker, over the last 

eight years since they've been in power, has put about $14 

billion dollars into agriculture -- 14 billion.  No government in 

history ever put that kind of money into agriculture.  And 

they're trying to put more in now and this government won't 

even accept it.  They're wanting to put another $30-some 

million in, matching with $23 million.  And they wouldn't even 

accept that. 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

And he has the nerve, Mr. Speaker, to stand up here and say, 

well the federal government is trying to off-load onto 

Saskatchewan.  Well that's not correct.  The reason for it is . . . 

They've got one thing in mind, Mr. Speaker.  They just say, 

well we've won an election; we've got to balance that budget.  

Under all circumstances that budget has to be balanced. 

 

They know, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, they know 

that they didn't get a good vote from rural Saskatchewan.  And 

they're saying we're playing politics.  They didn't get a good 

vote from rural Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, they didn't, 

because we got 130-some thousand votes and most . . . you 

couldn't count the votes we . . . it would only take you a few 

minutes to count the votes we got in Regina and Saskatoon.  

We only got 10,000 votes out of Regina and 10,000 out of 

Saskatoon. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the reason why we're here discussing this here 

. . . and it's wide-open debate.  The member from Elphinstone 

talked about election, the big mandates.  He talked about 

everything -- off-loading, western stabilization -- he talked 

about everything.  So I want, Mr. Speaker, to respond to some 

of these things that he said. 

 

This is not correct, that they got this great big mandate from 

rural Saskatchewan.  We all know they got a mandate, Mr. 

Speaker, from Saskatchewan.  But they didn't get a mandate 

under the things that they're doing.  They broke almost every 

promise.  They got one thing in mind -- balance the budget, 

balance the budget.  But on whose backs?  On whose backs?  

Whose backs are they going to balance the budget? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House Leader, Mr. Speaker, keeps on saying 

-- he's said it for months in this House -- that the federal 

government has reneged on Saskatchewan farmers.  And that is 

absolutely not correct.  That is absolutely not correct, Mr. 

Speaker.  And they know it. 

 

They're the ones that's reneging on the farmers in 

Saskatchewan.  It's not just the farmers in Saskatchewan, plus 

it's everybody in Saskatchewan.  It takes in every business 

man, every senior, everybody.  When farmers don't have 

money and they don't succeed, everybody suffers.  This is an 

agriculture province.  And they've forgot about agriculture. 

 

We had promises, promises galore for farmers.  The Minister 

of Agriculture went to a meeting the other night out in 

Humboldt area and he should ask . . . the House Leader should 

ask him, Mr. Speaker, what took place out there.  Any place he 

goes, he gets it, and he gets it bad from people that voted for 

him.  He gets her and he gets it good. 

 

The member from Quill Lakes couldn't possibly go out into his 

riding, Mr. Speaker, couldn't possibly go out into his riding and 

explain exactly what this is all about, that what we're doing is 

bringing a GRIP Bill to this House and tell them what it's about 

and what we are doing and the retroactivity of this Bill.  And 

he couldn't possibly tell them that. 

 

And that's why it's wrong to have closure and time allocation 

so soon because we need time for him to go out and tell his 

people.  We need time.  Where were they in 

that 18 days?  Why weren't you out telling your people, hey 

this is what we're going to do.  Do you endorse us? 
 

The other night when I was speaking, Mr. Speaker, I 

challenged the members opposite to get one person in 

Saskatchewan to phone me -- one that will say, I agree with 

what the government's doing.  I haven't had a phone call . . . 

Yes, I did have a phone call.  I had 13 phone calls since that 

time from the city of Regina only -- some of them are farmers 

that live in Regina -- saying, you're right on the money. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, I haven't had one person . . . and I still 

challenge them again today.  Every member go out and talk to 

your riding people.  I challenge the member from Moose Jaw.  

I ask him to go to Moose Jaw and talk to his city people that 

are not farmers, and say, this is the Bill that we're bringing in 

the House, and we give a few hours . . . that's enough.  Just tell 

them we give them a few hours speaking time, to the 

opposition, to speak about the GRIP.  They talk about this here 

two months debating Bills.  Well this government here is just 

fooling around with this here Bill.  They're determined to get 

this Bill through. 
 

What are we talking here about this morning, about time 

allocation for?  What . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  We're going to have a lot of 

interruptions today.  And I will tell members that I'm going to 

warn you two or three times, and if there are continual 

interruptions, you will find yourself outside of this legislature.  

I will invoke rule 28. 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Why are we here 

this morning?  Why is the first thing on the agenda time 

allocation on the GRIP Bill when we've already had . . . he 

does closure all the way along the line, as every time he sees 

fit.  He did closure on the interim supply Bill after we spoke for 

five hours and 15 minutes.  And he just stood up and 

interrupted the member from Estevan and says, I bring in 

closure on the interim supply Bill.  It's never happened before 

in history. 
 

Why aren't we on Estimates this morning?  They want to get 

the GRIP Bill just rammed through this House.  They want to 

get it done regardless, because they're frightened of the 

constitution, the reality of it.  They know that there's a good 

chance that it's wrong.  But they want to get it done, then turn 

around and say to the people of Saskatchewan, oh, this 

opposition is holding up the legislature on a few things like 

Estimates and Bills, other Bills.  We got other important 

Estimates. 
 

And he keeps saying we haven't passed Estimates.  Bring them 

forth.  We need the energy and supply in this House, we need 

the Minister of Agriculture, we need the Minister of Health.  

Why don't you bring these important ones forth before you talk 

about closure and time allocation on anything?  Why don't you 

just set it aside for a while? 
 

Set the GRIP . . . it's the most contentious Bill we've got, we 

know that, ever in the history of this province.  Not the Bill in 

itself, just the . . . You got a right to bring in a Bill pertaining to 

your thoughts on GRIP, but not this retroactive part.  The 

mistake, I've got all kinds of quotes here where you've all 

admitted it.  The Minister of 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

Agriculture has admitted it, the House Leader's admitted it, 

there was a mistake made.  They didn't send the letter out to the 

farmers. 

 

Why don't you leave that Bill to the last?  And then . . . That's 

the things you do in the closing hours of a legislature is those 

Bills that are of a controversial matter, you debate those last.  

We should be on to Estimates, Mr. Speaker, instead of me 

standing here this morning and my colleagues and myself will 

have to talk here until 11 o'clock tonight.  And he suggested, 

the House Leader, that maybe we could stop the clock at 11 

o'clock and then maybe we could sit on Saturday and maybe 

we could sit on Sunday and we could just have all the time we 

want.  And then we're going . . . we can hoist the Bill for three 

days. 

 

Is that . . . Why aren't we into business of the House?  Why 

aren't we doing the business of this legislature?  Bring the other 

Bills forward.  We got other farm Bills that are very important 

-- far more important that this GRIP Bill.  This GRIP Bill is of 

no importance to farmers at all other than take their livelihood 

away, nothing at all.  It just ruins them.  It wrecks their farms.  

It will.  And if the Minister of Economic Development is 

worrying about economic development in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, he should first think of economic development on that 

farm.  That's what he wants to think about.  Because you have 

stifled the farmers. 

 

And I was sincere the other night when I went through town 

after town, and I'm going to go through . . . Later on this 

morning I'm going to go through some riding by ridings and 

talk about your own rural ridings where you've misled your 

own people in those ridings. 

 

We should be getting on with things.  We don't need to be 

sitting here fighting and fighting all summer.  It's ridiculous.  

Sixty days -- we're roughly 60 or 65 days or whatever, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is not the time to get into wrangling.  If we 

got something that we're not getting along about . . . and who 

could possibly, who could possibly get along when you bring 

that type of a Bill in and that retroactive piece of legislation?  

So why didn't they leave that aside and get everything else 

done? 

 

Why haven't we . . . he wouldn't dare.  He knows that he'd be 

embarrassed.  The government knows, Mr. Speaker, that if they 

bring the Minister of Agriculture in here for Estimates and 

bring the minister responsible for Rural Development and Crop 

Insurance and the Minister of Health and the Premier on his . . . 

he's responsible for the whole government, Executive Council.  

They know they'd be embarrassed. 

 

(0930) 

 

So what they want to do is get the GRIP Bill rammed through, 

get it done, and then they're going to bring these things on in 

the closing hours.  I've seen them do it before because I was 

here from 1978, as you were , Mr. Speaker, '82 when all the . . . 

that's when they'd bring the most important . . . when 

everybody's got agreement to maybe get out the next night, 

we'll stop the next night at 10 o'clock or something like that 

and then we finish at 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning.  

Everybody's tired and nobody's 

paying any attention. 

 

Why can't we have accountability in this government?  Why 

can't we have the Premier, who's responsible for everything 

you've done in the first nine months of government or whatever 

it is -- it'll soon be a year, it's coming closely, it's next month 

that the election . . . it'll be a year next month since the election 

was called -- and why can't we have the Premier stand and give 

us all the time we want for him to answer questions? 

 

Because he must be proud of what he's done.  He must be.  

They must be able to compensate and tell the people of 

Saskatchewan, we are . . . instead of talking about closure, he 

should be able to say, well we think we done the right thing by 

breaking all those promises.  He should be able to stand here 

and say why we went after seniors and after farmers and hit 

everybody in the province by raising their taxes. 

 

They promised all these things to be gone.  He should be 

standing here, instead of talking about closure today, and the 

Premier should be absolutely defending his government of 

everything you done.  We need several days at him.  And we 

need some time with the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

But what this government is doing is saying, look at, we are 

going to just ram this GRIP Bill through.  And when that is 

done, then we're going to go out and say again to the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan, well these Tories are holding up 

the whole legislature.  They didn't really care about the GRIP.  

They're just holding it up, period.  Look at, the GRIP Bill's 

passed, and they're still holding it up. 

 

You want to believe we're holding it up.  If you think that it's 

going to be smart to talk about sitting on Saturdays and 

Sundays, well if you start talking about any longer hours than 

what you're talking about now, for 10 people to debate in this 

House, well I can tell you that when you put your ministers up 

here for Estimates, you'll have to go closure on Estimates.  

You'll have to do that too. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Why? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Because we may want to keep . . . 10 people 

keep one minister on his feet for several days.  Then you'll see 

how you like it.  Mr. Speaker, we have a right to have the 

Minister of Agriculture and the House Leader and the Premier 

and the Minister of Energy sitting there.  We have a right . . . 

and the Minister of Social Services, I'm a critic of.  We have a 

right to be able to question these people.  And we have a right.  

That is our right, because it's happened for ever. 

 

The House Leader says, why would you do that?  We would do 

that because it's only the minister that answers questions in this 

House.  So naturally we got 10 people asking questions to one 

minister.  You know, he tries to fool the public.  But you can 

only fool the people part of the time, not all of the time.  They 

finally catch on.  And they're catching on out there.  The people 

out there in Saskatchewan are absolutely fed up completely 

with this government now and their actions -- their actions 

today, their actions that they've done this whole legislature, and 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

the actions that they've done since they have won government.  

They didn't have, I don't think, a month or two and they were in 

trouble by breaking their promises. 

 

And they have to stand in this House and defend it.  And we 

want you to defend it.  Stand up and tell us where we're wrong.  

Tell us that it's all right to . . . what you've done in health care 

and what you've done in the various departments, in 

Agriculture.  Tell us why.  But you won't let us at them -- you 

won't let us at them.  They're just hanging on here, waiting for 

the 70 days to be done.  And they know that Regina's MLAs 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) that get a free ride here 

for 90 bucks a day, they won't be able to get it any more and 

they want this House closed on 70 days. 

 

Well I can tell you, since I've sat here -- this is my 15th session 

-- very seldom this House has ever been even close to done in 

70 days.  It just doesn't happen.  It's always, most of the time 

it's always been running, in my 15 years, from 90 to 130 days. 

 

Now why are we talking about . . . They got the media so upset 

that the media's wondering why we're holding the House up all 

summer.  Well any time, Mr. Speaker, that a government 

brings a House in in the end of April and wonder why we're not 

done in May and June, go ask the government.  Don't go ask 

the opposition, why are you holding things up?  Don't ask us, I 

say to the media.  Don't ask us that we have to sit here and 

discuss and debate on closure half the time.  We're debating 

closure.  We don't need closure; we need co-operation. 

 

Did this government, Mr. Speaker, ever think of co-operation?  

All we need is co-operation.  All we need is the House leaders 

and the whips to sit down and we could have discussed it at any 

time, and we could have had co-operation.  We're willing to 

co-operate, but we're not willing to give in on something that 

we're absolutely got principles for.  So don't try to say you're 

just going to shove it down our throat and we're going to 

co-operate.  Co-operation means co 

_operation on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is not . . . this whole debate, this whole 

legislature is not supposed to be . . . we're not supposed to be 

here discussing what's politically right for the NDP 

government, and we're not supposed to be here what's 

politically right for the Conservatives, opposition.  We're here 

on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

they can sit in their seats and they can grin and they can 

chuckle and they can smile, but I'll tell you, I'll go back again. 

 

And I ask the members that are grinning over there to go and 

ask their constituents:  is this right and is it proper for us to do 

this, bring this kind of a Bill forth that it probably is 

unconstitutional in the manner that we're doing, and then say 

you got no right to take it to court?  Go ask them that.  Just go 

ask your constituents.  Because I can't find anybody that'll say 

that's right. 

 

I got the president of a . . . NDP constituent that has made the 

statement that it is wrong, but I'm still NDP.  But it's wrong 

what they're doing.  We've got some family of the Reg Gross's 

that was in the elevator just the other day.  In 

fact, I believe it was his father.  Reg Gross's father.  And he 

couldn't believe . . . He said, I can't believe what we've done.  

I've been an NDP, NDP all my life.  And he says, now this here 

Premier, he's crazy, and this here Minister of Agriculture . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I think the member 

realizes that that kind of language certainly is not going to help 

in order to keep the decorum and order of this House.  And I 

just caution him to use some other words in order to express his 

ideas in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I respect your 

ruling.  But it's very difficult when I'm repeating what 

somebody else has said.  I'm repeating what somebody else has 

said, not what I've said.  I didn't say that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member knows full well that you can't 

quote everything that somebody else has said and use it in this 

legislature and then legitimize it.  So I ask the member to 

please use language that helps with the order and the decorum 

in this House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Then we'll just 

say that Reg Gross's father was not happy with the Premier.  He 

was not happy with his actions.  And that should be 

permissible.  And he's very, very angry with the Minister of 

Agriculture.  Now that happened publicly right in the 

constituency of Morse. 

 

And so don't tell us, Mr. Speaker, don't let these people here 

tell us and sit here and look at us that everything's fine.  Our 

constituents believe exactly what we're doing is right.  They 

know what you're doing is wrong. 

 

I challenge the member from Swift Current, when he goes 

home this weekend, when he's in church on Sunday morning to 

ask his people when he comes out of church, do you believe 

what we're doing?  When he goes to the smorgasbord or 

whatever, maybe he goes to that Chinese restaurant in Swift 

Current, just say to them:  I'd like to talk to you, my friend; I'd 

just like to say to you, this is what we're doing in this 

legislature; and I want to know, I want to get your feeling, do 

you back me on what we're doing?  Mr. Speaker, I want him to 

go and ask the people and not just take it for granted that's what 

they're going to say. 

 

Because I stayed in Swift Current on Monday night.  And I can 

tell you what . . . if he goes and talks to the people that work at 

the desk at the Imperial 400 in Swift Current that isn't what he's 

going to find out.  He needs to ask them what the people that 

come in there for coffee and to the cafe all day long say. 

 

That's what he needs to do, Mr. Speaker.  Ask them their 

opinion if this is right what we're doing here this morning, if 

this is right.  But you've got to explain it all.  Mr. Speaker, they 

have to explain the whole, entire situation. 

 

You just don't go out there and say, well we had our right 

because we promised at election time to change the GRIP Bill.  

They had the right to do that.  And all they'll say is, well we're 

just changing the '91 to '92 GRIP and we said we would.  But 

it's in the manner in which they done it.  That's what they have 

to tell their constituents. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

That's why we're here debating this GRIP Bill.  That's why we 

will not back off.  And I tell the House Leader, Mr. Speaker, 

that he's going to have to go closure on the closure, because we 

are not going to quit talking on this motion this morning until 

he goes closure on that.  He'll have to do closure on closure.  

And that's the only way he's going to keep us up, because the 

10 of us can go on for days and days and days and days until 

you won't get your summer holiday that you so badly want. 

 

Even though we want to go home and harvest, we think more . 

. . we want to go home and harvest, Mr. Speaker.  My family 

need me at home, but I believe in the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan and my constituents want me to never give up 

on this GRIP Bill. 

 

And when you explain to the people, well the non-farmer, 

you'll explain to them about the '91 versus '92 GRIP and they'll 

say:  I could care less.  Then you tell them of the manner of 

what this . . . how this is happening, that they're having a 

portion of the Bill just as if it had never been proclaimed.  

That's what they're doing, Mr. Speaker.  They're just taking part 

of that Bill and just saying, that's how it's been analysed by the 

experts, the legal experts.  That it's just that . . . part of that Bill, 

we're going to take it out of your life, and it never happened.  

And then if you don't agree, we've also got a part in the Bill 

that says you can't take us to court any more. 

 

Now if anybody possibly was . . . Everybody is elected 

individually in here and you have some good merits about you 

or you couldn't got here.  Somebody has to have something 

good about them.  They got to like you.  So for goodness sakes, 

be honest with your people.  Go back and you tell them, will 

you back me on what I'm doing? 

 

I can tell you how I know whether I'm backed or not, because I 

have 14 phone calls that I make . . . My caucus has known this 

for years -- I can do the quickest poll and the best poll of any 

place in Canada.  Gallup couldn't touch the poll that I do.  

Because I phone 14 people on my inner executive.  They have 

four phone calls to make.  They phone four others.  And so that 

. . . my 26 towns, I can get back in about 48 hours what these 

people think about any subject whatsoever. 

 

And if they think it doesn't work, then tell me why I've been 

re-elected for four times.  Tell me why I've been re-elected.  

Because I've been informing the people of Arm River.  I've 

been informing them and informing them. 

 

But I can tell the members that just came back here for the 

second time now -- most of the members here are on their 

second term; there's a lot of members only once -- and my 

advice is to be honest with the people.  And if your people 

don't agree with this type of legislation, for goodness sakes 

stand up and say so. 

 

Because I was in government for nine and half years and many 

times I wasn't agreeable of something we were doing and I told 

my people . . . I asked my people, what do you think?  And 

they said, we are against.  And I would come in and say so.  

I've stood right in this House and I've said so.  And I'll do it any 

time.  I'll do it any time about anything in government.  I'll be 

honest with the people. 

I've always done it. 

 

And when you people out there that don't believe this, then put 

it to practice and you'll find out.  Just don't keep in touch with 

your people, don't ask them their opinion, and see if you'll 

return.  You wait till this gets . . . I'll say that the 650,000 

voters in the province of Saskatchewan, that my statement is 

likely that it would be a miracle if 50 to 100,000 . . . well I 

don't think there'd be that many; only a small, small portion 

really know what's happening here in this legislature. 

 

No matter when I go home . . . I had a phone call from Hanley 

yesterday for somebody that's on my executive.  He has a 

problem with Crop Insurance.  Nothing to do with last year's 

GRIP; it's about getting into this year's GRIP.  They made a 

mistake with his papers and whatnot.  And he said, is the GRIP 

Bill passed yet?  And so I said, no.  He said, I just want to 

know.  He called me my name.  He said, I just want to know, 

Mr. Muirhead, what is the hold-up?  I mean, why are you 

fighting it? 

 

And so I explained to him.  He says, well that's sure something 

I never heard before.  I didn't know anything about that.  I'm 

not much for listening to the television.  I keep a lot of cattle.  

I'm out in the evenings . . . (inaudible) . . . and I didn't know. 

 

But I'll tell you, he was not a happy camper after I explained to 

him what was going on.  And so that man, he said, I've got 

about 30-some relatives in the Hanley area and we're having a 

family picnic this Sunday, so there's 38 more people going to 

hear about it.  So it goes on and on.  And you give this a few 

more months or a year, whatever, and unless you people stand 

up in your own ridings and be counted, be counted, you are 

going to fall.  There is no other way.  You must do it.  And if 

you think city members are going to be excluded from this, 

forget it.  Because there's people right on the streets of Regina 

here that do not know what this underhanded, dictatorship-type 

thing you're doing here.  I mean it is unreal what you're doing. 

 

(0945) 

 

We talk about what co-operation, Mr. Speaker, would do.  I've 

seen it back . . . This is not the same type of a government that 

I sat with in 1978-82.  We had some . . . I can remember our 

House leaders and the different agendas and whatnot, different 

Bills that come forth, and had some . . . a lot of dissension, but 

I never seen it once it didn't get worked out.  I never seen it 

once that we needed extended hours that there wasn't 

agreement.  You just don't up and do it the way you are and 

expect co-operation. 

 

I ask the people, I ask the back-benchers to go after your House 

Leader and your front row and say, if you don't want to sit here 

all summer then for goodness sakes bring the legislature in in 

February or January and you'll get out in your 70, 80, 100 days.  

That's what it takes.  It takes that long .  It takes that long to do 

legislation in this province.  And if you think differently, well 

you're being misinformed by your front row.  You new 

members are being misinformed by your front row.  Because 

you cannot do the business of this legislature and the amount 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

of Bills and all these dictatorship-type Bills, you can't expect to 

get it done in 60 days.  It is impossible.  It is impossible, Mr. 

Speaker, to do it in a right and proper manner. 

 

And I don't think, Mr. Speaker that . . . I am sure, talking to 

back-bencher after back-bencher -- nice people -- in 

conversations, I am certain when we get into conversation, they 

really are being misinformed, not told in their caucus what this 

is all about.  I don't think they understand.  If you're a 

non-farmer, you don't get to understand the GRIP.  I remember 

about two months ago, when we first started talking about 

GRIP, when nobody could see anything wrong with what they 

were doing. 

 

Co-operation, if we would just learn to co-operate.  I don't 

know of any more individual that would want to co-operate 

more than my people around me.  We want to co-operate.  But 

we're not going to be dictated to.  We're not going to be 

dictated to.  If you've got a Bill that you want to bring forth to 

this House and it's done rightfully and honourably and you're 

not going to do any crazy legislation in it -- Mr. Speaker, if 

you're going to do it right and proper - 

_ well then you'll get co-operation because you have your right 

to put those Bills forward.  But you haven't got your right to 

bring an unconstitutional Bill into this legislature.  You have no 

rights to do that. 

 

Those rights . . . We are fighting on behalf and talking on 

behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  And we 

are right when we're saying that we're speaking on their behalf 

and we're going to take it right to the last moment, and then we 

hope that what happens, and for the sake of not the Progressive 

Conservatives but for the people of the province Saskatchewan, 

that this Bill will be stopped either here -- it'll get public 

hearings . . . I'm still hoping, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill will get 

public hearings yet.  Because that's the way it should be. 

 

That's what happened in Ontario when they had this same 

bell-ringing limits that we got here, 30 minutes to an hour, and 

I'm hoping rather than closure . . . closure is all we can think 

about here.  It's closure, closure, time allocation, and closure.  

It's not right. 

 

Why can't we do like NDP Ontario?  The people came in and 

voiced their opinions at hearings right in the legislature and 

then they put it out for 30-day hearings on an environment Bill 

that was important to the people of the province of Ontario.  

Really a contentious Bill.  And so everybody co-operated. 

 

And when that Bill was finished it took six months and it made 

a lot of unhappy people that were . . . the government were 

trying to force that through, but they gave in to the wishes of 

the people of the province of Ontario and took amendments 

from the public through the oppositions, and accepted some . . . 

put some amendments in themselves from the public and the 

Bill got passed in six months. 

 

Now if anybody tells me that this is right that we had the 

Minister of Justice stand here in question period yesterday . . . 

He stood here and he very, very clearly said that when he was 

asked the constitutionality of this Bill and what the courts are 

going to do about, he said, I don't know; I don't 

know. 

 

When your Minister of Justice doesn't know, doesn't that put 

the province in a terrible, terrible position?  It puts us in one of 

the worst positions that any government's ever been in the 

history, Mr. Speaker . . . and any province or state in North 

America because your Minister of Justice says I don't know 

about the constitutionality of this Bill. 

 

Now that is terrible, terrible.  It is wrong that when he said that 

-- he says, I don't know, I don't know what would happen -- he 

said that.  Look at Hansard.  He said, I don't know. 

 

He didn't stand to his feet, Mr. Speaker.  He did not stand to his 

feet and say, I have sat down with the people that drafted this 

Bill, I have sit down with the Minister of Agriculture, I have sit 

with all the people that was involved in drafting this Bill, and 

they have told me that it is no problem whatsoever.  I guarantee 

you that this Bill is constitutional, that it'll get by the Charter of 

Rights, that there's no problem. 

 

But he couldn't do that.  He didn't, because he's an honourable 

man and he would not mislead this here House by saying 

something that he couldn't back up.  So the Minister of Justice 

can't back it up.  The rest of us aren't lawyers.  There's no 

lawyers over here.  I don't know of a lawyer in this House right 

at this moment.  But if there is, for goodness sakes, get on the 

phone like I've been doing.  I have phoned several firms that I 

know, people that I know well, our own personal, family 

lawyers.  I have phoned them and I said, I need to have to 

know what you think about this. 

 

I have phoned several firms in Saskatoon and I've had several 

get back to me.  And they said, well, we're not constitutional 

lawyers, but what we feel is what the courts should decide.  I 

can't make . . . for their sake -- that's their law firms and 

business -- I'm not going to make them put their names public.  

But I know that if the members opposite would do the same 

thing . . . phone their lawyers, get advice, and see what you're 

doing is right. 

 

It's not right.  It's absolutely wrong.  Freedom is being 

destroyed in this province of Saskatchewan -- absolutely being 

destroyed.  If this Bill passes, what can follow?  All we'll know 

is closure, closure, closure.  Because when you do it the first 

time, it hurts anybody.  We had to do it after 120 days.  That's 

what we had to do on the energy Bill. 

 

And it bothered me, it bothered . . . but there was hours and 

hours and hours given.  All the opportunity to talk about the 

energy Bill.  Did the energy Bill go ahead?  No it didn't.  

People's voices were heard. 

 

Why don't you do that?  Let the people of Saskatchewan 

decide.  You can't keep on destroying the rights of the 

individual.  And that's what you're doing.  You are destroying 

the rights of the individual, of their voices being heard in this 

legislature. 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I challenge these people to go out and talk 

to their people and see whether I'm right or not.  And if they 

can come back with a list of people that . . .  



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

names, legitimate names that said we are backing you, well 

then, they got some support. 

 

But I went through a terrible pile of towns the other night -- 

and I didn't get half through them -- that we've heard from.  I've 

heard from every town in my riding, either by letters or phone 

calls, and why should my riding be different than any other 

riding?  And it isn't different.  They're all the same. 

 

Something's happening in this province of Saskatchewan that . . 

. it bothers me, Mr. Speaker.  It really bothers me.  Because 

how far is this going to go?  If this government doesn't do 

something for farmers and something for business men out 

there to stop these foreclosures and bankruptcies day after day 

after day . . . They don't understand.  They haven't got involved 

like I have and many other people -- I know some has -- to look 

at why is there so many suicides and people taking strokes and 

dying because of shocks of losing their business. 

 

And they come out from eastern Canada or from Europe and 

they homesteaded here in the early days, Mr. Speaker, and they 

thought they were in a land of freedom and they thought they 

could work hard and do well, and they're seeing their whole life 

taken away from them.  They see that they're being . . . they 

worked hard and they're losing family homes. 

 

This government must take heed.  They must take heed.  

They're going to be responsible.  When things go wrong, they'll 

be responsible.  This province of Saskatchewan -- and I don't 

like to talk doom and gloom but all you have to do is be in 

touch with people and it's a doom and gloom out there in rural 

Saskatchewan.  I've never seen anything like it. 

 

I thought it was bad while we were in government for nine 

years, how things were going downhill in rural Saskatchewan.  

I'm saying rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I'm talking about 

all Saskatchewan.  I'm talking about every business there is in 

this province of Saskatchewan -- nearly everyone ties in with 

rural Saskatchewan.  We're all rural. 

 

A citizen listening to me here this morning in the city of 

Regina is rural.  You may live in the city, but when the rural 

people don't survive and the towns don't survive, they lose their 

farms, they move into the city and they take your jobs away. 

 

I mean people last summer, Mr. Speaker, would think this was 

a pretty terrible thing talking about all these closure motions 

we have in here now, but they thought it was a tragedy because 

some of them, to hold on to a job, had to move out into rural 

Saskatchewan on Fair Share Saskatchewan; had to move out to 

be able to try and save some of the towns and spread 

government jobs throughout the province. 

 

But now, maybe the people that opposed it, maybe the ones 

that opposed it should stop and think about the population in 

the towns going down, down, and down, and then they lose 

their farm and they come in and they lose their job to a farmer.  

Maybe he's well educated.  Maybe he's been a teacher at one 

time and he takes a 

teaching job.  Maybe he's an accountant and then he went 

farming.  He loses out; he comes back in. 

 

It's got to . . . the whole situation is terrible.  We talk about over 

in Europe, we talk about the Berlin Wall.  And I'm going to 

relate the Berlin Wall today to what's happening right here with 

this closure motion in Saskatchewan.  That Berlin Wall was put 

up there in the country of Germany to . . . and it separated the 

Russians from the German people, the free enterprise from the 

socialists.  And it sat there for nearly 40 years.  And they took 

it down because the people had enough of dictatorship.  They 

had enough, absolutely enough. 

 

The good people . . . I was talking to the member from Morse.  

He's going over to Russia with Campus Crusade in September.  

I have a friend in EYM (Expanded Youth Ministries) that's 

going over to Russia.  You couldn't do that a few years ago. 

 

The Berlin Wall came down in Europe and they're trying to get 

rid of that socialist dictatorship but I'm afraid that it's being 

built in Saskatchewan.  There's been a wall built between the 

government and the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  

It's happening out there.  And that's what people feel.  I know 

that they must be getting the same phone calls we're getting and 

you're not listening. 

 

If the members here have to be getting the call -- because I'd 

never get a call from anyone outside my riding and most the 

ones inside -- are you letting your MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) know?  Are you telling them what you 

think about all the different things this government's done?  

Are you informing them?  Are you telling them what's 

happening?  Are you telling them that every . . . you broke 

every election promise?  That this here Premier, instead of 

being in here defending closure, he's still out there defending 

what happened at the last election.  But he can't defend that he 

hasn't lived up to one election promise, except I'll give him the 

benefit of the doubt that maybe he's trying to balance the 

budget. 

 

But he promised, he promised faithfully that there'll be no 

increase in taxes.  He promised he was going to do more for 

farmers than ever before.  The Minister of Agriculture is trying 

to tell that to people throughout Saskatchewan.  He goes 

around there: we as a government are going to do more for 

farmers than any government's ever done before.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, they're not believing them. 

 

They're not believing them when they said last fall, Mr. 

Speaker, that there would be a moratorium put on farm land.  

There's been like several hundreds of foreclosure notices gone 

out since last fall.  They've broken that promise.  We're sitting 

here . . . They're trying to get the farmers.  It's going to cost 

him probably a few hundreds of thousands of dollars.  It's 

going to cost maybe up to half . . . if this crop . . . there's a lot 

of areas of this province, Mr. Speaker, that needs rainfall. 

 

And perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it could be up to half a billion 

dollars that this change in GRIP . . . and even could be more.  

Because last year if the crop, under the '91 GRIP, it would have 

cost close to 3 billion if we had had a 1988 crop.  And by 

fortunate we were blessed . . . by good fortune we were blessed 

with a good crop, one of the best 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

in the history of this province.  And still there was a lot of 

money to pay out to farmers.  Farmers had a good crop and still 

got some money back. 

 

But under this new GRIP Bill, why we're here . . . and they 

wonder why we're discussing closure, why we're discussing 

time allocation.  Why wouldn't we?  Because we're fighting for 

farmers out there that their crops have slipped away.  Their 

crops have slipped away on them and they can see themselves 

into a disaster with the 1992 GRIP Bill.  But the big disaster, as 

I said before, is when you take them on to the type of Bill and 

how they're doing it. 

 

(1000) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some quotes here that I'd like to just bring 

to the attention.  It's a headline in the Leader-Post, July 30, 

which is not that long ago.  "Gov't getting prepared for another 

GRIP battle."  Why do we want to prepare for GRIP battles?  

Why do we have to battle one another?  Why the GRIP battles?  

Why don't we sit down and listen to logic, listen to your 

Minister of Justice, and discuss this thing and let it go out to 

public hearings?  Why can't this go out to public hearings?  

Because we're saying it right here. 

 

I'm not going to read the whole thing.  This is a quote: 

 

 "We're not about to jam it at the Opposition,"  government 

house leader Dwain Lingenfelter said.  "We'll give them 

plenty and ample time to debate the bill." 

 

So first reading of the Bill came in, Mr. Speaker, and this is a 

quote right from the House Leader: We'll give them ample and 

plenty time. 

 

So what did we have?  The motion come in to introduce the 

Bill, and the member from Morse started to speak at quarter 

after 11 on a Friday and at 1 o'clock -- that's an hour and 

three-quarters . . . We come in Monday -- closure.  Now that is 

not right.  That's not treating the people across the province of 

Saskatchewan in this opposition in a right and proper manner. 

 

They don't seem to understand that when we were sworn in as 

MLAs, that our duty is to see that things are done in a right and 

proper manner in this legislature.  And we'd be wrong, we'd be 

absolutely wrong if we up and just said:  well okay, you can do 

closure and we won't say a word about it.  We naturally had to 

debate that. 

 

I'd like, Mr. Speaker, for the members opposite to go through 

their Hansards and see how much time of this House has been 

wasted debating whether we debate or not.  You know, for 

goodness sakes, count up the hours.  And don't blame us.  

Because don't jam us; if you're going to jam us and not 

co-operate, we're going to jam you back.  Because we want you 

people to take it serious. 

 

When this gets to the Committee of the Whole, we're going to 

be asking that Minister of Agriculture to go out for public 

hearings, that he couldn't possibly say no.  Nobody could say 

no to a public hearing.  It would be impossible, Mr. Speaker, 

for the Minister of Agriculture, when we ask 

in Committee of the Whole or whatever.  He should be doing it 

now. 

 

He should stand up, make a ministerial statement this afternoon 

and say:  I want to announce that there's a lot of unhappiness 

out there pertaining to the GRIP Bill.  And I'm going to say that 

we're going to pull it . . . we're going to momentarily pull this 

here GRIP Bill for a few weeks, and we're going to hold some 

public hearings throughout Saskatchewan.  And we're going to 

tell them exactly, we're going to tell them exactly, Mr. Speaker, 

exactly what the Bill is all about and see if you'll back us.  

They're going to say exactly the whole thing about closure and 

about the type of Bill it is.  And we're going to ask you, do you 

back us on what we're doing. 

 

So naturally they know they're doing what's right.  They think 

they're right.  But there's nothing wrong with public hearings.  

They did it in Ontario.  And they'll do it . . . I never hear any 

problem any place in Canada with this bell-ringing episode at 

all.  There's nothing wrong with the 30-minute bell-ringing and 

get on with the work of the House and then let the Bill or 

subject matter go out to the people.  Let the people decide. 

 

Another quote here, headline, this is August 6, this isn't very . . 

. just a short time ago, Mr. Speaker:  "Farm-aid bill fight 

continues".  That's all people are reading in the paper: 

"Farm-aid bill fight continues".  So the people reading these 

here articles in the paper, most people glance through the 

paper, they see: "Gov't getting prepared for another GRIP 

battle"; "Farm-aid bill fight continues";  "GRIP bill called 

illegal".  I mean they're just saying . . . people out there 

probably read the headline and dump the thing in the garbage.  

Because before I was an MLA, I never paid much attention to 

what went on in here unless somebody come and told me. 

 

And all people know, that it's just a fight over GRIP.  They 

don't know the details.  So I know for sure that there isn't a 

doubt about it, that in this here province of Saskatchewan 

where a government that says they're democratic, that they 

believe in the rights of the people, that we'll take this out for 

hearings throughout the province of Saskatchewan.  I know 

they'll do it. 

 

Here's another quote here: 

 

 Although government House Leader Dwain Lingenfelter said 

he'd give the PCs "a lengthy period of time" to debate the 

bill, he left the door open for another closure motion if the 

Tories take too long. 

 

Well, you know, before we even debate it . . . and he's saying, 

if they take too long I'll close out on them.  Well did he ever 

stop and think that co-operation, that maybe if you just had 

have said nothing about closure and said I'm going to give them 

plenty of time, that we might have been reasonable, that we 

might have put our points across?  We can only speak so long.  

You know, we're only 10 of us and 55 of you can't play out 10 

people.  You can only . . . you can outspeak us, surely to 

goodness. 

 

Surely to goodness, you can get to your feet . . . Last night I 

seen people get to their feet here on the debate and some 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

of them were up two minutes and they couldn't even stay on the 

subject matter, and two or three minutes is all they could speak.  

They didn't even know how to do what we're doing, to stay on 

the subject matter of that debate we were on last night.  They 

don't know how to do it.  They get up to try, but try doing it 

like we're doing it for hours.  Try doing it.  Try doing it and 

stay on the subject matter. 

 

We're doing it because the Speaker stopped us when we're not 

doing it right.  And you people are not doing it.  Get up on your 

feet and debate.  I'd like to hear you today, instead of us talking 

till 11 o'clock tonight on this here closure -- because we're 

going to go till 11 o'clock tonight, we're going to go all day 

tomorrow, we're going to go every day until there's closure.  

Because the only way we're going to get this here stopped, 

there has to be closure some time this morning or this afternoon 

so we can get stopped tomorrow.  Otherwise we'd go all day. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I challenge them to get up and defend what 

they're doing.  Challenge them to get up, and get up and defend 

what you're doing and then send what you're saying . . . And I 

challenge them, take that Hansard, like I do, send Hansards 

out.  I used to send out . . . we all can send 10 Hansards with 

no charge to your constituency.  I send out as many Hansards 

as I possibly can.  I take photocopies and I send out. 

 

So I challenge them, when they get up and speak, this is 

something you can do in your own office.  You can get up and 

put your remarks in words in this legislature.  And then when 

that Hansard gets out, take that page . . . and I don't suppose 

they could speak a page, but if they did get a whole page in, 

photocopy it and send it out to 5,000 homes -- that's 

approximately how many homes in their riding -- and say, do 

you agree with what we're doing?  Do you agree with what the 

stand the government . . . Or do you . . . do I, as your MLA, 

take a different stand on behalf of you as the constituents?  Do 

I take a different stand?  That's what you have to do. 

 

Another heading here.  "GRIP bill called illegal".  Mr. Speaker: 

 

 A Saskatoon lawyer believes the bill amending the Gross 

Revenue Insurance Plan is on very shaky constitutional 

ground and thinks it will be challenged in court. 

 

Well, and the name is right here.  I'm not going to read them 

out.  But it's already been made public, the law firm.  Well I 

don't know why they're not nervous about it.  The Minister of 

Justice yesterday or three days in a row was sure nervous 

enough about it.  He let the Minister of Agriculture answer, and 

then finally the Minister of Justice says to himself, well that 

Minister of Agriculture is destroying me so I'll get up and I will 

answer yesterday. 

 

So he get up, Mr. Speaker, and he said, I don't know.  I don't 

know.  I don't know what's going to happen in the courts.  I 

don't know.  And of course he doesn't know.  And if the 

Minister of Justice doesn't know, why don't we just pass this 

Bill?  Instead of talking here about foreclosure and time 

allocation for hours, why don't we just have, Mr. Speaker, why 

don't we have the House Leader get together with our House 

Leader and our whips and say, 

well are you in favour of passing the Bill?  And we'll refer it to 

the courts. 

 

I mean it's so simple, so easy.  Because you're right.  You say 

you're right.  If you say you're right, do it.  You got no problem 

with it. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sit down and we'll do it. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I guess I'll have to sit down 

because we got a commitment from the House Leader that 

they'll do it, that we'll let the Bill pass, we'll let the Bill pass 

and we'll send it right to the courts. 

 

So when I'm through speaking . . . I don't know how to do this 

because how can I sit down and lose my . . . Is there any way, 

Mr. Speaker, that I can sit down and get that commitment from 

him and then get back up after he makes that commitment?  

Because it would be all over.  Well I say . . . And the best way 

to do this, Mr. Speaker, is the House Leader come and talk to 

our Deputy House Leader here and make that deal and then 

she's all over.  She's all over. 

 

We pass the GRIP Bill in a matter of hours.  We can have it 

done tonight, with the rider on it.  It's been said by the House 

Leader, we'll do it.  So I must keep my place and speak while 

they do that.  So, Mr. Speaker, as I go on with my remarks, I 

ask the House leaders to get together now and put that down in 

writing and we got the problem solved. 

 

So I want all viewers to realize what the House Leader, the 

member from Elphinstone, just said:  We'll do it.  And what 

they're going to do -- and I'm so pleased that on an hour and 10 

minutes I've been able to accomplish that this morning -- that 

our House Leader has stated that if we let the GRIP Bill 

through today, we're all finished tonight.  We can have it done, 

Royal Assent, everything, and then we have agreement that it 

goes, that it doesn't get -- no, sorry  

_- it wouldn't get proclaimed until it goes to the court. 

 

That naturally would be our agreement -- it has to go straight to 

the court, to the supreme court of Saskatchewan.  So they can 

get together and work that out.  And in the meantime, I'm 

happy about that.  I'm happy that the House Leader has finally 

agreed.  And I thank him for that co-operation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's good you're happy, Gerry.  That's the 

important thing. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well it's good that a member that's been 

here that long, the member from Elphinstone, is a . . . He was 

here in 1978 when I came in, and I've had a lot to do with him 

and I've had a lot of battles with him.  But I seen him in 1978 to 

'82 . . . I've seen them give in before.  Now they've done it 

again; they've finally done it.  He says, we'll do that.  So I'm 

happy that the . . . I hope the media's picked that up because 

maybe that can hit the noon news, that the GRIP Bill is now 

settled. 

 

It's great news, Mr. Speaker, for the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan that now their voice has got heard.  That we're 

going to have the GRIP Bill passed it its 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

entirety and then it's going to go to the court to see if it's 

constitutional or not.  That's just great news for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And I know that the media will have their TVs 

and their sets on back there and that'll hit the noon news.  And 

so we're accomplishing something this morning, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have . . . I want to go through a few ridings and 

just talk about the members from a few ridings.  I'm going to 

start with the member from Redberry.  He's from completely a 

rural riding.  And I'm going to ask, Mr. Speaker, and challenge 

the member from Redberry to go out this weekend, just this 

weekend -- this GRIP Bill will probably be passed tonight, but 

if something happens that it doesn't, it doesn't make any 

difference whether it does or not -- ask the people in his riding, 

the member from Redberry, ask the people in his riding:  do 

you agree with what we're doing in this legislature?  Do you 

agree?  And take out your remarks when he stands to speak, 

when this individual, this member, Mr. Speaker, stands to 

speak in this House, and he says very clearly that I'm part of a 

government that brings in a retroactive Bill that we're going to 

void. I want him to show that section that we're going to void 

that part of the Bill, the '91 GRIP right out of their life, and 

then if they don't agree, we're going to not allow that farmer to 

take it to court.  And then it's secondary whether they ask him 

about '91 or '92.  He's probably already voiced his opinion.  But 

find that out and then come back and tell your House Leader 

and your Premier what you found out.  I'd tell him to do that. 

 

The member from Shellbrook-Torch River, that's completely a 

rural riding, pretty well a rural riding.  I don't think any of 

Prince Albert comes into Shellbrook, but if it . . . I don't think it 

does unless the new boundary lines had it do so. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I ask that member to go out and do the same 

thing.  Now that's . . . when I spoke the other night, that 

scenario that I didn't have very many calls from, but I did have 

some.  We did have some.  I had Shellbrook-Torch River -- I 

haven't got those notes here, that book here, with the numbers 

beside them of the calls -- because that's a pretty good crop 

area.  Our member that came from there, he always talked 

about land of milk and honey in the Shellbrook-Torch River 

area.  I'd like to know what his remarks are in this legislature 

about how the '91-92 GRIP affects them.  Because I can 

remember some people that a year ago said that '91 wasn't that 

best for them up there. 

 

(1015) 

 

So get a feeling.  I challenge him to get a feeling from his 

people exactly what they're saying about the GRIP Bill, but be 

sure -- be sure -- that you add in the part that I'm asking the 

member from Redberry to do, that you tell him, Mr. Speaker, 

you tell your individuals.  You can do the same as I do.  You 

can phone 14 people or 15 like I do and then tell them to phone 

four or five more.  You'll have the feeling of your whole riding 

before you come back on Monday morning.  But be sure that 

you give them a copy of the Bill or tell them what's in that Bill 

and about the part being void and about the part that says no 

recourse to go to court. 

And then, Mr. Speaker, we'll move to the member from 

Kelsey-Tisdale.  I'd call that maybe a . . . there's some bigger 

towns in that area, but it's still a rural riding but it might be a 

little more a urban-rural riding.  But there's an area where I'm 

sure that the member would get some negatives on the '91-92 

GRIP because that's the area where it's been so dry this 

summer.  That's the area that a year ago they didn't seem to talk 

much about GRIP whether it was good, bad, or indifferent.  

Their land . . . they got a lot of land in the area that's high 

producing and not high assessed and they said it wasn't a big 

thing to them.  But now it is.  It's serious.  Kelsey-Tisdale has 

got a large drought area there.  And if the Minister of 

Agriculture would just go up to some of these specific ridings 

like Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Minister of Agriculture should be announcing that . . . well 

if our caucus . . . in that 18 days that we had this walk-out, 11 

sitting days, I'm sure that the Minister of Agriculture must have 

went up and visit with the farmers in that area.  And if he didn't 

have, Mr. Speaker, he should have.  He should have went up 

there.  The Minister of Agriculture should have went into 

Kelsey-Tisdale because that's an area where there's a poor crop.  

There's one of the poorest crops in there.  And I've only seen 

poor crops in that area when they got early frost.  They quite 

often get frost in that area.  But now . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture heckles such a 

weak, weak remark, saying that he didn't go out . . . he's 

admitting that he didn't go out any place in those 18 days to 

talk to anybody, because he thought we might be back in the 

House. 

 

Well there was six of those days were weekends that never 

would sit here.  And everybody would excuse the Minister of 

Agriculture.  We'd excuse him now.  We would excuse him day 

after day after day, Mr. Speaker, because he's been here 

answering . . . trying to answer questions . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  I do want to 

remind the members that we are on time allocation motion, as 

to why or why not time allocation should be put into effect, and 

that's really the topic that is before us.  And I ask the members 

to please get back to that topic. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We wouldn't be 

sitting here talking about time allocation and talking about this 

Bill, and we wouldn't be in this here mode that we're in if the 

Minister of Agriculture had been out talking to people about 

the GRIP Bill. 

 

Because they would have informed him that they're either 

doing right or they're doing wrong.  And I'm sure that whatever 

message that the Minister of Agriculture could pick up out in 

rural Saskatchewan, we'd pick up the same message.  And he 

can't prove to us that he's picking it up. 

 

But I ask him this weekend to fly up and land -- don't fly over 

-- land and go through the Kelsey-Tisdale and ask them:  do 

you agree that we're going time allocation and closure on the 

GRIP Bill, and tell them what's in it and speak to people.  

They'll come.  I'm sure that if he said . . . he could put it on the 

air up there right today that I will be Friday night in such and 

such a hall in Kelsey-Tisdale, and 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

you'll get probably 1,000 people.  They'll come for miles to 

listen to him explain the GRIP Bill.  They'll come for miles.  

And I challenge him to do that. 

 

Then if he can come back in here Monday morning with a vote 

that they endorsed everything he said -- that he said that we're 

doing time allocation; we're doing closure on every move the 

Tories do . . . And he'll say, and there's nothing wrong because 

we can't shut these guys up.  But he has to be sure he tells why 

he can't shut them up.  He must say that we're doing all these 

things because of a part of the GRIP Bill, Bill 87, is that they're 

moving . . . they're having a part of the Bill void -- disappear 

for our life -- and then if you don't agree, Mr. Farmer, we are 

not going to allow you to take us to court. 

 

So come back in and see if those thousand people or 2,000, 

what he'll liable to get . . . He's liable to get more people in that 

area that you'd have to use an outside park.  You wouldn't be 

able to get a hall.  So I challenge the member to do that. 

 

The member from Pelly is over in that area.  That's a good crop 

area.  And like I said the other night, we've had a lot of calls.  I 

ask that member this weekend to go home and do the same 

thing.  The member from Nipawin's in a poor crop area.  He'd 

do the same thing.  He goes home . . . But he can advertise the 

meetings for tomorrow night.  We're the ones that has to be 

here till 11 o'clock tomorrow night.  We'll excuse a dozen of 

these rural members not to sit here tomorrow night till 11 

o'clock.  They can't golf while it's dark and so they could go 

and . . . They can't fish when it's dark, not very easily. 

 

So if they could have a hall meeting in their riding tomorrow 

night and say . . . and advertise it right, so that you could do it 

now.  Advertise it today that I'll be speaking on Friday or 

Saturday night.  You could do two or three or four.  And bring 

back to this legislature a commitment, a passed endorsement of 

what this government doing is right, correct, honourable, 

moral, the whole bit. 

 

And there would be . . . You know, it's the best way, Mr. 

Speaker, that they can back the opposition off.  I'm just telling 

them how you could sit us down and shut us up.  Bring in hall 

meetings, endorsements saying that the Tories are wrong and 

that we're right.  But have an amendment from every one of 

those meetings.  We'll say 15 members goes out and have 15 

meetings, or each have two or three meetings each, over the 

weekend.  You'll get . . . come by the hundreds, if not the 

thousands.  They'll come. 

 

And I ask the House Leader to go down to the old area of 

Shaunavon and say that he's going to be speaking in the town 

of Shaunavon tomorrow night.  He'll have two meetings on 

Saturday and maybe a couple . . . He has to go to church, 

naturally, on Sunday morning.  So Sunday evening he will 

have another meeting, Mr. Speaker.  And say to the people at 

these meetings, we need an endorsement what we're doing is 

right.  We want you to tell us, from my old riding of -- his 

riding . . . the old riding slipped my memory -- Shaunavon, and 

we want you to endorse this with a motion from this meeting. 

And I'm sure if somebody as high profile in the government as 

him, the one that's bringing all the closure motions forward, 

that he'd probably get park fulls of people will gather to listen.  

And then ask for a motion from the floor to see if how many 

people, how many show of hands will endorse what we're 

doing and how many is opposed.  And then come back here 

Monday morning. 

 

And if you all would do that on the weekend, that would be the 

best way for you to . . .  And you have nothing to do.  The 

back-benchers have nothing to do here.  They don't speak.  If 

they do get up to speak, it's two or three minutes to talk on a 

motion.  And so we're asking you . . . That's what we ask you 

to do.  Come back in with the motions, endorsements from 

rural Saskatchewan.  And that takes in -- when you go to 

Melville -- that takes in cities.  You go to Swift Current, that's 

cities.  Yorkton.  We're talking about all of Saskatchewan.  You 

could have one right here in Regina.  Probably get the smallest 

count, Mr. Speaker, right here in Regina. 

 

These things we don't have to do, Mr. Speaker.  We've come to 

these 10 seats that are behind me here, we've been doing that.  

We've been speaking to people all over our ridings.  We know 

where we stand.  And I've got my, what I call my sister ridings 

that I look after, and that's Last Mountain-Touchwood, 

Humboldt, and the Quill Lakes.  And we've had contacts -- I've 

contacted my people in all these ridings to get a feeling from 

the farmers, where do you stand on this retroactive, 

dictatorship-type Bill.  Where do you stand? 

 

So we know where we stand, but I would like . . . So the 

member from Quill Lakes doesn't have to take my word for it 

that his riding is against what they're doing.  I challenge him, 

Mr. Speaker, to go out and hold hall meetings, get . . . ask for . 

. . He wants hundreds and he wants a few thousand people out 

to come and tell me that I endorse you, what you're doing. 

 

I ask the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood.  I've got to 

talk to that gentleman several times.  He's a real nice individual 

and a normal man.  And I know that if he would phone 

someone in every town in his riding, that we're going to gather 

in such and such a place in Last Mountain-Touchwood, Cupar, 

or Southey, or his home town, Raymore, Semans, whatever, 

and I'm going to be asking your opinion of what's going on in 

the legislature here . . . That he explains exactly what's going 

on. 

 

He takes some copies of Hansard . . . but at least he takes the 

Bill out and reads them the parts of the Bill that we are 

debating in this House and why we're sitting here right now on 

a time allocation and say to them:  do you think we should just 

shut these Tories up and shut these farmers up in 

Saskatchewan?  Ask them that question and ask if you can get 

an endorsement from your riding.  Ask them.  That's the way 

democracy would work.  That's the way it would work.  You 

go ask your people. 

 

We have asked our people.  We know where we stand, and 

we're sure we know where your riding stands because we've 

been getting contacts from the whole province, but let's say the 

. . . I say, Mr. Speaker, the representative, the MLA, is the one 

that should be doing it.  Come in here and lay it on the Table 

and say, we've 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

been endorsed by this many people.  I challenge you.  And I'm 

not going to put a prediction on what will happen.  I just 

challenge them to do it. 

 

There's no reason why you couldn't have some . . . You would 

never get big crowds in the cities; that just doesn't happen.  

You don't get as big a meetings.  But you could get a hold of 

your executives, the city members here like the member from 

Regina Victoria.  There's no reason why he couldn't contact his 

executive this weekend.  He can do it tonight or tomorrow 

night or Saturday night and say, I want to go through this here 

Bill that's causing all this here hold up in this legislature and 

see if you agree.  And bring back an endorsement.  Bring back 

an endorsement. 

 

Now I don't know whether it's asking quite a bit for the 

member from Athabasca to do that -- he's a long ways from 

here -- but whether he's going to go home on the weekend or 

not, I don't know that, but I'm sure he could phone his 

executive and do the same thing. 

 

We know that when we get to Rosetown-Elrose we know 

where they stand there.  That's the riding that was held 12, 13 

years by Herb Swan, and Herb has done a good job and along 

with the old executive out there contacting the people from the 

Rosetown constituency and they're saying the Minister of 

Agriculture is totally, absolutely wrong.  And they challenge 

him to come to a meeting in the Rosetown-Elrose area. 

 

Go to Beechy, Mr. Speaker, and talk about time allocation and 

talk about foreclosure and talk about whether we're doing 

things right or not.  Ask them. When he gets down to this point, 

he should have the . . . when he goes to a meeting, the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance, and asks them is it right that 

we're going to foreclose on these people, on these Tories in 

here to shut them up, and then explain the '91, '92 GRIP in a 

right and proper manner . . .  

 

Because the '92 GRIP, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely wrong for 

farmers.  It's the wrong type of an insurance policy.  All it is . . 

. and that's what we're here arguing about for so long, that they 

said they were going to change the GRIP Bill.  They promised 

improvements in the '91 GRIP Bill. 

 

And for goodness sakes, Mr. Speaker, I agree that we had to 

have some changes to the '91 GRIP, but they entirely took it 

away, brought in a policy where it's nothing but an option to 

cover yourself on insurance on the price of grain.  Whatever 

the price of grain is, you're just like gambling the markets.  It's 

just like going to play crown and anchor and you gamble where 

the wheel is going to stop. 

 

It's exactly the same thing because you put the . . . you insure 

your price of wheat.  If the price of wheat goes up, you collect 

zilch, and if the price of wheat goes down, you'll collect 

money. 

 

Now what happens, Mr. Speaker . . . that's what's wrong.  

That's what the farmers are so upset about.  And that's why 

they've come back now, Mr. Speaker, the farmers, and said -- 

and have said very clearly -- now we understand what a good 

program the '91 GRIP Bill was; along with some changes, we 

had what we wanted.  But the '92 GRIP 

Bill, if the price of wheat ever went up over $3 a bushel and 

you had a complete crop failure and grow zero wheat, you get 

nothing.  The price of wheat don't help you if you get no crop 

whatsoever. 

 

That's why it's wrong.  And that's what the farmers . . . it takes 

the farmers a long time to have to put it into reality and that's 

why so many farmers in my area and the Last 

Mountain-Touchwood area and the Humboldt area and 

Rosetown and Biggar areas, the people that I'm in contact have 

said, we want back what we didn't want last year.  They didn't 

want the '91 GRIP.  They took it and they felt that it wasn't 

going to do the job for them and didn't realize that it wasn't that 

bad of a program.  It was a guarantee for farmers.  It was 

bankable. 

 

(1030) 

 

And now what have we got?  We're sitting here and you're 

wondering why -- we heard the House Leader speak this 

morning -- why, why do we have to have closure and time 

allocation.  It's because the farmers are protesting.  We're not 

standing here protesting.  If anybody thinks that in this 

province that we 10 people like sitting here in July and August 

and maybe September . . . And we should be home harvesting 

and helping our families survive, like in other provinces in 

Canada.  I know in Newfoundland -- I was down there, Mr. 

Speaker, one time -- and they shut the House right down when 

the main fishing season's up.  They adjourned for a while.  But 

we don't have that luxury here in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we need to be home.  But we're going to stay here as long as 

people are saying we're right -- that we're right, and what we're 

doing is right, protesting this government, protesting this 

government on this heavy-handed legislation.  And that's what 

it is.  It's heavy-handed legislation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I asked the member from Weyburn . . . The 

member from Weyburn, he's got a . . . there's a good crop 

growing around Weyburn.  They're maybe going a little short 

of moisture there now to fill it up.  But they've got a good crop 

growing.  And he's got a . . . I call Weyburn an urban-rural 

riding because there's farmers . . . it takes in a rural area. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people in that area . . . That's my 

family's old home town.  So I got a lot of contacts in the 

Weyburn, Yellow Grass, Pangman area, where it's . . . 

Bengough, Milestone.  They got a good crop growing and I 

can't find one person in the area that says '92 GRIP is best for 

them.  But as soon as you tell them . . . they tell you that, then 

you go back and tell them, hey, this is what's happening in the 

legislature.  And then that's when they really get riled. 

 

This morning, Mr. Speaker, as I was coming out of my 

apartment, I had a friend of mine that I've got to know quite 

well.  And he said, you're off to the legislature; what's up 

today?  And I said, time allocation I think will be on the agenda 

this morning. 

 

He said, is that all those people can think about -- this man 

would have to be 70, 80 years -- that's all they can think of is 

closure and time allocation?  He said, but then 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

of course, he said, you have been sitting there a long time I 

suppose; maybe everybody wants out, even yourself.  I said, 

no, we haven't been sitting here very long.  This government 

didn't bring the House in till almost May.  We've only been 

here 65 days -- 65 days. 

 

Oh, he said, that's right.  He said, you usually go in -- I've seen 

you here for 10 years -- you usually go in in February, March.  

That's right, he said.  Well so that's the government's fault that 

they're there so long.  And I said, right on.  He said, I wish you 

good day; give it to them.  He says, don't give in. 

 

And this man had nothing to do with the farmer, nothing to do 

with the farms.  He had nothing to do with a farm in his whole 

life other than he's smart enough to know that the farmers have 

to survive and the people of the province of Saskatchewan have 

to survive. 

 

It's just unreal, Mr. Speaker, what this government is doing.  

And that's what's riling people up.  I challenge the city 

members that's here to go to their malls this weekend and just 

start talking to people as they come along:  here, I'm the MLA 

from such and such, and I want to tell you what's going on. 

 

This Bill, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely constitutionally wrong.  

What are we going to do when we're sitting in an impasse like 

that, that we're at time allocation and foreclosure and we know 

that we've got the serious doubts about this Bill being a legal 

Bill, that it would pass the Charter of Rights and the 

constitutional courts?  What are we going to do about that?  

What are we going to do?  And our hands are getting tied now. 

 

We're down to whenever this here closure . . . The House 

Leader probably before the day's over or tomorrow will go 

closure on closure -- that's what we're going to have -- and we'll 

be stopped.  And then, Mr. Speaker, what's going to happen is 

we have one day left in second reading, one day which . . . 

That's fair enough.  I'm not worried about the one day in the 

second reading. 

 

But the rights that's been taken away from us is to get at that 

minister, Mr. Speaker.  That Minister of Agriculture needs 

about 60 days.  He needs instead of 18 hours in Committee of 

the Whole, he needs 1,800 hours.  That's what he needs.  

Because we could go on and on and bring in every individual 

that's talked against this Bill and the public would become 

aware.  The public would become aware if we could keep him 

here in Committee of the Whole, and put amendment after 

amendment, and the bells would ring, and the public would get 

sick and tired of it, and they'd ask what's going on.  And then 

we'd have a chance to get all 600,000 voters in Saskatchewan, 

we'd get them all, get all the voters aware of what this 

government's doing to them, and then they'd back off. 

 

But what they're doing is giving us 18 hours in Committee of 

the Whole to ask this minister questions.  He's been here now, 

he's been a member of the government and the Minister of 

Agriculture since last fall after the election.  And we couldn't 

get at him last fall when the legislature was on; we only had the 

Minister of Finance stand up and they even went foreclosure on 

an interim supply Bill -- talk about a heavy-handed government 

that don't care 

about people, don't care about people's rights. 

 

And we're the ones that's speaking here on behalf of the 

province of Saskatchewan, their rights.  And we don't get our 

rights.  We are not getting our rights in this legislature.  It is 

absolutely not right.  People sit over there and grin and smile at 

me, but some good-thinking people are sitting there with a 

pretty sour look on their face because they know I am right.  

They know that I am right. 

 

I see the member from Moose Jaw there.  He is a good man.  I 

know him quite well.  And he is a sad man because he knows 

when he goes home and tells his people this weekend that they 

are foreclosing on us, we're foreclosing on the Tories and we're 

shutting them up and we're doing time allocation and we said 

that's enough of these guys, and these people are going to say 

to them, what is it that the Tories are fighting about?  What are 

they protesting so much about?  So he will naturally tell them 

well, we think we're right in saying that this Bill is retroactive 

and we're going to void part of that there clause from the '91 

Bill that the March 15 letter, it didn't go out.  But that wasn't 

good wording in the Bill so we're just going to take that portion 

of the Bill and void it from your life.  It just never happened. 

 

But then he'll have to tell them, Mr. Speaker, well my friends in 

Moose Jaw, I have to say to you that we also are not going to 

give the farmers the chance to take it to court and then see what 

he brings back for a message.  I mean they're not going to come 

back with that great of messages next week.  But I hope they 

can because that's the way to shut us up.  That's the way to do 

it. 

 

If the Minister of Agriculture won't let himself be available for 

questioning in this House . . . Because when we get him, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, when we get him in Estimates and we get him 

in Committee of the Whole, we'll get you, period.  It'll be the 

end of his career.  There will be no more foreclosure notices in 

this House.  There'll be no more time allocations when the 

Minister of . . . with that Minister of Agriculture, because he 

won't be in that position.  There's no way that Saskatchewan is 

going to stand for it any longer because no matter where you 

go: what is the matter with that man? 

 

I want to repeat what the father of Reg Gross said this week, 

that there's . . . the Premier, he's not doing things right and 

proper.  And I was stopped for using the words I used before so 

I can't say words like he said about the Minister of Agriculture 

-- it wouldn't be allowed in this legislature -- that he is 

absolutely doing the poorest job for the farmers.  And it's Reg 

Gross's father that said it, an old time CCF-(Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation) NDP, and that's coming all over. 

 

I've got the candidate, and I'll put it right in the record, the 

candidate from Arm River, not coming from him directly but 

indirectly from his family saying, boy I'm telling you, it's sure a 

good job that our nephew didn't get elected because it's bad 

business, I'm telling you, what they're doing. 

 

I don't know what's going on.  The Deputy Speaker's . . . are 

you asking me to quit, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  Well you just 

waved a motion.  You just waved a motion in front of 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

me. 

 

Because there's nothing I'm saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

isn't . . . there isn't anything because it was set in here this 

morning.  The House Leader got up and spoke this morning.  

There isn't a subject that he didn't touch.  He's got on to western 

stabilization.  He got on to almost anything you want to talk 

about, about the federal government off-loading onto 

Saskatchewan.  Off-loading, off-loading -- when a federal 

government gave 13 to $14 billion and he says the federal 

government is off-loading on this province. 

 

It's the provincial government that is off-loading on every 

farmer in this province of Saskatchewan, for $23 million -- $23 

million.  And they said, Mr. Speaker . . . there's more reasons 

why we're sitting here, why we're here and talking about 

closure and time allocation.  There's more of the reasons why 

we're here.  Because the Minister of Agriculture sent letters out 

to everybody in Saskatchewan saying, regardless of the 

economic conditions, we have dramatically increased our 

funding to farmers, when we know just prior to that the 

Minister of Finance admitted there was a $75 million cut-back.  

So it was an improper letter that went out. 

 

It was signed by him and it misled all the farmers in 

Saskatchewan.  It was a terrible thing for him to do.  So that's 

what's making farmers angry, when they know that their 

pocket-books have been gutted by this government.  And then 

you have the arrogance to send a letter out saying, we're giving 

you more money.  Well why didn't you give them 23 million 

more?  You cut back 75 million.  Why didn't you take the 

federal government's offer and we wouldn't be in this situation 

here today. 

 

Now I'm hoping that this is all to an end.  I'm hoping when I sit 

down, that the House leaders have got this all worked out.  

Because we got it on the record, and I want to put it there 

again, that I suggested that we finish this GRIP Bill today.  

We'll all finish it.  And there'll be a clause go into the Bill or 

whatever, amendment or whatever, that it goes from here, this 

House, right to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

And that's what the House Leader said.  He agreed.  Agreed.  

So I'm hoping that hits the noon news, that the media's picked 

that up, that the GRIP Bill is finally . . . that the GRIP Bill is 

finalized.  You don't need to worry, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

members don't need to worry about whether the media comes 

out there or not, because they get it on their television.  It's 

probably getting ready to flash the news of Saskatchewan that 

the House Leader has stated, yes, we agree that we will send it 

to the courts if we can get this Bill passed today. 

 

Well that's no problem.  We will just do it so fast.  So after I'm 

through here, my remarks, I hope that that's what can happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have something I want to go through here before 

I sit down.  It kind of sums up my remarks.  I don't think it'll 

take more until dinner time.  Mr. Speaker, since . . . I just want 

to go through some chronological order here of what has 

happened in the last . . . and what's really been happening and 

put it on the record. 

Since day one, this NDP government has been intent on 

pushing through their political agenda, using any means.  

Resorted to using closure three times, and now this motion.  

This is nothing new.  We faced this arrogant government 

during the first sham that the NDP called a session.  We faced 

this last fall.  We went through it.  They put closure on an 

interim supply Bill.  At that time, the NDP were introducing a 

motion in our province that's never happened before and an 

interim supply Bill was only debated a short time, and that's 

when they started, a motion that's tripped opposition members 

with the right to freedom of speech.  We were not able to 

question the ministers, as I said a few minutes ago.  We were 

not, Mr. Speaker, able to get at one minister. 

 

We had the Minister of Finance trying to answer for the 

Minister of Health and answer for the Minister of Agriculture, 

answer for the Minister of Energy.  And that's not right.  We 

should've had . . . That got us off to a poor start right last fall. 

 

And that's why we're . . . this arrogant government causes us . . 

. It's not co-operation.  The co-operation should've been here 

right away.  You come in with a big mandate of 55 people, or 

whatever, to 10, to 11 opposition members.  Why didn't you 

show . . . You got the numbers on us.  You can out vote us on 

anything.  Why didn't you show co-operation to us? 

 

Why didn't you just . . . anything we asked, why didn't you 

answer because you promised for wide-open government.  We 

should not be discussing time allocation or closure under any 

circumstances.  We should be able to answer any question, 

because you're right.  And we should get answers. 

 

If we would get answers . . . They talk about -- I see it in the 

paper -- the media writes, the opposition's filibustering this 

House.  Well it's not correct.  I said it before and I'll say it 

again.  The people that's responsible for the stalling of this 

House and the filibuster is the people that won't answer the 

questions.  If you'd answer questions in question period, if 

you'd answer questions in Estimates . . . but you don't bring 

them forth. 

 

Instead of being here discussing this Bill or this motion, we 

shouldn't be doing it at all.  We shouldn't even be discussing it.  

We should be on the Agriculture Estimates.  We should be on 

Health Estimates. 

 

They said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they said there's a cure for that.  

Do I get a commitment that Health, Agriculture Estimates are 

coming on today?  No . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I've been 

told, if I sit down and try it.  Well I wouldn't trust those people 

over there.  They'll change their minds so quick, by the time I 

sit down, they'd have new . . . if I sit down, I know what's 

going to happen.  Likely before I'm through, likely what their 

House Leader's doing now is writing another closure on the 

closure motion.  That's what's going on.  He's going to have a 

closure motion on the closure motion.  And that's not 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were stopped from getting questions 

from this open and honest government and 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

they didn't want their ministers answering questions.  And 

that's what happened here last fall . . . were successful at 

ramming the appropriation Bill.  They were successful in 

ramming the appropriation Bill through the Assembly. 

 

Now NDP are ramming time allocation motions through on 

GRIP.  NDP must be tired, tired of listening to logical and 

reasonable debate.  That's why you don't want to listen to 

reasonable debate. 

 

You won't even debate us.  We talk for hours; you talk for 

minutes.  We talk for hours and you talk for minutes.  If I sit 

down, if a member gets up, it'll be two minutes like last night -- 

two minutes.  And then we've got to get another one up. 

 

(1045) 

 

The NDP are ramming allocation motions through on GRIP.  

NDP must be tired, as I said before.  And they are.  They're 

tired of listening to reasonable debate, don't like being 

reminded of how devastating their retroactive GRIP Bill is.  

They can't stand it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for us going on day 

after day talking about the portion of the GRIP Bill, that they 

want to just have it void from our life, and they don't want to 

have us saying day after day, hour after hour, they don't want 

us saying, and if you don't agree, Mr. Farmer, you have no 

right to take it to court.  They don't want us to keep saying that, 

so they've got to shut us up. 

 

But they're not going to.  You can't shut us up.  When you go 

foreclosure and foreclose on us on this here GRIP Bill and we 

are stopped and we can't get another word, don't forget -- then 

comes maybe three weeks or a month in Estimates with the 

Minister of Agriculture on his feet, ten to one.  You just try ten 

to one.  We've been sitting 55 for 10 here for 65 days.  And 

then when we get onto Estimates and Bills, we'll just have one 

minister with ten onto one.  And you'll get a taste of your own 

medicine and your long hours. 

 

You'll get a taste of your medicine from 9 o'clock till 11 

o'clock.  You'll find out what it's like.  You'll be going back . . . 

the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be going 

to his House Leader.  Why did you get me in this mess because 

I can't even answer their questions.  They're always right.  He's 

going to be in the worst mess he ever was in ever. 

 

The Minister of Health, she's going to go and say to the House 

Leader: why did you force these Tories; why did you make 

them arrogant on closure motions and time allocation; why did 

you do that?  Why did you anger those Tories?  Because they're 

hitting me on the people dying from lack of medicine, that can't 

get chiropractor treatment, all these things, and they're closing 

my hospitals, and they're giving it to me.  And the trouble is, 

they're right. 

 

And they're going to jump on that House Leader and they're 

going to say: why did you put me in this mess where I've got to 

stand here for hour after hour, day after day, when my back's 

killing me and I need a chiropractor treatment so bad and I 

can't get out of here?  I mean it's going to be unreal, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  It's just going to 

be the worst carryings on that you've ever heard of. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're off the subject, Gerry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's certainly on 

the subject when I just finished saying that she's going to go 

and he's going to go to the House Leader and said, why did you 

force foreclosure and why did you force time allocation onto 

the opposition members and put me in this terrible position.  

Because 10 . . . and I say it again and I want you to listen 

carefully because you're giving it to us now -- 55 people versus 

10.  But you wait till ten versus one. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture now, I know he's already rubbing 

his feet; he knows what it's going to be like to stand for 18 

hours.  He's worried.  Then he's worried about what he's going 

to say, he's going to say, because we'll go after him about 

closure.  He'll hear about closure, closure, closure.  I'll tell you, 

when you . . . you'll have to answer. 

 

But then this is only small.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is nothing 

-- this is nothing.  It's when this legislature is over and you 

have to go and answer to the people of Saskatchewan, there's 

where you're going to be in trouble; there's where you're going 

to wish you had have listened to the people of Saskatchewan 

through the opposition, and listened and not rammed down 

dictatorship Bills like you have in this House.  You're going to 

wish that you'd never even thought of the word closure.  The 

House Leader is going to wish that he never knew how to spell 

the word closure.  It's going to haunt him for ever.  It's going to 

haunt, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will haunt everybody in this 

legislature for ever and ever and ever. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do the members opposite care, NDP government 

bullying the motion through the House like this, abusing their 

majority?  Do they care?  NDP government becomes so caught 

up in it's power that they are willing to push through any 

legislation that suits their needs.  And that's what they're doing.  

Anything. 

 

I've never seen it.  The old NDP government was not like this 

from '78 to '82.  We could sit down . . . we had many Bills.  I 

can remember Eric Berntson, instead of talking closure -- he 

never thought of the word -- he would come over in opposition 

and go over there and talk to the House leader and say:  well 

here, our guys don't agree on this.  And if you don't pull that 

Bill and get, you know, put some amendments into it, we're 

going to be here a long time.  And we're getting these kind of 

comments from the ridings, we're getting it from the people.  

And sure enough, there'd be some reasonable negotiations.  But 

not with this government.  They're right, they're just going to 

slap us right down. 

 

But I can tell you, you're facing 10 people that's going to be too 

much for you.  Because when you get a free enterprise that gets 

his dandruff up and he knows how to fight, I'll tell you, he 

knows how to work, he knows how to produce.  Because the 

free enterprise in this province has been keeping the socialists 

for a hundred years.  We've been keeping you because you 

never even learned how to work.  Socialism -- you just want to 

even 'er all out. 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

NDP government has included measures in the various laws it 

is passing that will take away rights from groups and 

individuals and increase the powers of cabinet minister to act 

without scrutiny.  GRIP is not the only Bill in this House that 

stripped individuals of their rights.  So far the NDP have 

introduced or announced plans for Bills that will allow 

government employees to enter private property without a 

search warrant. 

 

That's why we're here, that's why we're here.  They want to 

shut us up.  You want time allocation and you want closure.  

You don't want us to be telling people about that environment 

Bill, An Act to amend The Environmental Management and 

Protection Act.  You don't want us talking about it so you shut 

us up. 

 

The minister to divulge personal records to the public, NDP 

Party members or anyone else a cabinet minister chooses.  Bill 

14, An Act to amend The Child and Family Services Act.  You 

want to shut us up so we can't talk about these things. 

 

You know that it's wrong.  That's the reason you want closure.  

If there's something that the Tories don't like and the people 

don't like, close them down, shut them up. 

 

A minister to forbid a court of law from hearing or receiving 

evidence held by a government employee that might be 

relevant in determining a person's innocence or guilt -- Bill 13, 

An Act to amend The Adoption Act.  We argued about these 

for several days before and we let them go because there was 

no sense in it.  But we let those Bills go.  Those are my Bills, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We talked about them for a while and we 

let them go.  But it gives the ministers the rights . . . But we 

finally . . . when you shoved this GRIP Bill at us, we said, no 

way, because the people said no way.  And we're not going to 

stop. 

 

A minister take over the role of the labour board to determine 

proper union certification in the construction industry.  NDP 

hand-picked labour committee recommendation. 

 

The government justifies its moves to increase the powers of 

cabinet ministers at the expense of individual Saskatchewan 

voters by saying the measures are necessary to protect the 

public from unacceptable practices. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's why we're here.  That's why we're 

debating this morning -- because you're trying to shut us up to 

voice our opinion. 

 

The Minister of Justice has not commented on the trend to 

reduce individual rights and there have been no legal opinions 

or studies released indicating what impact the various measures 

have on the justice system. 

 

You do things and you start thinking about it afterwards, when 

it's too late.  Think it out first.  Don't bring these type of Bills 

and motions to this House until you think it out and be 

responsible.  You're not being responsible. 

 

The government will go to any extreme to carry these actions 

out.  The NDP think we should allow them to break into the 

private property without a warrant because 

it will protect the environment, that we should allow them to 

remove the rights of miners because the mining companies are 

evil corporations, and we should take away legal rights of 

farmers entrenched in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms so 

that they won't lose in court. 

 

It's wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  It's wrong, wrong, wrong.  

These kind of Bills are wrong.  And as soon as we go to debate 

it: enough of you, be quiet, closure.  That's all we can hear.  

That's all they want to talk about. 

 

When the Bills are wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

something's wrong, when the people are speaking . . . And I've 

challenged them.  I know I'm right because I've challenged you 

last week to go out and get somebody in your riding to phone 

me to say they agree with this Bill.  And you can't get anybody 

to do it.  You can't find one, you can't find one individual, 

because you can't find them.  You'd have to pay them to do it.  

They wouldn't do it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I challenge the Minister of Agriculture, 

like I said before, to go out this weekend in his own riding and 

advertise a meeting in Beechy for tonight and maybe Rosetown 

tomorrow night and maybe a couple . . . You'll have to use 

parks.  Halls won't work because they'll be filling parks to 

come and listen to you explain the Bill. 

 

And then when you do, is when you get an endorsement from 

that crowd.  Say: I want a motion from this group of people 

saying that we endorse you on this Bill and we endorse you 

that you're making part of the Bill void, that we are endorsing 

you that you can't take it to the courts.  And then bring it back 

in here.  And all the members do that.  And then you'll back 

this group of opposition right off because that means you're 

right. 

 

But I challenge you to do that.  And if you can't do it, that 

means that you haven't got the backing from the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel for the NDP back-benchers.  They're being 

led around by the nose.  That's exactly what's happening.  

Because go do what I suggest, as an old veteran in this House 

-- go ask your people.  I suggest to the back-benchers to go 

home to the constituency and find out exactly what the people 

knew what the government was thinking.  And that's exactly 

what I've been telling you for a long, long time here.  So I'm 

just wrapping up saying, go ask your people if you're right. 

 

Heavy-handed governments so intent on pursuing its political 

agenda, it is blinded.  It just gets blinded.  That's what 

happened in all the socialist countries in Europe, Mr. Speaker, 

and here we live in the province of Saskatchewan where people 

came from those countries.  They came to get away from 

socialism and dictatorship.  They came over here to get away 

from it.  And then all of a sudden now these here 

dictatorship-type of people been elected, been elected with a 

mandate, and they broke every promise.  They come in here 

and all they can talk about is closure, closure, closure.  

Heavy-handed governments so intent . . . 

 

Labour legislation will pay back the election favours of '91 but 

doesn't assure you of a victory in 1995.  It won't 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

assure you of a victory, my friends, in 1995.  Legislation like 

GRIP '92 is your ticket back to the opposition benches.  It'll put 

you right over on this side of the House. 

 

You've had ample time to start acting like a government.  

You've been there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they been there for 

nine months.  And act like a government; be a government; 

govern this province.  You got so used to saying . . . when you 

were in opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you used to say, we're 

going to make this place ungovernable.  Well now you're in 

government.  Don't keep the same attitude.  You're making it 

ungovernable.  You got the same attitude -- we're going to 

make it ungovernable. 

 

You'll find out that these 10 people sitting here with me, that if 

you co-operate, co-operate and try to work things out in a right 

and honourable manner for what's best for the people of 

Saskatchewan, we could wind this House up and be gone.  But 

if you're going to just shove this down our throats it isn't going 

to happen. Soon Progressive Conservatives economic 

initiatives will have have been taken hold.  Just wait till Crown 

Life and FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) move out to 

Saskatchewan, and they're going to jump on there and say that . 

. . they're going to say, Mr. Speaker, it was our idea and we got 

it. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say in my last, final 

words before I make an amendment . . . I'm going to make an 

amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm not proud to stand here 

this morning and speak on this here motion that we're talking 

about.  I'm not proud.  We should have come in here this 

morning and the House Leader should have had Estimates 

brought forward this morning.  We should have been 

discussing Agriculture Estimates or the Premier's Estimates or 

the Minister of Health's Estimates, the important departments 

of this government.  That's what we should have been 

discussing this morning.  We want the Estimates brought on.  

And if they can't bring them on, we're sitting at 60 or 65 days, 

and a government that never brings forth their important 

departments to be discussed and so we can ask them questions, 

so the people of Saskatchewan know where they stand, then I'm 

just ashamed of this government. 

 

And I want to say in closing, before I make the amendment, 

that I'm . . . every time I've been speaking anything to do with 

GRIP . . . and my closing remarks are that -- the front benches 

and the senior members -- that I'm ashamed of them for the 

type of government they are running.  I am absolutely ashamed 

of them.  And I know that their constituents would be ashamed 

of them if they go and tell them the facts, what's happening in 

this legislature. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my last words, challenging them to go 

and ask their ridings this weekend.  Hold meetings, come back 

in here with all your endorsements and see if you're on the right 

track.  Especially to the Minister of Agriculture -- I want him to 

come back in here saying, I'm endorsed by one person.  Even 

stand up and give us one person besides his staff that support 

him. 

 

Give us the names of one person that will say . . . I'll bet you 

that his EA (executive assistant) that works for him, Ernie 

Spencer, in his office, who was born and made in 

my town of Craik -- He was brought up in a right and 

honourable family, a real good individual -- I'll bet you when 

he gets away from the office, he says, I can't believe that my 

boss is a part of this terrible tragedy.  I'll bet you that's what 

he's saying to himself. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to make this here motion moved by 

myself, seconded by the member for Moosomin: 

 

 That the words "pursuant to a Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 

ruling on the validity of Bill 87" be substituted for the words 

"notwithstanding the Rules of the Assembly". 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

(1100) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- The member for Arm River has 

moved an amendment to the main motion.  I find the 

amendment to be in order.  The amendment does not construe 

an alternative to the main motion that's before us, but seeks to 

replace certain terms of the main motion.  Therefore any debate 

at this point should be on the amendment strictly.  It will not be 

a concurrent debate.  So at this point the question before us 

then is the amendment which has been moved by the member 

for Arm River, seconded by the member for Moosomin.  The 

amendment reads: 

 

 That the words "pursuant to a Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 

ruling on the validity of Bill 87" be substituted for the words 

"notwithstanding the rules of the Assembly". 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me pleasure, 

Mr. Speaker, to rise today to speak on this amendment, the 

whole amendment of time allocation, the whole motion of time 

allocation, and what this opposition is doing to the government 

in this session.  Mr. Speaker, the whole process that the 

opposition is taking today is not a process over GRIP, it's not 

anything; it is just a waste of taxpayers' dollars.  It is keeping 

this legislature . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  I have just, I think, been clear 

on what it is that I think the question is before the Assembly, 

and that is the amendment.  The amendment proposes to make 

some changes to the motion that's before us, and I've ruled that 

the debate is not concurrent.  So that the question that's before 

us right now is not time allocation as such; the question that's 

before us is the amendment.  If the member has remarks to 

make, he should make them strictly adhere to the amendment, 

pertinent to the amendment. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, this amendment is all about 

obstruction.  This is not debate.  We have gave them an 

opportunity to debate this Bill on different occasions.  On 

Tuesday we wanted to adjourn private members' day to allow 

them to debate Bill 87. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What did they do? 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- They refused.  They have had ample 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

opportunity to debate the GRIP Bill.  And because of their 

obstruction, the motion for closure was put in.  They have had 

ample opportunity.  And I listened to the member from Arm 

River today go on and on and on about phoning our people, 

talking to our people, going out into the country and talking to 

the people before we bring a Bill in, or before we make 

amendments to it. 

 

Well I tell him, Mr. Speaker, we have been out and we have 

been talking to the people.  We were out during the 

bell-ringing, and we were talking to the people.  We were out 

and did a blitz of Last Mountain-Touchwood and we talked to 

the people. 

 

The member for Arm River says, Mr. Speaker, that we are not 

a government of the same type of government as they were.  

You bet we're not.  We don't want to be the same type of 

government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- And the people told us on October 21, they don't 

want us to be that kind of a government.  They said that they 

wanted us to be a government that gets in here and does what 

has to be done to fix what the mess had been left after nine and 

a half years of Tory rule. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, the member from Arm River says, 

go out and phone someone.  If fact he challenged me to go out 

into Last Mountain-Touchwood and to phone someone in every 

town and ask them the question:  do you think we should shut 

these Tories up?  I know what the answer will be.  If I phoned 

those people, they will say yes.  They said we told you yes in 

October 21 and we said it loud and clear by giving you the 

largest majority that Last Mountain-Touchwood has ever been 

won by. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, they continue to obstruct over 

there.  They walked out of the legislature over -- what did they 

say? -- changed rules.  But they've been on record as saying it 

wasn't to do with the changing of bells . . . the ringing of bells.  

It was to do with GRIP. 

 

But I want to compare that walk out.  And they say, well that's 

all right.  The New Democrats when they're opposition did the 

same thing.  They walked out in '89.  But there's a difference.  

The big difference was in 1989, when the Tories walked out, 

after the 1986 election they had over 50 per cent of the people 

of Saskatchewan voted for them in the 1986 election.  They 

had 26 seats.  They campaigned that they said they wouldn't do 

it.  And during that walk out, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the members that on 

the ruling made by the Deputy Speaker, that the amendment 

that has been made is simply taking out "notwithstanding the 

rules of the Assembly".  The following words have been 

substituted, "pursuant to a Saskatchewan Court of Appeal". 
 

It's very clear on the understanding that this is not a concurrent 

debate, that the debate must take place on the 

amendment that has been proposed.  It's very clear in the 

documents by experts on this when they simply say . . . If it is . 

. . similarly, if it is intended to leave out certain words only and 

to substitute other words, then although both the original and 

the proposed words may be discussed, debate should not range 

over the other words of the motion to which the amendment is 

not directed. 

 

Order.  The debate must be on the amendment that has been 

proposed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what's your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My point of order is, is that the 

rules being applied here to this amendment . . . I've noticed in 

the past in amendments that have been moved by the members 

opposite on private members' day on many motions, that there 

is great leeway allowed by the Chair and the Speaker when 

amendments are moved. 

 

The only point that I want to make is this, and get clarification, 

is that we don't want to question at all what the Speaker's ruling 

is.  But if we're going to follow that tightly and closely on 

every ounce of the word of the rules on amendments, that we 

would very much appreciate if that were applied to every 

amendment put in this Assembly from now on.  Because I 

think we're setting very, very serious precedent when we allow 

people no leeway on a motion or an amendment of this type. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member, I think, makes a very valid 

argument, if we follow what has been the practice in many 

instances in the past.  But no two instances are the same.  And 

the member knows that.  In this particular case, as we did 

yesterday in the subamendment . . . the subamendment 

yesterday was very narrow in its aspect. 

 

Today, the amendment is also very narrow in its aspect again.  

And all I'm saying is to the member, that he must relate his 

argument to the amendment that is before us.  And he can't just 

range all over the place.  And that will be the ruling, and that's 

the one I'm going to enforce. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this 

amendment again is just another example of delay.  And I want 

to try and tie into why . . . that I'm speaking against this which 

says it has to go to the courts.  Why it is unnecessary to have 

this amendment. 

 

And I go back to the walk-out.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to try 

and tie it in, if I can, to the walk-out related to the 1989 and the 

walk-out by this government, which was a delay, an 

unnecessary delay, where they had the chance . . . that we 

wouldn't have needed this submotion, or this amendment. 
 

And I go back, Mr. Speaker, to say that -- and I hope I'm on the 

right track.  And I'm sure if I'm not, I will be corrected, Mr. 

Speaker -- that when we walked out in '89, and I wasn't part of 

the government then, but when they walked out in '89, the 

Leader of the Opposition and the now Premier of 

Saskatchewan toured the province and held rallies in every . . . 

in a great number of small towns all around rural Saskatchewan 

and filled the hall 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

on every occasion. 

 

He had one in Last Mountain-Touchwood, and he came out to 

Southey.  We couldn't get all the people in the hall.  They went 

out and they asked the people what they thought of the 

walk-out.  They asked the people what their opinion was and 

they consulted with them. 

 

And while he was doing that, the other members were out 

collecting petitions.  And they came back to this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, after 17 days with consulting with 

thousands and thousands of people, and tabled 120,000 

signatures in this Legislative Assembly, on petitions. 

 

Comparing that to what has happened in the last and to show 

why this motion, these people walked out for 18 days, when 

they walked out in the 1991 election, they had some 20 per cent 

of the voters vote for them.  They didn't have the backing of the 

people.  They have 10 members.  And what did they do in 

those 18 days?  The Leader of the Opposition came back with 

what?  A better tan and a better golf game. 

 

Why didn't they go out and hold rallies in the towns of rural 

Saskatchewan?  Why didn't they go and consult with them?  I 

know why they didn't, Mr. Speaker.  Because they're scared to 

go to rural Saskatchewan right now because they'll be told to 

get back into the legislature and get down to work and get on 

with the business of it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- In fact, Mr. Speaker, when they walked out and 

went golfing, our members went to work and went and 

consulted with the people on it. 

 

So it's another delay; it's another waste of the taxpayers' 

dollars.  Now we're on the time allocations and we're on the 

rules that say 10 minutes or whatever for bell-ringing.  And 

there was a show of it last night, the waste and the delays.  A 

vote on a submotion that had no value to it.  We were all in the 

House when the vote was taken.  They rang the bells to the 

maximum -- to the maximum. 

 

As soon as that vote was taken, there was another vote taken on 

the amendment.  We were all in the House again.  What did 

they do?  Rang the bells again to the limit, on their own 

amendment.  They walked out on their own amendment.  

Makes you wonder if they have to go back and decide how 

they're going to vote in it. 

 

It's a delay; it's a waste of time.  They are wasting, and they 

have for nine and a half years when they were in government, 

they wasted the taxpayers' dollars.  And now all we see from 

them in opposition is more waste of the taxpayers' dollars. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am hearing from people in my constituency -- 

not my supporters but some of their supporters -- that are 

saying . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What few remain. 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Yes, what few remain . . . are saying, why don't 

they let you govern the province?  They messed it 

up; they were no good as a government; and now their own 

supporters are saying, and they're no good as an opposition 

either. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, when we introduced the GRIP, we 

campaigned on changes to it.  That was the difference in the 

walk-out.  They campaigned that they were not going to do 

anything with SaskEnergy and they did it.  And we campaigned 

we were going to change GRIP.  The people voted for us 

because we said we were going to do it.  And now we're doing 

it. 

 

And they persist in wasting time.  In fact the member from 

Arm River says, he says we're going to keep you here all 

summer.  Why?  Why would they want to keep us here all 

summer?  Why don't we get on with the business of working, 

get the legislations passed, and get out of here?  He even states, 

well we would go 1,800 hours and when we get in Committee 

of the Whole -- 60 days. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is that co-operation? 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Co-operation?  That's a waste of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he says that if the Bill passes, what's going to 

happen.  If the Bill passes -- and there is no reason for it to go 

to the courts; it's an obstruction of the whole business -- he says 

if the Bill passes, what will happen?  Well I'll tell you what will 

happen, Mr. Speaker.  If this Bill passes and when this Bill 

passes, the farmers will start to farm the land and not the 

programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Mr. Speaker, agriculture will prosper and 

Saskatchewan will once again start on to the road to recovery. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they continually change their minds.  Now they 

want to move an amendment that it should go to the courts.  

First they said they didn't want any changes to it.  On March 15 

they said . . . first they said no changes on March 15, and now 

on August 14 we are, or 13th, they say we want you to change 

the Bill.  We want you to change it.  And they move 

amendment after amendment after amendment.  They don't 

want to debate the Bill.  They move an amendment now, it has 

to go the court.  Then let's pass the Bill and let the courts 

decide whatever's going to happen.  That's up to the courts.  

Our deal here is to pass the legislation, and that's what we want 

to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the whole thing of this is . . . and we had to 

change the Bill because of the off-loading that has come out of 

Ottawa, that those members opposite have sat for nine years 

and watched Ottawa off-load onto the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, they always said, and the member 

for Arm River says, he stood up and he always . . . he stood up 

against his government when he had to. 

 

Well as far as I know, my understanding is he never did 



2420 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

vote against his government on anything.  He was led around 

then; he's still being led around.  And he's being led around on 

this amendment to take this thing and pass it to the courts. 

 

It's an unnecessary amendment, and it is not needed on this 

Bill.  They are wasting time.  There's more obstruction.  That's 

all it is.  It's not an amendment to go to the courts.  It's another 

amendment to obstruct the proceedings of this House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, because of that amendment, and because of 

that amendment, I want to consult with my caucus members 

and so forth, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment 

on this debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

NOTICE OF MOTION FOR CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise to give notice 

pursuant to rule 34: 

 

 That at the next sitting of the Assembly immediately before 

orders of the day is called for resuming the adjourned debate 

on the motion to allocate time for proceeding on Bill 87, An 

Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income 

Insurance Legislation, and any amendments or 

subamendments proposed thereto, I will move that the said 

debate be not further adjourned. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, as I was speaking last night and as I 

indicated to the Assembly, certainly the debate on the GRIP 

Bill has occupied and taken up a fair bit of time in this 

Assembly.  It's a debate that will take and occupy a fair bit of 

time, not only as it has in the Assembly but across rural 

Saskatchewan from back even in the fall of 1990 when the 

proposal was put forward for a revenue insurance program, Mr. 

Speaker.  And there's no doubt in my mind that this debate will 

be ongoing and will continue. 

 

And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that trying to 

devise a revenue insurance or an insurance program for the 

agriculture community that actually becomes a very supportive 

structure of our rural economy and our whole Saskatchewan 

economy, will take time.  And because of the complexities of 

the whole economic situation regarding agriculture the fact that 

we in 

Saskatchewan, we in Canada, have very little control over the 

prices we receive for our product. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons we have such little 

control over these prices and over the prices we receive for our 

product is the fact that, Mr. Speaker, the prices are set on a 

world market.  They're set in nations where the production may 

. . . is much larger than ours; but also, Mr. Speaker, they are set 

by nations where the populace base is much, much larger than 

here in Canada. 

 

If we look at the Canadian situation, Mr. Speaker, we find that 

less than . . . or around 3 per cent of the total Canadian 

population is involved in agricultural production --  less than 3 

per cent.  And yet the 3 per cent of the population in this 

country involved in agricultural production, Mr. Speaker, 

produces five times more product than we in Canada are able to 

consume.  Because of that, Mr. Speaker, we have become, and 

are, and have continually been, an export nation.  Some 80 per 

cent of the product we produce -- 80 per cent of the wheat or 

any of the grains, the cereal grains we produce, the livestock, 

the meat we produce in this country, in this nation -- must find 

its use and consumption on other markets. 

 

And because of that, Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult for us to 

try to achieve higher prices for our product.  And as the prices 

are dictated by world markets, Mr. Speaker, it makes it very 

difficult for individuals in the farming sector.  And as we have 

seen over the past number of years, as we've seen starting in the 

late 70s we did have a period of some good economic growth 

in the agricultural sector. 

 

But as you saw through the, say, the '75-80, '79-81, period 

where prices of agricultural products had risen -- wheat in 

particular to that $6 range, and we saw the time when flax was 

in that $15 range, and canola was in the 9 to $10 range, Mr. 

Speaker -- at that time it appeared that we were nicely on our 

way into a period of such high economic, rapid economic 

growth, that spending could indeed fall in line. 

 

And we saw the price of our land move to double and triple and 

quadruple and even go five times what it actually should have 

been, five times its productive value, because it just seemed 

there was a period of time in our history, Mr. Speaker, where 

there was no end to what we were going to receive.  And we 

could produce the product, we had a price that gave us a return 

on our investment, Mr. Speaker, and people felt, well the 

farming and rural and agricultural community was booming.  

Certainly the Saskatchewan economy was booming as well.  

That we could spend, continue to spend, without really having 

to give account for our spending.  In a lot of cases, a lot of the 

spending that was done in this province was done on the basis 

of the capital gains or the capital investment as people would 

buy land. 

 

And I know the comments were made about the fact, well I've 

just paid $70,000 a quarter for land.  Maybe it was four times 

what it was . . . its actual productive value was, Mr. Speaker.  

But because of the inflationary factor people said, well if I 

don't quite make it, the price is going to continue to rise, I'll 

unload it and it'll become an 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2421 

investment and maybe I'll make $10,000.  It won't pay for 

itself, but maybe I'll make $10,000 on my investment. 

 

Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, there was a day of reckoning.  

And that day of reckoning started in the early 1980s -- in 1981, 

'82, '83, when the prices of grain took a nosedive, Mr. Speaker.  

The price of the product we were producing took a nosedive.  

And we didn't have a system in place, Mr. Speaker, that would 

protect and stabilize the agricultural economy.  All we had, Mr. 

Speaker, was crop insurance. 

 

Now crop insurance is, as I've indicated, strictly insurance.  

But, Mr. Speaker, with crop insurance . . .  And just for the 

people who may not recognize or realize what crop insurance 

did, crop insurance protected the producer to the tune of the 

producer could carry 50, 60 or 70 per cent of what his 

long-term average productionary value was.  He could carry 

protection on 70 per cent if he carried the maximum of his 

production value.  So if you were producing an average of 30 

bushels to the acre of wheat on your farm over the long term, 

70 per cent, if you carried that at high average, was 21 per cent 

-- you could protect yourself for 21 per cent or 21 bushels to 

the acre of crop protection.  And you were given two or three, 

and in the last number of years, four different price options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were many times where you would have . . . 

drought would come through, or you'd have conditions take 

place that were beyond your control and your production would 

be below your 21 bushel guarantee, and you may have carried a 

guarantee factor of $4 a bushel -- $4 a bushel and 21 bushels 

guarantee would give you $84 to the acre.  And if you fell 

below that production factor, you were brought up to that $84 

guarantee, Mr. Speaker.  Taking the crop you produced, if it 

was 15, the extra six bushels you were paid for. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there are many times when you could 

be carrying that high guarantee factor of $4 a bushel, and find 

that by the time the crop year rolled around and you moved 

your product to market, and you've produced, you ended up 

maybe with a production factor of 22 or 23 bushels per acre on 

your farm, two or three bushels over the guaranteed or the 

insured guarantee, Mr. Speaker.  And the market would fall 

from that . . . maybe the market was in the 4.20, but fall to the 

3.50, to $3.  You were out $1 per bushel on that other 21 

bushels.  And you didn't get a pay-out.  So you may end up 

with $60 in your pocket on your production, even though you 

were insured for 84.  But because the way the program was set 

up, it didn't pay you that extra revenue portion. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the attempt was made to try and 

stabilize the agricultural sector by introducing a program that 

would guarantee the revenue portion of your insurance 

component, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, so what we've seen over the past two years, and in 

fact, going into next year, we've seen a very serious and 

long-term debate take place.  And trying to address how indeed 

do you guarantee or set aside or establish a guarantee program 

that will place . . . give farmers the ability to carry the 

insurance that they would feel would be appropriate for their 

farming operation? 

And I must emphasize the reason for the insurance program, 

Mr. Speaker, was to let people know right across Canada, 

people out . . . labourers, or whether they be teachers, whether 

they be nurses, whether they be lawyers, whatever profession 

they may be in, because of the feeling and the animosity we 

find in our nation towards agricultural producers, because 

people were coming to . . . or beginning to feel that they were 

continually throwing dollars, good money after bad, into the 

agricultural sector. 

 

The reason for an insurance program, Mr. Speaker, was to 

inform people that farmers would have the ability to carry 

insurance and protect themselves if they faced a period of 

severe loss or whether it was through drought, whether it was 

through hail, whether it was through frost, Mr. Speaker, giving 

farmers the ability to carry the protection that they needed. 

 

And I can well remember, Mr. Speaker, the number of debates 

that took place across this province back in the spring of 1991, 

before the introduction of the 1991 program.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, originally, the Department of Agriculture and Rural 

Development had worked together and had set up some 25 

meetings across the province. 

 

Now you can rest assured, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 

vastness of our province and the miles and the many 

communities in this province and the 60,000 or the 50,000 farm 

families we have across this province, Mr. Speaker, what we 

found after the first series of meetings, we found people very 

annoyed.  They wanted to have input to the GRIP legislation.  

They wanted to have input to the gross revenue insurance plan. 

 

(1130) 

 

And it didn't matter where the ministers went, whether it was 

the Minister of Agriculture, whether it was the Minister of 

Rural Development, when they scheduled a meeting, whether it 

was in Whitewood, whether it was in Weyburn, what they 

found, to their surprise, that the meeting halls that they always . 

. . that they chose . . . and they even felt that that meeting hall 

might be just too large; they're spending too much money 

renting this facility.  But because they didn't know what kind of 

reception or what kind of turn-out they would have at these 

meetings, Mr. Speaker, what we found, what the ministers 

found, Mr. Speaker, that the turn-out was beyond their beliefs, 

beyond their expectations. 

 

In fact, even in my constituency the complaints I heard was: 

why in the world didn't the departments locate a facility that 

would accommodate more people?  Why did they rent such a 

small facility?  Why didn't they at least rent the largest facility 

in the community so that when people came they wouldn't be 

on the outside trying to hear because the speaker system wasn't 

set up or wasn't capable of reaching out to people who ended 

up outside of the building standing?  Because the indication, 

Mr. Speaker, was that many people wanted to hear and wanted 

to have input to the GRIP program. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, over the period of the spring the 26 

original meetings turned into, I believe, some 50 



2422 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

meetings across this province.  And many ideas were thrown 

out.  Many ideas were placed before the ministers.  Many ideas 

were placed before the bureaucrats regarding the building and 

the creation of the GRIP program. 

 

The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker -- and the commitment was 

made by the federal and provincial governments of the day -- 

the unfortunate part was that many producers wanted to see 

major changes right up front to the program.  But because we 

were already into the spring, into February and March, and 

were getting to the point where people were ready to start 

signing their contacts and establishing their contracts so they 

would know exactly where they stood as they began to plan 

their spring seeding operations, it was impossible, Mr. Speaker, 

to make major changes, although some minor changes were 

made and some minor changes were worked into the system 

even though they didn't satisfy all producers.  And we realize 

that. 

 

But the commitment was made to take those ideas and to 

continue an ongoing consultative process to look at improving 

the system for 1992. 

 

And then, as we are all aware in here, Mr. Speaker, because it's 

a federally-provincially funded program -- federal 

contributions, provincial contribution, and producer 

contribution to the insurance premium, Mr. Speaker -- because 

it's federally and provincially funded, we're all aware of the 

fact as well, Mr. Speaker, that the process must take place to 

allow the federal government to bring forward the 

recommendations that their committee has brought to their 

attention. 

 

And so I think . . . and the argument, as we've been laying that 

out, Mr. Speaker, has been along the lines that the provincial 

government should have given the process time to develop.  

The federal government said no, we will not make major 

changes this spring because we cannot . . . we don't have the 

timetable or the time frame to make the changes and to place 

them in the hands of the producers prior to the deadline that 

had been established in the 1991 contract that farmers signed. 

 

And people would ask, but why would you have to sign a 

contract?  Well, Mr. Speaker, we can look back to the crop 

insurance program over the years.  Crop insurance was the type 

of program that if it looked like it might be a good year, then 

you just decided not to carry crop insurance for that year.  Or if 

it looked like your area might be in . . . or your farm might be 

in a situation that the year may not be as good or it may not be 

as productive, then you carried insurance.  You were in or out, 

just a matter of signing, just a matter informing the corporation 

by, I believe it was April 30, that you were going to be 

involved in the crop insurance program for that year, and then 

going in and filling out your form and deciding which crops 

you wanted to put into the crop insurance program. 

 

The problem with that, Mr. Speaker, was because of the 

in-and-out ability yearly, it was very difficult for that insurance 

program to carry itself.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, when the 

gross revenue insurance program was brought into place, the 

suggestion was made that if you're in, you're in for, I believe 

it's five years, Mr. Speaker.  You sign up.  You signed up for 

five years. 

If you decided that you didn't want to continue to be a member 

of the program, Mr. Speaker, then you gave notice that you 

were going to get out of the program.  And you gradually got 

out of the program over three years.  And then you would have, 

if you got out of the program, once you said you were getting 

out of the program, over three years you phased out of the 

program.  And then once you were out of the program, you 

would have to wait two years before you could reapply.  And 

then there was a three-year phase-in. 

 

The reason for that, Mr. Speaker, was to try and acknowledge 

that insurance is only capable running at a break-even position 

and carrying itself if there are people involved that committed 

to the program.  And we can talk to any insurance corporation 

in Canada and you will find there isn't any corporation or 

insurance company across this nation that would be able to 

survive if people were just in and out of a program or in and 

out of their insurance program, Mr. Speaker.  Therefore the 

long and hard debate that has taken place, taken place in this 

legislature. 

 

Now the difficulty we also find with the GRIP program and 

what we're finding with the 1992 program is that the 1992 

program, what it has done is really -- as the government and as 

the Minister of Agriculture would argue -- well it's taken away 

the ability for farmers to, if you will use the term, if you want 

to use the term, abuse or take advantage of the program. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that one component in many farmers' cases 

of allowing the producer to market his production over and 

above his guarantee at whatever the market price is, is 

something that producers right across Saskatchewan argued for 

and suggested they should have.  And therefore, if the . . . and 

when they take the time, and when they put the investment into 

their crop production, Mr. Speaker, by producing, by putting in 

the fertilizer, by putting on the chemical, by managing their 

farm operation, and if they produce over their average, Mr. 

Speaker, by being able to do that and by being able to keep that 

production over and above that average or that guarantee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that was a good component and that was 

a component that I spoke about during the campaign, a 

component I spoke about at a Sask Wheat Pool sponsored 

all-candidate meeting, Mr. Speaker.  And I believe at the end of 

the day the general consensus at the meeting was as well that 

that was one positive component to be added to at the 1991 

GRIP program -- not changing it to the point that you went on 

an area average pay-out. 

 

And that's where we find the great difficulty with the new 

program, Mr. Speaker.  The new program, in and of itself, has 

some positive aspects, and we recognize that.  Certainly the 

biggest detriment to the new program, Mr. Speaker, is it hurts 

the individual who, through no fault of his or her own or their 

own, as a family, the individuals such as we see in the 

Melfort-Tisdale area, individuals in other areas of the province, 

Mr. Speaker, where . . . even in the Kinistino area.  The former 

MLA was just in yesterday and he mentioned about some of 

their crops 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2423 

being no more than six and eight inches high. 

 

And we've also seen reports from the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool where there are areas in this province where crops are 

being ploughed under because there's not enough to the crop, as 

well, to even make hay out of it for livestock feed, Mr. 

Speaker.  These are the areas that are going to be very severely 

affected by the 1992 program. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker?  Because if they would have been under the 

1991 program, if their average would have been . . . The 1991 

program, number one, paid them 100 per cent of the long-term 

average, as far as acreage average bushel production, and gave 

them the ability to choose a price option.  And, Mr. Speaker, on 

that basis they were guaranteed their bottom line. 

 

If their production was 30 bushels and they had the guarantee 

was $4.15, the IMAP (indexed moving average price) price, 

they would be looking at somewhere in the neighbourhood of 

124 or $125 an acre.  However, under this year's program 

they're looking at an IMAP price which we knew would be 

somewhat lower. 

 

But they're also . . . the big factor in this year's program is the 

fact that their protection is based on 80 per cent of their 

long-term average if they took the 80 per cent.  You were given 

that option.  And as well, Mr. Speaker, it's based on an average 

of an area.  And I would suggest the areas that have been 

drawn up and have been mapped out, Mr. Speaker, are so large 

and they are so broad that they allow for this factor that's going 

to take place this year where one person could have a crop and 

his neighbour down the road may not have a crop because of 

drought or because of frost, Mr. Speaker, and find that in the 

end when the average . . . the revenue portion that will be paid 

out or if it comes, depending on how the formula breaks down, 

if it comes out, whether it's 10, 15, 20, or $25 an acre, the 

person with his bins running over will have not only his 

product to sell and . . . 

 

There's a good possibility that the price of grain could go up, 

although we've seen over the last number of days on the 

Chicago market the fact that the price of wheat has been 

dropping steadily.  And I think the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, 

as I indicated earlier, the factors regarding the price of our 

product are determined outside of the boundaries of this great 

nation we live in.  And the reason for the decrease in the price 

of wheat is the fact that the product coming off in the States 

right now is coming off much better than was anticipated.  And 

on that basis, Mr. Speaker, it has put pressure on the world 

markets. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the person who has good production 

this year is going to find that not only is he going to have grain 

to market, not only is he going to have his bins full and being 

able to put this product into the market system, Mr. Speaker, 

and receive a return on that, but he's also going to get the same 

acreage pay-out as his neighbour down the road who has no 

crop to market even, and no crop to even take advantage of this 

year's prices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you can see why we are speaking out very loudly 

and why we have taken time to debate this motion and this Bill 

in this Assembly.  Because, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe that we should at least give opportunity for the process 

and talk about the fact that if it's wrong, give the government 

the ability to look at what has taken place.  And they have had 

ample time, there's no doubt about it.  They have had ample 

time to and become . . . I'm sure that even the Department of 

Agriculture is becoming more and more aware of some of the 

real problems that they will be facing with this new program as 

the harvesting begins and starts to proceed across this province. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, the indication out there as well is not that 

even though in a lot of areas the crops are very lush and look to 

be very productive . . . We saw in our area last year, Mr. 

Speaker, where we had stands of wheat that many producers 

anticipated as they were swathing and as they were inspecting 

their fields that there may be a 40- or a 45- or a 50-bushel crop 

here, and yet the disappointment when after they pulled the 

combine into the field, Mr. Speaker, and after that grain was 

harvested, the fact that a lot of those crops, Mr. Speaker, that 

were anticipated to be in the 40- to 50-bushel range actually 

came off in that 30 to 35, and in some cases even as low as 25.  

Mr. Speaker, a stand of grain as you're driving down the road 

may look lush and productive but that doesn't necessarily mean 

that it's going to actually produce what it appears to produce, 

because it can be very deceiving. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, we may find more than just the 

drought areas of this province where people are going to find 

that this 1992 program has become a very severe detriment to 

them trying to balance the ledger in their farming operation.  

It's going to become a detriment to them trying to meet the 

needs and trying to be able to keep up to the bills and going in 

to people that they've dealt with over the years, whether it's the 

bulk fuel dealer, whether it's the fertilizer dealer or the agent 

who's been handling their chemicals, Mr. Speaker, people that 

each and every one of us in the rural sector, we all know each 

other face to face and we're friends and we deal with each 

other.  We not only deal with each other in our businesses and 

through our business operations, Mr. Speaker, but we deal with 

these individuals in the curling rinks and in the skating-rinks 

and in all kinds of community endeavours.  And you become 

very close friends. 

 

And I would suggest that there are many people, many 

producers who themselves, if they aren't able to pay their bills, 

feel bad about it because they don't want their close friend 

who's working as an agent, who's bringing fuel out to their 

farms faithfully over the years, they don't want him to think 

that now all of a sudden they're turning their back on him and 

aren't interested in paying their bills.  And I believe most 

producers, most farmers across this province are very diligent 

and very conscientious and endeavour to . . . it is their extreme 

desire to make sure their bills are paid and up to date. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, not only is it the problem of paying up 

bills, it creates, without funds in the hands of farmers, it creates 

a problem for people in the business community.  It creates a 

problem for the small equipment dealers across this province. 

 

And we take a look at a number of our communities.  And in 

the community of Kipling, Mr. Speaker, we don't have an 

implement dealer left in that community.  And that is 



2424 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

basically because of the fact that, number one, Mr. Speaker, 

because of the difficulties that we have seen in agriculture, 

because of the lack of a comprehensive and sound revenue or 

an insurance program, Mr. Speaker, Farmers were unable to 

make their payments, were unable to make their commitments, 

and in many cases were unable to continue the normal 

upgrading of their equipment, that many of our small 

equipment dealers across the province finally had to close the 

doors because they couldn't continue to operate on the basis of 

building up debt after debt after debt such as we have seen in 

the agricultural sector. 

 

(1145) 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, why the government would be 

very concerned about the debate that is taking place here.  And 

whether or not the media is following it very closely, Mr. 

Speaker, is not the question.  The fact is, that as long as we are 

debating in this House, and the fact that we're getting closer to 

the harvest season, Mr. Speaker, we're getting closer to the time 

of year when producers will get a better understanding of 

where they stand regarding the GRIP program, where they 

stand regarding their ability to meet their commitments this 

fall. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the government themselves will realize 

that as well, that they are going to find that more and more 

producers are going to begin looking a lot more closer at the 

program, at where they're at.  And as they begin to find out that 

they're further behind and that indeed what they had budgeted 

for this spring, what they had spent for . . . based on their 

budget, and all of a sudden their income isn't there, Mr. 

Speaker, and they're unable to pay the bills, that we're going to 

find more people on the doorstep, more people calling MLAs 

in this Legislative Assembly.  Not just opposition members, 

Mr. Speaker, but even government members as well. 

 

And I'm sure that government members, if they were honest, 

would indicate that yes, people across Saskatchewan -- some 

have indicated, yes, we can live with '92.  Many have said '91 

would be more beneficial and '91 would help us get ourselves 

established and back on our feet. 

 

And I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that under the '92 

program, by year's end, Mr. Speaker, or even into the January 

and February of 1993, another factor that is going to crop up is 

the factor of farm foreclosures.  Many people, even though 

today they have a bit of a reprieve because of the fact they've 

got a crop in the ground and the potential is there for some 

revenue, the fact that this program has been down-sized 

considerably and the guarantee is not there, Mr. Speaker, we 

are going to find, and I believe you will see, that there will be 

more and more farmers coming before the federal Farm Debt 

Review Board. 

 

In fact there are some individuals in my area who are on the 

board, and they have indicated that they are amazed at the 

number of producers who still end up before the board, trying 

to look at ways and means of saving their farm operation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we have found over the past number of 

years and months regarding . . . when it comes 

to negotiations regarding farm foreclosures and having the 

Farm Debt Review Board come in, we find we get the lender . . 

. usually the Farm Debt Review Board by acting as a mediator 

is able to bring the lender and the farm family together.  And 

on numerous occasions they've been able to sit down and come 

to workable agreements regarding their farm operation, 

regarding the foreclosure notice that has been set out there. 

 

And in a lot of cases that agreement has been based on what 

guarantee the gross revenue insurance program was bringing to 

their farming operation.  And we find, Mr. Speaker -- however 

we find, Mr. Speaker, what it's doing this year, the '92 program 

is taking away that sound guarantee that many of these farm 

families had restructured and reorganized their farms around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're also aware of the fact that we've been 

sitting for . . . this House has been open for a number of days, 

number of weeks, number of months, for a period of time.  

We're also aware that it's just about . . . the summer has just 

about passed us by.  And we're aware of the fact that many 

people have been forced to give up and forfeit their holiday 

time because of the sitting of this Assembly.  And as I noted 

the other day, I picked up an article that was written, and I took 

a look at the first paragraph, and I basically threw the article 

aside.  I thought, well here we go again.  It's an article that's 

just running the opposition down. 

 

But yesterday I decided to pick the article up again and just 

look at it a little more closely.  And I find that even though the 

article is based on the fact that there are many people annoyed 

at what has taken place in this Assembly and they're annoyed, 

as the writer of the article would indicate, at the opposition for 

ruining -- I'm not sure if the word he's used here is quite 

appropriate, so I'll say, ruining -- their summer holidays. 

 

And talking about a good summer.  And yes, I think we have to 

admit that even though July was kind of a cool and damp and 

wet month and it wasn't much for the businesses in our parks or 

even for the parks and recreation, the rural parks, across this 

province -- many businesses found it to be a very difficult time 

of the year -- the month of August has proven to be an 

exceptional month, an excellent month to be actually enjoying 

the great outdoors much more, rather than sitting in this 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

And so I can appreciate the fact that there are people who are 

somewhat annoyed at the fact that their summer has just been 

wasted and their ability to spend time with the family has been 

wasted. 

 

But the article goes on to say, talking about whether the Tories 

should have been speaking and debating in this Assembly.  He 

says: 

 

 . . . we'd be remiss in not taking a hard look at the important 

questions of principle they've raised about the way the NDP 

government is operating. 

 

And then as the article continues: 

 

 And once you begin to answer some of these 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2425 

questions -- (the question) who has been abusing the 

legislature and who has shown virtually no respect for the 

institution -- you may reach the same conclusion as the 

Tories: 

 

And what does it say?  It says: 

 

 Romanow and the NDP can't be trusted. 

 

 The mistrust that must now be directed at the NDP isn't 

solely because of the hypocrisy they've displayed on this 

issue, although that hypocrisy is ample reason to question 

their principles. 

 

And then he, the editorialist, Mr. Speaker, talked about 

speaking to one of his editors and he says: 

 

 . . . (the editor) reminded me (of) recently that hypocrite was 

the strongest word that Jesus ever used and . . . he used . . . 

(it) once.  (And he says) Perhaps so, but Jesus never covered 

Saskatchewan politics.  I dare say, had he, he would have 

used hypocrite at least twice. 

 

 Perhaps we can instead use a more politically correct term 

like "morally diverse" or "ethically challenged" to describe 

the 20-minute diatribe that spewed from Romanow Thursday, 

explaining why he now believes prolonged bell-ringing at the 

legislature should end. 

 

 There were times in his 25-year political career -- like the 

potash nationalization debate of 1975 -- where: (he says and 

he's quoting the then leader of the opposition, the Premier) "I 

feared this institution would not survive debate,"  Romanow 

-- well into his wise old political sage role -- told the 

Assembly Thursday. 

 

 But (he says) the legislature did survive the potash debate and 

even his own opposition's 1989 SaskEnergy debate, 

Romanow noted.  (He somehow neglected to mention that the 

debate never occurred in the assembly.  As the Tories did 

June 11 on the GRIP bill, his opposition walked out before 

the legislation could be introduced. 

 

 At any rate, (going back to the 1989 debate) the NDP was 

justified in denying the introduction of the SaskEnergy 

legislation because the Tories didn't campaign on its 

privatization in the previous election . . . 

 

And as we've indicated on the GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker, the 

government talked about changes to the GRIP Bill.  And the 

opposition of the day and the government of the day and the 

opposition, present opposition, while we were campaigning, 

talked about changes to the GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker.  But no 

one really anticipated that the government would use the 

majority that they have today to so diversely change the 

program, just wiping out from under people's feet their ability 

to establish an insurance program or an insurance guideline that 

they could manage with. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we also say, it's not just the debate 

that's taking place regarding the GRIP Bill, there are other 

issues as well.  And the fact that this Bill takes away the rights 

of individuals. 

 

And the writer of this article also says: 

 

 . . . what are we now seeing from Roy Romanow in his first 

summer as premier? 

 

 Are bills with retroactive clauses contributing to public 

discussion?  Is introducing closure an enhancement of public 

debate? 

 

 . . . what are not not seeing from Romanow and his 

government? 

 

 Quietly, the NDP is now releasing the regulations -- the fine 

print explaining how laws are to be interpreted -- that give 

NDP cabinet ministers some of the most sweeping powers 

this province has ever seen. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we've raised in this Assembly and we 

will continue to raise as we get into further debate on many of 

the Bills and many of the committees in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, I think not only the media, but many people across 

Saskatchewan are sincerely becoming very concerned 

regarding the process that has been followed by this 

government, by using a so-called majority, a large majority . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Why is the member on 

her feet? 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I was wondering if the person 

reading the article would -- as they allude to in the second half 

of the article, the hypocritical opposition -- if he would read the 

last two paragraphs or table the document. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  That's certainly not a point of 

privilege.  And our rules do not provide that a private member 

has to table any document.  That only pertains to . . . Order.  

That only pertains to cabinet ministers.  Order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I believe the 

articles that are available are available to everyone, Mr. 

Speaker.  And we all recognize that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at . . . and a number of the 

members opposite are talking about reading all of the articles 

that we have in front of us.  And yet we see, Mr. Speaker, it 

was the government members thought it very appropriate for 

them to be waving around a document, reading one or two 

sentences that were to their . . . what they felt were beneficial.  

Were they willing to read the whole article, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it also sounds like . . . it sounds to me like 

many of the members have finally come awake and would like 

to enter into the debate. 

 

It reminds me of a little story, Mr. Speaker, a little story I heard 

a while back of the senator who was noticed as being very 

astute and also was continually in the Assembly and appearing 

up for sessions.  And people 



2426 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

thought, well boy, that's interesting that a senator would be 

noted as having been always in his place in the Senate. 

 

However It wasn't all that long, about a few days later, that 

someone noticed that the dear soul had passed on and brought 

the question to the Assembly: how come you didn't notice that 

the reason the person was available at every meeting was . . . 

and that he had passed on.  The comment was made: but, Mr. 

Speaker, it's because he was a man of so few words. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Why is the member on his 

feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker, point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- On this story about the senator.  I wonder if the 

member would confirm that this is Senator Berntson? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Both members are out of order.  I 

think the member from Moosomin realizes that we are on the 

GRIP Bill.  Order, order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order is that we 

don't want a further travesty of the Legislative Assembly.  The 

points of order raised are obviously frivolous with the intent of 

distracting the member from Moosomin in making his speech. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- Look, I'm not going to take any more points of 

order.  I've ruled that the member . . . By the way, the member 

from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, I did not recognize that, 

but he wasn't even in his right place when he made the 

comment. 

 

Number two, number . . . Order.  Number two, the member 

from Moosomin should recognize that we are on Bill No. 87.  I 

think his story really had nothing to do with Bill No. 87. 

 

It now being 12 o'clock, this House stands recessed until 2 p.m. 

this afternoon. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 

 


