




















































Hansard: July 06, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1211 

 July 6, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to introduce to you 

and through you to the Assembly, three very important people 

in my life: my daughter, Denise Stanger; her partner, Scott 

Seland; and my granddaughter, Desirae Stanger.  Scott and 

Denise teach on a Dene-Tah Reservation in northern Alberta, 

and they are here on holidays.  And I ask the members to 

welcome Denise, Scott, and Desirae. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is 

with great sadness that I rise to pay tribute to Pauline Jewett, a 

leader of women and a distinguished Canadian who passed 

away Sunday at the age of 69. 

 

Ms. Jewett was a gifted academic and politician, a graduate of 

Queen's, Harvard, and the London School of Economics.  She 

was a professor of political science at Carleton University and 

later served as head of its Institute of Canadian Studies. 

 

In 1974 Pauline became the first woman president of a major 

co-educational university, Simon Fraser University in British 

Columbia.  She was most recently chancellor of Carleton.  Ms. 

Jewett served one term in 1963 as a Liberal MP (Member of 

Parliament) for Northumberland in Ontario.  In 1979 Pauline 

was elected as a New Democrat MP for B.C. (British 

Columbia) constituency of New Westminster, Coquitlam and 

served three terms, retiring in 1988. 

 

As critic for women's issues it was Pauline's perseverance that 

led to the adoption of an equality clause in the Charter of 

Rights.  Without her contribution women may have continued 

to be recognized as unequal before the law.  An External 

Affairs critic, Pauline was outspoken on peace and nuclear 

disarmament issues.  Pauline received the Order of Canada in 

1990 and was appointed to the Privy Council just four days 

before her death. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time is up. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Recently an 

unfortunate event took place in which several burrowing owl 

nesting boxes were destroyed near the town of Gray.  When 

vandals destroyed these boxes they took with them three pairs 

of owls and up to 20 fledglings.  The disappearance diminished 

the hope of reviving one of Saskatchewan's finest natural 

treasures. 

 

Endangered species like the burrowing owl are a 

sounding-board for how well we treat our environment.  If 

these shy hunters perish, if they become a memory, we can 

only fear for our environment as a whole.  Where acts of 

vandalism give us reason for despair, Mr. Speaker, the 

untiring and generous efforts of farmers and wildlife officials 

through Operation Burrowing Owl give one hope for the 

future. 

 

Since 1987 the Saskatchewan Natural History Society has 

encouraged farmers to protect nests located on their land and 

introduce artificial nesting boxes. By all, just continue to 

monitor their well-being and are just now sorting out the 

mystery of where these owls migrate so that our winter habitat 

can also be preserved for them.  Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 

people of Saskatchewan I offer my sincere thanks to these 

selfless efforts. 

 

In closing, I urge the people of our province to participate in 

efforts to promote responsible stewardship wherever possible 

so that our children and grandchildren will inherit an 

environment every bit as bountiful as the one we once 

possessed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Few people have 

an opportunity to receive national recognition during their 

lifetime.  I want to report to you, to the Assembly, and to all the 

people of Saskatchewan, that a constituent from my riding 

received such recognition within the last week. 

 

Rita Swanson of Churchbridge participated in the national coin 

design competition sponsored by the Royal Canadian Mint.  

Her design was selected from 2,871 entries for the new 

Canadian $1 coin. 

 

The new design has nothing to do with the much-maligned 

loonie.  It features the Parliament Buildings in the background 

and three children seated in the foreground facing the 

Parliament Buildings.  One of the children is holding a 

Canadian flag while another child points to the Peace Tower 

clock which indicates 1:25.  Rita was able to incorporate 

inspirational merit and artistic merit in her design. 

 

As a bonus to winning the competition, Rita and her husband 

Cal were in Ottawa to participate in the official ceremonies on 

Parliament Hill.  The new coin design was unveiled by the 

Hon. Paul Dick, minister responsible for the Royal Canadian 

Mint.  Over the weekend the community of Churchbridge 

honoured Rita at a reception in recognition of her artistic 

ability and her recent achievement. 

 

I would like to ask all the members of the Assembly to join me 

in congratulating Rita on her success. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Murray: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This weekend, Mr. 

Speaker, from Thursday to Sunday, country music comes out 

of the closet again in Craven.  The 1992 Big Valley Jamboree 

will take place, and it promises to be the biggest, best, most 

successful, and most profitable yet. 

 

Not a lot of mosquitoes, not too much mud I hope; just a lot of 

happy tourists and music lovers and a number of very talented 

entertainers.  The headliners consist of 



1212 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

established stars and up-and-comers, Canadians and 

Americans, young and old, men and women -- something for 

everybody. 

 

I am particularly happy to see that Canadian stars Rita 

MacNeil, Gary Fjellgaard, and Saskatchewan's own Buffy 

Sainte-Marie, will be performing.  With that kind of talent it is 

no wonder that the Big Valley Jamboree has become one of 

Saskatchewan's primary tourist attractions and, closer to home, 

a major employer and contributor to our economy. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the jamboree has reached the stage where 

it can fly alone, as it should, without the propping it has 

received over the last while.  That's a real sign of maturity.  

And they will do it without government freebies, as the Leader-

Post called them on Saturday -- no free government booze, no 

special government tent for VIPs (very important persons), no 

free ice for free drinks -- just good, clean, happy fun for 

everyone, on an equal basis. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to report to the Assembly on a function that took place in 

my riding on the weekend. The town of Rouleau was 

celebrating its 85th anniversary, and they had a home-coming 

event that stretched through the entire weekend. 

 

For those of you that don't know where Rouleau is, it's just 

south-west of Regina.  And it's a community that has been a big 

contributor to the fabric of our province and indeed our 

country.  People such as the Semen brothers from Bow Valley 

Industries in the oil patch were raised and grew up there; a 

number of entertainment people, a gentleman by the name of 

Nesbitt that wrote for the Wayne and Shuster show. 

 

There was about 700 there on the street for supper on Saturday 

night, and they finished off with a street dance.  They had the 

entire main street blocked off.  And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

that the folks of Rouleau were extremely proud of their 

heritage, wandering through the crowd that night, listening to 

them talk about their home town and community, their home 

province, even though many of them don't live here any more. 

 

I think it really showed the spirit of our province and it was 

really a pleasure to mingle with those crowds till the wee hours 

of the morning as they celebrated their part of Saskatchewan 

history.  And I think many other communities in our province 

would do well to look at the spirit that is in Rouleau, 

Saskatchewan, and know that our province is a wonderful place 

to live. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, following on the member's statement by my bench 

mate, the member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, those of us who 

are regular visitors at the Big Valley at Craven this year will 

find something new at Big Valley, Mr. Speaker, and that's the 

presence of a large, white semi-trailer truck that will serve as a 

temporary recycling 

depot from SARCAN. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- For the very first time, Mr. Speaker, the 

visitors and jamboree'ers at Big Valley will be able to recycle 

their drink containers right on site.  And that presence of 

SARCAN at the jamboree will benefit those of us who are 

visiting, those of all of us who are concerned about the 

environment, and it will also be advantageous for service 

groups who collect containers for fund raising on the site. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this will inevitably serve to even raise the return 

rate in the province of Saskatchewan, which it's now one of the 

highest in North America at 70 per cent.  We predict with 

recent changes to SARCAN that return rate will raise to 80 per 

cent.  Mr. Speaker, this government is shooting for 90 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to give my personal 

congratulations to Carter Currie, other members of the 

SARCAN staff, to the Minister of the Environment and the 

department, and to the partnership of Saskatchewan people that 

is making Saskatchewan a leader in recycling. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Economic Development and Job Creation 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for 

the Premier.  Mr. Premier, your government was elected while 

condemning many of the economic development projects that 

the former government undertook to better the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I can remember well the members of the now 

government campaigning against the fertilizer plant, paper 

mills, bacon plants, and so on.  At the same time they were 

saying that we don't need this kind of diversification, and we're 

going to eliminate poverty in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Premier, the facts are now in.  In Saskatoon one out of ten 

people is on the welfare rolls, while the government throws 

away hundreds of jobs tied to the nuclear industry.  Mr. 

Premier, given the shameful statistics that were brought out this 

last weekend, will you now reconsider this drastic move, and 

move toward bringing these much-needed jobs to your home 

city?  Will you do that, sir? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 

the question, and would answer as follows.  First of all, our 

complaints about many of the economic projects which were 

advanced at the time when he was a member of the front 

benches, stem from the fact that huge sums of taxpayers' 

dollars, huge sums, were devoted in order to get many if not all 

-- certainly many -- of these projects located in the province of 

Saskatchewan with what we 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1213 

have subsequently found out to be at least some limited return 

as a pay-back to the taxpayers. 

 

In the context of a growing question of poverty, in the context 

of more people on welfare, our complaint was at that time, as it 

is now, that the priorities should have been for people.  And 

that's something that your government did not exhibit. 

 

With respect to the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.), 

ministers have indicated before, and I reiterate again, that we 

are in discussions with the appropriate federal ministers and 

with the appropriate people at AECL with the view of seeing 

whether or not there is an agreement that can be arrived at 

which accomplishes the objectives of AECL as well as the 

objectives of the people of the province of Saskatchewan as set 

out at the time that I made my statement respecting the initial 

deal. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

Premier.  Mr. Premier, people aren't looking for those pat 

political answers that you have been giving this province for 

months and months. 

 

The numbers on welfare in the city of Regina are up over 20 

per cent from a year ago.  Leader-Post article from July 4 says: 

 

 The number of people on social assistance in Saskatchewan 

has continued to grow at an "alarming" rate, in spite of the 

provincial government's pledge to eliminate poverty. 

 

 More children than ever are going hungry, and the number of 

families using food banks is on the rise at a time of year 

when demand usually drops. 

 

Mr. Premier, the fact is that you have not come forward with a 

plan for the province of Saskatchewan to show the way in 

economic development so that all of these tens of thousands of 

people who are going on the welfare rolls will see some hope 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Premier, there is a project in the city of Regina sitting 

waiting for your ministers' attention.  Will you give assurance 

to the Assembly today that your ministers are actively 

reviewing the project to combine our expertise in 

manufacturing railcars along with our potash industry to take 

some of these people off the welfare rolls? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I thank the 

hon. member for the question once again.  The answer is two 

parts.  First of all, we're prepared to do everything that we can 

do to assist private enterprise or any enterprise to locate in the 

province of Saskatchewan in order for them to make a profit 

and in order for jobs to be created and to be maintained in this 

province. 

 

But I'm sure the hon. member would agree with me that it 

makes little sense that in order for us to pursue that objective, 

the taxpayers of the province spend large dollops of their 

money in order to attract the business for 

limited return, because that would not only take money away 

for the question of support for those who need it but it would 

also be counter-productive. 

 

Business in the province of Saskatchewan realizes that we are 

virtually broke thanks to the last 10 years.  Business in the 

province of Saskatchewan, and I say to business all over North 

America: if you play by the rules, you pay fair wages, you look 

after environment laws, follow the laws that we pass, you're 

welcome.  But please understand that we are not in a capacity 

to give out large sums of money to the business people who 

can do the job for themselves, thank you, very well. 

 

Finally, with respect to the second aspect of your question, 

namely the question of how the poverty or the social welfare 

rolls are increasing, I want to remind the member that the 

largest increase in the numbers of people on social assistance 

took place during the time when your administration was in 

office.  Nearly 14,400 people was the increase, or an increase 

of over 35 per cent, all the while that you were following your 

so-called "successful" economic policy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, 

the 15,000 people on the welfare rolls in this capital city of 

ours are begging for a plan and an answer from you, not the 

answer you just gave this Assembly. 

 

Your Minister of Economic Development was boasting in this 

Assembly a short while ago that he was in contact with over 

700 companies that were looking to come to this province.  

Can the Premier today at least give some indication where we 

are with those 700 companies?  Give us a list.  Give this 

Assembly, give the people on welfare, some hope that there 

will be jobs in the future.  Tell us how many of the 700 are 

coming to the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again I thank the 

member for the question.  The Hon. Minister of Economic 

Development and Trade, my colleague the House Leader, will 

at the appropriate time in House Estimates answer the detailed 

questions of the member with respect to this matter. 

 

The members opposite laugh but they know full well of what 

we speak.  And that is that the expressions of interest total the 

number that the minister has indicated.  Not all of these are 

going to come to fruition; maybe a majority of them won't 

come to fruition.  But we fully expect that a number will. 

 

These are going to be deals which are going to be thought out.  

They're going to be done solidly; they're going to be financed 

on a solid basis.  They won't be like GigaText, worked out on 

the back of an envelope.  And moreover the member's question 

is predicated on a wrong and false assumption.  Housing sales 

are up and housing starts are up.  There is a sense of buoyancy 

and optimism in the province of Saskatchewan, certainly in the 

province of Regina now. 



1214 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

Sure we're in some difficult times.  I think people all 

understand that, and we know we have a poverty problem.  But 

I want to tell the member opposite that unlike you and your 

former administration and colleagues -- people like Mr. Grant 

Schmidt who occupied the chair of Social Services -- unlike 

then, when he said that there was no problem, at least we 

understand and recognize that there is a problem and we're 

setting about an economic social policy which is going to 

tackle that problem, and that's a huge benefit and step forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, I hear the same rhetoric 

coming from the Premier as I did at election time last year.  He 

criticized the economic development plans of the former 

government, very well I must say.  But to hear it eight months 

later -- the same litany saying, well just wait, just wait -- 

simply isn't good enough. 

 

This government has indulged in patronage when they said 

they wouldn't.  They are firing hundreds of people in the civil 

service while back-filling with their friends.  Even Crown Life, 

Mr. Premier, and FCC (Farm Credit Corporation) aren't going 

to be enough to offset the losses in the civil service alone. 

 

Mr. Premier, your Minister of Finance has said he will create 

2,000 jobs this year, and yet he will not tell this Assembly 

where those jobs are going to come from.  Maybe today, Mr. 

Premier, you would enlighten the Assembly for the stuff that 

the Minister of Finance won't tell us.  Tell us where those 2,000 

net jobs are going to come from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- You know, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to 

stop thanking the member for these questions because they're 

getting more difficult to understand.  I say to the hon. member 

here, just take a look at the illogic of the question. 

 

He says, for example, look at all the firings of civil servants 

that you have carried out, which means lack of jobs.  And then 

he says in the same breath, of course they're being back-filled 

by people who are your friends. 

 

Now there is either a loss by virtue of dismissals or there isn't a 

loss.  You can't have it both ways.  But nonetheless, as the 

member knows, and it's stated in the budget figures, we're 

targeting for a reduction of about 400 and 450 jobs -- positions, 

not even jobs but positions -- in the civil service. 

 

And by the member's own admission, this was the advertised 

number for Crown Life.  They said up to a 1,000 jobs.  The 

FCC transfer is going to be a couple hundred more other jobs.  

Your mathematics do not count. 

 

You accuse me of making political speeches.  I say to you, sir, 

you and your band over there are about the only group left in 

Saskatchewan yet who hasn't realized that there's a change in 

government with a new direction based on 

common-sense policy and compassion for the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, the 

facts are before us.  This province has a lower population since 

when you were last in power in this province in the 1970s, by 

the way. 

 

You have almost zero inflation; you have low unemployment; 

you have people leaving the province; low interest rates.  You 

should have all of the basic indicators that mean that this 

province should move ahead.  And yet we have poverty rising 

faster than at any time in our history.  I suggest to you, Mr. 

Premier, our poverty levels are going up almost as fast as the 

NDP's (New Democratic Party) numbers are in the polls going 

down. 

 

Mr. Premier, when you reconcile these two facts side by side, 

we should have an economic boom going on in this province.  

Mr. Premier, tell the taxpayers of this province what your plan 

is. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. member again is 

caught up in the inconsistency and the illogic of his argument.  

He says, you know, Mr. Premier, the numbers in terms of 

population are lower today when you're in office than they 

were when you left office.  And I agree with him.  That's 

because of 10 years of the policies of the PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) opposite that they're lower.  That's exactly the 

case. 

 

The basic indicators, he says, where are the basic indicators?  

Well the basic indicators are the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan know that we have some economic challenges 

and hurdles to overcome.  Everybody understands that.  But a 

lot of that is occasioned by the fact that you and your 

colleagues left this province on the verge of bankruptcy, and 

they also know that to be the case. 

 

Now any government inheriting that in just eight months -- in 

just eight months -- has done a tremendous amount, as our 

government has done, in turning around the attitude, which is 

now optimistic, in opening up the books, giving a correct and 

factual set of the records of finances, putting it in a situation 

where the climate is there for investment. 

 

And I say to the hon. member opposite that the argument that 

he advances is false, it's ill-directed, it is . . . I could use other 

words that my colleague has suggested, which I won't use, 

primarily because he knows one thing and one thing only.  

There is a change in government with new direction.  We're not 

going to give money to your large, large corporations.  This 

money goes to the priorities of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That's the new direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Premier, 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1215 

this morning's Leader-Post: "More families use food bank."  

Over a hundred new families using the Regina food bank.  

Every economic indicator in this country says that you should 

be moving ahead, but because you don't have a plan, we have 

more families at the food bank. 

 

It seems, Mr. Premier, that every time an NDP government is 

elected anywhere in Canada, we have more people on the 

poverty rolls -- Ontario, a good example. 

 

Mr. Premier, the way to rectify the problem isn't through 

phoney increases in the minimum wage or more welfare 

payments to people.  The only way to change that around is to 

create economic development, sir. 

 

Will you commit to this Assembly today that you will be 

tabling an economic development plan for this province before 

this session ends?  Will you do that much for the people in the 

food bank, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased again I think 

to answer this question by the hon. member opposite. 

 

I really find it incredible that anybody from the official 

opposition would dare to get up and talk about poverty.  This is 

an absolute outrage.  It is an outrage. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- The unmitigated gall of any member 

of the Conservative official opposition getting up and talking 

about poverty when it more than doubled in the 10 years that 

they were in office, when we became the province, shamefully, 

which had the highest rate of child poverty of any province in 

Canada, is an outrage.  And that you should get up in this 

House to say this is absolutely incredible, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the people of the province of Saskatchewan know that. 

 

And not only did it double, Mr. Speaker, but while it doubled 

they actually paid no attention to the people of this province.  

They kept the social service rates down.  They kept the child 

feeding programs down.  We even, under desperate financial 

circumstances, have changed all of that to give assistance to 

those in need in the province of Saskatchewan when they did 

not do so, much to their shame.  Mr. Speaker, I say it is 

absolutely incredible. 

 

With respect to jobs, the question the member asked 

specifically, I can answer specifically.  He said, is it our 

intention to table an economic development plan before this 

legislature adjourns or prorogues.  The answer is yes. 

 

And I can tell the members opposite, it will not be an economic 

development plan which sees billions of dollars going to the 

large, multinational corporations and the friends opposite, it 

will go to the people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I have the gall to stand here 

today and ask these questions of the Premier because all I've 

got to go on is the true record of this government -- a record 

that says it is closing hospitals, nursing homes, libraries, and 

schools; a record that says it is taking more money out of 

Saskatchewan's taxpayers' pockets than ever before in our 

history.  It's a record that says they will hit the poor hardest by 

jacking up power rates and gas rates and phone rates. 

 

It'll nail the elderly and take away their heritage grant, their 

pensions, and their nursing home funding.  That's why I have 

the gall, Mr. Premier, because that's what is before the people 

of this province. 

 

If this is the plan, Mr. Premier, that you're going to table in this 

legislature, maybe we should put it to some third-party 

evaluation.  Maybe some people that do have some common 

economic sense should have a say in what your government's 

doing to determine the real impact on jobs, poverty, and the 

population level on our province. 

 

Mr. Premier, maybe you should bring in some . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  Order, order.  I would like to the member to ask his 

question. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Premier, the fact that we have seen 

nothing in this legislature to give us any hope on the economic 

development front, would you consider bringing in some 

third-party assessment of your government's record? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the last time we brought 

in a third-party assessment of the government's record it was 

the Donald Gass Commission, and they didn't like that 

third-party assessment.  And I think that if we brought in 

another third-party assessment about what we have been faced 

with, they wouldn't like it either. 

 

The member prefaces his question by saying, here we have a 

government with the highest taxes and all these cut-backs and 

the like.  And the member from Rosthern applauds. 

 

Well I tell you, Mr. Speaker, anything that the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan are now pulling together to 

overcome is due to 10 years of GigaTexts and waste and 

mismanagement and profligation of the kind that you would 

never see, and programs which simply had absolutely no merit 

at all.  That was the last third-party assessment of government, 

Mr. Member from Thunder Creek. 

 

We are going to be third-party assessed.  We will be third-party 

assessed, Mr. Speaker, when the next general provincial 

election is called.  We will put our record of fiscal 

responsibility and our support for local business against yours 

of waste and mismanagement and billions 



1216 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

of dollars to your big-business friends.  That's the third-party 

assessment we are looking forward to. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just to set the 

record straight, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Finance's 

own economic assessment of the province of Saskatchewan: 

Saskatchewan's manufacturing sector is small but the 

construction of a second heavy oil upgrader, a fertilizer plant, 

and a pulp mill will help support economic growth in 1991 . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- . . . as well as other opportunities for more 

growth in the future.  All projects of the former government. 

 

Mr. Premier, the reason we ask for third-party assessment is 

what your two ministers involved with rural development have 

done to the province of Saskatchewan.  Maybe we should have 

third-party assessment on the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) program.  Your home city of Saskatoon alone could 

lose thousands of jobs because of that policy. 

 

We're increasing welfare.  We're driving people from the 

province, particularly if the red meat industry goes under.  And 

yet you say to the folks, trust us. 

 

Well, Mr. Premier, they don't trust you any more.  There are 

19,000 people in your home city on the welfare rolls.  Maybe 

it's time we had an independent assessment of the FeedGAP 

and some of the other agricultural programs.  Would you do 

that before you wreck it all, Mr. Premier? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, the hon. members 

opposite there are in this mode of -- how shall I describe it? -- 

trying to overlook the 10-year legacy which they have 

strait-jacketed the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

around. 

 

I understand that they have no other choice to do that.  Because 

if one had a record as bad as their record, I think I'd be trying to 

chase any other kind of an object possible rather than defend 

what their record is. 

 

I say to the people opposite in this legislature as I say to the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan, the game plan requires 

what we're doing.  Get the financial situation of the province of 

Saskatchewan under control, first and foremost.  Secondly, 

look to small-business people and the business community in 

this province and give them assistance.  That's the second 

objective. 

 

Third, we get back to the rural communities and the farming 

community to the best capacity that we can, to the best capacity 

that we can.  In face of the fact that they have bankrupted . . . 

those, the people opposite bankrupted the ability of this 

province, this provincial government, to assist people in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And fourthly, to look to Ottawa to do its job 

and stop off-loading on agriculture and other matters, face up 

its 

job. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Premier, 

you don't have to listen to the official opposition.  And I 

suppose you don't even have to listen to some good, third-party 

assessment of your government's track record.  But it's really 

something when you see in the headlines of the newspaper that 

not-so-loyal NDPers need not attend. 

 

Mr. Premier, your good NDP friends here in the city of Regina 

have to send out special invitations so that the not-so-loyal 

NDPers don't show up to a meeting to criticize your 

government.  If you're scared of your own caucus, Mr. Premier, 

and you're scared of your own membership on these questions, 

don't you think it's time to do some second thinking?  Think 

about the consequences of the decisions you've made so that at 

least, Mr. Premier, so at least you can have some of the people 

in your own party attend your meetings if they have some 

discrepancies with the things that your government is doing.  

Would you do that, Mr. Premier? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I assume . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Well that's fine.  We can cut off question period and give about 

five minutes so that we can have some play in the House.  But I 

thought we were in question period.  It was very difficult to 

hear the member ask his question.  It was very difficult to hear 

the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

thought I was here to answer about the activities of the 

administration of the government, but the members want to talk 

about the administration of the NDP.  I don't know what he's 

talking about over there, but I can simply say to the hon. 

member opposite we have no concern about loyalty of New 

Democratic Party members at all. 

 

And I want to tell you one thing.  If there's any again caucus 

which has no credibility on this issue, it should be the members 

opposite who will remember about one year ago to the date 

when they didn't send out a notice but should have that the 

House leader for the PC government was so disloyal he got up.  

He couldn't take it any more.  He quit the bankruptcy and the 

corruption and the incompetence of the government.  We don't 

have that. 

 

You worry about your loyalty of your friends. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Premier, you've done everything 

under the sun in this Assembly to keep your back-benchers 

happy.  You've got commissions running around on everything 

from the store hours to the colour of the sky.  But I tell you 

what, Mr. Premier, it's the bankrupt policies of your front 

bench and the Premier himself in this province that have got 

you and your government to the state that we are in today. 

 

There is a veil of darkness dropping over this province, 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1217 

Mr. Premier, because of your inability, your inability to get 

anything going in the province of Saskatchewan in the last 18 

months.  You refuse to take any responsibility.  We simply hear 

political rhetoric. 

 

Mr. Premier, a simple question.  My final question to you.  Can 

you tell this Assembly today one significant announcement that 

will give the tens of thousands of people on the welfare rolls of 

this province some hope that there's a reason for them to hang 

on, hang on until you come to your senses in this province -- 

one announcement, Mr. Premier.  That'll do today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, again the incredibility of 

the opposition is manifest in this question.  Those of the 

members who have watched the proceedings in this House, and 

my colleagues in this legislature, will know that one of the 

recurring themes of the opposition is, you don't consult, you 

don't consult.  You did this without consultation, you did that 

without consultation.  And yet what is the member from 

Thunder Creek do today?  He gets up and says, all you do is 

you consult too much.  You got task forces on the colour of the 

sky.  You've got task forces on the colour of somebody.  You 

got task forces there, you got that . . . What is it? 

 

Now look, people of the opposition, make up your mind.  What 

is your plan?  What is your plan as an opposition?  Are we 

consulting too much or are we consulting not enough?  And the 

former premier picks up two newspaper clippings.  He's got 

two different kinds of plans -- sometimes consult, sometimes 

don't consult. 

 

Gentlemen, get in the real world.  The election is over.  You 

lost and there's a brand-new era of growth and hope and 

prosperity and compassion.  Get on a baseball glove and join 

the game instead of sitting on the sidelines being doom and 

gloom.  Join on the winning side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

New Cobalt Radiation Treatment Unit 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to inform this 

Assembly of one of the steps being taken to address the health 

needs of the people of Saskatchewan.  I'm pleased to announce 

that this afternoon the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation will 

officially unveil a new cobalt radiation treatment unit at the 

Allan Blair Memorial Clinic in Regina.  The $1 million unit 

began treating cancer patients a month ago.  And I am pleased 

to say that the addition of the new unit has led to a great 

reduction in the time cancer patients must wait to gain access to 

this vital treatment. 

 

The addition of this unit brings to three the number of cobalt 

treatment units at the clinic, and has led to a reduction in 

waiting times from six to eight weeks a year ago, to two and a 

half weeks now.  It has also allowed for more effective 

treatment schedules.  The clinic currently provides cobalt 

therapy to 10 patients a day.  That number is expected to 

increase to 20 patients a day by the end of 

this month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the demand for radiation therapy is increasing 

steadily.  The incidence of cancer in our society is rising at a 

rate of about 2.5 per cent a year.  And researchers are finding 

that there are increasing types of cancer which can be 

successfully treated with radiation therapy. 

 

I am pleased that my department has been able to work with 

the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation and the Allan Blair 

Memorial Clinic to provide this life-saving equipment to the 

people of southern Saskatchewan.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

want to commend the minister on her statement and the steps 

taken.  I think when it comes to cancer, I don't believe that 

there is a family in Saskatchewan that is not in one way or 

another being affected by the most dreaded killer of mankind 

over the years. 

 

And I know whereof I speak.  I know I lost my dad about three 

years ago to cancer, and my brother last year to cancer as well.  

And when we hear of the increased rate, I believe that Madam 

Minister read two and a half per cent per year.  Researchers are 

telling us that cancer is on the rise. 

 

And when we think of the skin cancer threat that is upon us 

right now, I think anything that we do, not only in a treatment 

sense but also in the preventative sense, by making awareness 

part of the process as well as the reactive kind of situation that 

treatment is, then I think we would make large headways in the 

threat that cancer has on the lives of Saskatchewan people and 

indeed the people of the world. 

 

There's one question that I would have for the Madam Minister.  

And that is, as far as the treatment in the Pasqua Hospital for 

the special children's ward in the Pasqua Hospital, for the 

children there that are receiving chemotherapy in treatment of 

cancer, I have been asked to ask the minister if she would make 

a commitment that that ward will stay in Pasqua Hospital, and 

that the children that are receiving treatment there will continue 

to receive that treatment in this hospital. 

 

So all in all, Madam Minister, I think that the announcement 

that you have made today is something that the opposition 

takes a certain amount of . . . I don't know if pleasure would be 

the right word, but thankfulness, I suppose, for a lack of a 

better word, that you are taking these steps.  But I would ask 

you to make that commitment to the children's ward in Pasqua 

Hospital in Regina.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Industrial Development 

Act 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 

of a Bill to amend The Industrial Development Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I convert to motions 

for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for return (debatable). 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial 

Stability Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of my remarks I'll move the second reading 

of The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act, 1992, (No. 

1). 

 

Mr. Speaker, part six of The Farm Financial Stability Act, the 

provincial government provides guarantees to lenders who 

make loans to associations for the purchase of feeder cattle or 

female breeding cattle on behalf of association members. 

 

The loan guarantees have been an effective way for 

government to encourage growth in the cattle sector.  The 

benefits of this program, called the feeder breeder loan 

guarantee program, is to assist Saskatchewan farmers in the 

development of the cattle industry.  The program has served 

Saskatchewan farmers very well and has been well received by 

them, and the program is helping to build the livestock industry 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

The program allows for groups of six or more individuals, not 

corporations, to form an association either as co-operatives or 

as a corporation.  The association is formed for the purpose of 

borrowing money on behalf of its members in order to 

purchase feeder cattle or breeder cattle. 

 

(1415) 

 

Members must provide minimum deposits -- 5 per cent for 

feeders, 10 per cent for breeders -- and these deposits are 

collected in an assurance fund.  The assurance fund is the 

association's common risk money and it adds greater security to 

the loan.  The association can draw on the assurance fund in the 

event of a member or members are unable to pay back loans 

made on their behalf.  The assurance funds must be used first 

before government guarantees can be called on.  The advantage 

to farmers who join the association is that they can usually 

obtain more favourable interest rates because of the 

government guarantee and the assurance fund. 

 

Briefly, the programs benefits are: number one, access to 

money that might not otherwise be available to individuals; 

two, more favourable interest rates; and three, low deposits to 

the assurance fund. 

 

As of June 10, 1992 there is a total of 103 feeder and breeder 

associations in Saskatchewan.  Of these, 25 are feeder 

associations only, 4 are breeder associations only, and 74 are 

breeder and feeder associations. 

 

The government loan guarantees on feeder cattle total 22.9 

million, and the guarantees on breeder cattle total 9.5 million, 

for a total of 32.4 million in government loan guarantees.  This 

is a substantial amount of money; it is imperative that it is 

protected. 

 

However the Act requires some changes in order to ensure that 

the farmers' assurance fund and the government guarantees are 

more fully protected.  The amendments to the Act will help to 

ensure that the risk to the government guarantee is minimized 

by being able to deal more effectively with potential problem 

areas.  Increased accountability will be placed on association 

members and livestock dealers to ensure soundness of 

transactions and loan repayment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments to the Act are necessary to 

protect the feeder/breeder associations from purchase 

arrangements that might otherwise result in a claim on the 

assurance fund or the guarantee.  The amendments will clarify 

the current legislation which explains when a guarantee can be 

withheld.  Authority to deny future guarantees is needed to 

protect the investments by program participants and the 

Government of Saskatchewan guarantee. 

 

The amendments also ensure that proper procedures are used 

by licensed livestock dealers, and they ensure that custom 

feedlot facilities can be assessed by the local provincial 

supervisor.  The balance of the amendments will clarify 

existing requirements. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments to The Farm Financial 

Stability Act will allow for the continuation of a program that 

has proven of benefit to our livestock industry.  At the same 

time these amendments will prevent abuses of the program, 

will protect members of the association, and will limit risk to 

the government. 

 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to bring forward 

the amendments to The Farm Financial Stability Act, and I ask 

all members of this House to support it. 

 

Therefore I move The Farm Financial Stability Act, 1992, (No. 

1), be read a second time.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I took the liberty, 

Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, to send the Act to feeder 

associations across the province, and I've been getting some 

response and some concerns that have been raised.  And I will 

raise them for you to consider at this point, and then I will 

move to adjourn the debate. 
 

The one very large, single concern that has been raised by 

individuals is the frequency that animals will have to be 

branded before they're allowed to be taken by the individual to 

their own pastures or to the feedlots.  And 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

that has raised a great deal of concern on their part -- if the 

individuals have to brand them before they can move them out 

of the premises that they have purchased them at the livestock 

dealers.  And I know the concern that has been raised. 

 

But I want to raise this concern, that the more . . . I am a 

livestock owner and raiser and I have had considerable 

experience in this area, and I know that the more we do this 

sort of thing, the more frequently we brand our livestock, the 

more people will begin to say, that's not the way to do it.  And I 

believe we need to take some precautions about how often 

we're going to stamp our possessive ownership on each one of 

these animals.  And I've raised this with a number of packing 

plants and I know that they're concerned about it too.  They 

lose a value in a hide of about $2 for every brand that's located 

on them. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, having been in the cattle 

business all my life, I have purchased cattle with a half a dozen 

brands on them and that is not necessarily the right thing to do.  

I know that they need to have an identification, and perhaps 

that needs to be addressed.  The associations are coming 

forward saying that the process is not being jeopardized, 

although the department and the government may think they 

are. 

 

The second point that they've raised with me, and I want to 

point that out to you, is that the method that you're using to 

reduce the risk on government guarantees, and that is that the 

risk is going to be spread over the individuals who have the 

loan . . . the assurance fund in the . . . against the cattle that 

they have a loan against.  And that is being raised by a number 

of them because the understanding that they have of it is that 

their whole assurance fund will have to stay in the feeder 

association in order that they become a credible risk to the 

government. 

 

And I just want to say that if you have 103 of them, one of the 

reasons why you have is . . . the program was initiated to get a 

rate at the lenders that was reasonable and could effectively 

increase the livestock industry in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That was the first reason. 

 

The second reason was that the government give a guarantee so 

that the individuals could have a more fluid cash flow within 

their jurisdictions where the paperwork by the creditors and by 

the individual would not have to be so lengthy.  And that was 

another.  It sped up the process. 

 

The third reason why this was done, and to ensure that the 

government would be at reduced risk, was to require that the 

assurance fund which you mentioned was at 5 per cent for the 

feeders and 10 per cent for the breeders, was a significant 

amount to offset the risk that was involved. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, the people have said to me that that is 

sufficient to cover the risk that the government takes in relation 

to the guarantee.  Because the government is only guaranteeing 

25 per cent, if you really take a serious look at it.  They're only 

guaranteeing the 25 per cent of that feeder association or the 

breeder association loan.  And so they have at their disposal 

risk capital involved at 5 per 

cent of the total mortgage, and that is significant too. 

 

I want to point out that there is another point that has been 

raised with me, and I believe this to be accurate.  One of the 

things that is required on the breeders' associations -- and we 

had meetings in Swift Current where the majority of these 

associations are located, and we had meetings with your 

directors of program for the association and they understand 

this -- and that is that calves on the breeder association side are 

asked to be branded when they're less than two weeks old.  And 

this raises a very, very serious concern whether in fact the 

guarantee is on the cows or whether the guarantee is on their 

calves.  And that, Mr. Minister, I think is an assumption that 

should be reconsidered and allowed to have a view from the 

feeder associations and the breeder associations brought 

forward. 

 

They also contend that some other identification should be 

required and could be required on these animals other than a 

brand.  And I will just use my own for an example.  If we were 

to put the feeder association brand on these two-week-old 

calves, there would be five brands on that calf before he was a 

month old.  And that, Mr. Minister, is I think not acceptable.  

And I believe that that should be changed and adjusted so that 

it would be less onerous on the livestock.  And I don't believe 

it's any less stressful on a cow than it is on a calf. 

 

So I just raise that as things that we're going to be bringing 

forward for discussion in Committee of the Whole.  I have 

other things that I'm going to plan on saying later on, so I'm 

just going to move to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, members 

of the Legislative Assembly, Bill 59 is an Act amending The 

Agri-Food Act.  The Agri-Food Act was passed in the summer 

of 1990.  The Act deals with the development and marketing of 

agricultural and food products in Saskatchewan by agencies 

such as development commissions, development boards, and 

marketing boards. 

 

Legal opinion informs us that the Act's language is not clear 

and precise on the point that producer agencies established 

under the Act can own shares in companies which are set up to 

accomplish purposes related to the development and/or 

marketing of the agency's product. 

 

Therefore we propose to amend the Act to ensure that the intent 

is clearly and precisely stated and that these agri-food agencies 

are provided with the power to hold shares in companies.  The 

ability to own shares in companies which can develop and 

market the products generated by Saskatchewan agricultural 

industry is an effective business tool.  All of our Saskatchewan 

agricultural agencies should have the opportunity to have 

access to this business tool. 

 

The amendment will enable the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to grant development and marketing agencies the 

power to hold shares through regulations.  The 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

legislation is enabling only.  The Lieutenant Governor in 

Council may also place terms and conditions upon the exercise 

of this power by any agency through regulations. 

 

We also propose to lower the voting threshold both for 

establishing and amending marketing and development plans to 

not less than 60 per cent of producers who vote rather than a 

majority of all eligible producers.  In conjunction with this 

change, the Lieutenant Governor in Council would have the 

power to fix minimum numbers of votes required to establish 

boards and amend their plans. 

 

We also propose to amend the Act to ensure that members of 

development and marketing agencies who are elected by 

producers have their rates of remuneration and their 

reimbursement set by producers rather than by Lieutenant 

Governor in Council. 

 

As well, we propose that the elected development commissions 

be allowed to appoint their own auditors at annual general 

meetings rather than one appointed by them . . . for them by the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and members of the Legislative Assembly, I 

encourage you adopt these amendments to The Agri-Food Act.  

Therefore I move that Bill 59, An Act to amend The Agri-Food 

Act, be read a second time.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, I want to 

commend the government for bringing forward the portion of 

that Bill that deals with share ownership and its relationship to 

agencies like the Saskatchewan Hog Marketing board which 

have a considerable problem in dealing with Moose Jaw 

Packers in relation to this.  And I want to commend them for 

bringing it forward. 

 

We, at the conclusion of our term of office, had this in mind, 

that we were going to that.  And we had brought it forward 

with discussions from the hog marketing board who were 

having this problem and other agencies who need to have an 

opportunity to deal with this.  We're going to be asking some 

questions in committee on the 60 per cent that you have in 

quite a few places in your Bill and we want to know how they 

interface with what's there today.  And we will be asking those 

questions in committee. 

 

Just to take a little bit more serious look at the things that have 

been said by the minister, Mr. Speaker, we will do that 

probably next day.  And therefore today I move adjournment of 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 61 -- An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies 

Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

move second reading of The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 1992.  These changes are proposed to 

streamline the operations of the Office of the Rentalsman.  The 

procedure for resolving security deposit disputes will 

be amended so that the Rentalsman will be served with 

documents and become involved only after it is determined that 

there is a dispute between the landlord and tenant. 

 

The current legislation contemplates the Rentalsman be 

involved in every case.  The requirement for the Rentalsman to 

investigate every complaint will also be removed.  Instead, a 

procedure more like that used in small-claims court will be 

adopted to ensure that a hearing is held in every case.  This 

change is being made on the recommendation of the 

Ombudsman.  It is his view that this will make the procedure 

fairer. 

 

(1430) 

 

Under the new process the person making a complaint will be 

issued a notice of hearing to serve on either party, and each 

party will be responsible for bringing his or her evidence 

before the Rentalsman.  However, the Rentalsman will retain 

the authority to investigate complaints or convene hearings if 

such action is considered necessary or advisable. 

 

To ensure that the Act is constitutionally valid, landlords and 

tenants will be given the alternative of having their residential 

tenancy disputes resolved in the Court of Queen's Bench. 

 

The Rent Appeal Commission will also be eliminated.  Appeals 

from the orders of the Rentalsman will go to the Court of 

Queen's Bench.  All rent review and rent control provisions 

will also be repealed.  These amendments are being made to 

reduce the costs of the Rentalsman program while at the same 

time maintaining a high level of protection for renters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Residential Tenancies Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise 

today just to raise a couple of points, and certainly commend 

the government for bringing forward the legislation as rental 

disputes have been something that have come across my desk 

on a number of occasions.  And I . . . if I understand the 

minister rightly, the minister has indicated that certainly the 

idea is to try and simplify the process and hopefully lower the 

costs.  And I don't know, when you get into disputes between 

two parties, certainly it takes a fair bit of time and effort on the 

part of any individual -- and in this case, the Rentalsman -- to 

come to an agreement or to try and ascertain which party is at 

fault and how to deal with the disputes that have arisen. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we would like to take, and will be taking, a 

further look at the Bill just to decide how we should be 

questioning . . . the line of questioning.  And so at this time I 

would adjourn the debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

Bill No. 52 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. MacKinnon that Bill No. 52 -- An Act 

to amend The Senior Citizens' Heritage Program Act be now 

read a second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  There are a couple 

of areas of concern in this particular Act.  Just the other day I 

was talking to an older gentleman from my constituency who 

expressed his concerns, and I think probably that keyed me to 

the fact that we should take a second look at this program. 

 

His major concern, of course, was the fact that it's being 

reduced to begin with, from the 30,000 down to $22,000 

income.  He feels that that was very unfair and he asked me if I 

would bring that to the attention of the government.  So I'm 

taking this opportunity to express that opinion for him. 

 

He feels that that is an unfair reduction to people who have 

come to expect this particular amount of money to come into 

their incomes each year.  And he feels that the government is 

placing too low a level on incomes to be in reality with our 

present day circumstances of the high cost of living and the 

high cost of maintaining homes for older people who don't 

have very high incomes. 

 

The second thing that he expressed his concern about was the 

reduction of the $500.  I think it was from $700 before.  And he 

felt that while $200 doesn't seem like a whole bunch of money 

to people who are in politics or some other profession where 

they have a steady job, cheque coming in every two weeks or 

every month, that doesn't seem like very much money . . . but 

to a person who's on a fixed income on retirement, $200 

suddenly becomes a very significant amount of money if you 

happen to be that much short at the end of the month or at the 

end of the year. 

 

And so he feels that here again this is a cut-back that was done 

sort of at the spur of the moment because the government had 

an overwhelming need to balance its budget, and so decided to 

take a clip out of everybody but didn't take into account the fact 

that a lot of folks may now have to resort to going to other 

forms of the welfare system or the social services resources 

that are available to people in our province. 

 

And so he wanted me to express that concern, and I've done 

that here for him and on behalf of the other people who have 

expressed those concerns. 

 

The other major concern, of course, that he has is the sunset 

clause under 5(3).  And of course the sunset clause means 

exactly that.  I guess it says that the seniors' heritage program 

will not be offered after 1992.  And without some sort of 

indication that there would be a replacement program or some 

other kind of an approach to providing people with the monies 

that they're now going to not have in the future, he feels that it 

leaves seniors, especially those that don't have a whole lot of 

money stored up in bank accounts, leaves them in a very 

vulnerable position in terms of worrying for the rest of the 

summer as to whether or not there will be some kind of 

other program for next year. 

 

His words were that if they have any plans at all to assist us 

next year, would they please let us know so that we don't have 

to sit here and pull our hair out and wonder if we're going to 

have anything to substitute for this program after the end of this 

year. 

 

So those are his basic concerns and basic worries, and I think 

they're justly put.  Older folks have a tendency to need security 

in their lives.  They don't have the ability just to bounce out 

into the work-force or out into the labour market and pick up a 

new job or pick up some extra cash doing something else. 

 

They pretty well are in a situation where they live by the rules 

that have been in place for a long time.  They kind of gear their 

lives towards that direction of working with what they have 

from year to year.  And it's awfully hard on them when they 

finally find themselves with programs being cut or things being 

adjusted.  I think they're probably more vulnerable in these 

areas than any other people in our society.  And I think it's 

unfair for our seniors to be treated cruelly, and I hope that this 

isn't a cruelty.  And I hope that it's just a lack of recognition of 

a problem that has been created in the process of trying to 

re-evaluate the programs that are presently in existence. 

 

So having said that, I hope the government will take that into 

account, will take into account the need for security for old 

folks, and let them know that there are some other plans 

available for them. 

 

With that, I'd like to study this a bit more, Mr. Speaker, so I 

would move that we adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 35 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 35 -- An Act 

respecting the Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale of 

Milk be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to raise a 

few points on the Bill before us under the sale of milk, 

production supply, and distribution.  The matter raised with me 

by the dairy producers . . . or the milk producers from across 

the province have raised some concerns that I want to bring 

forward and I think that the government should listen to.  I 

think they're relevant and I think they're important. 

 

One of those items that they indicated, that they did see serious 

erosion of their own independence of the Milk Control Board.  

And the Milk Control Board has functioned as an independent 

agency, arm's length, I would say, from the government for 

something like 50 years.  And because of that, it has gained its 

own set of expertise within itself to manage itself. 

 

And the milk . . . dairy producers . . . the milk producers of the 

province, which are the people who milk the cows, the dairy 

producers on the other hand, are those that belong to the dairy 

producers co-op -- that's the 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

significant difference between the two -- the milk producers 

have said that they see an erosion of their own independence. 

 

The other thing that was of concern to them is the lack of 

consultation by the minister in dealing with this very, very, I 

guess, emotional feeling that they have towards the Milk 

Control Board.  They feel very slighted in that they were not 

asked about a number of things. 

 

And there are three basic areas that they didn't feel that they 

were asked enough questions about.  The first, and I think one 

of the most important, is that the minister has the authority 

under this Act to appoint temporary members to the board, the 

Milk Control Board, to in effect override any decision that the 

board may make that the minister may not agree with.  In that 

way, I think, it's a very serious problem. 

 

And I want to point out to the government that they should take 

a very serious look at that, that deals with the membership in 

the Milk Control Board.  And I want to point that out, that 

being section 5 -- I know I can't deal specifically, Mr. Speaker, 

with various sections, but that deals with section 5 in this Bill -- 

and it's a problem that the milk producers have pointed out to 

me. 

 

Another area that raises a concern on the part of the milk 

producers of the province is that the assignability of quota is a 

concern that is raised from just the inflexion of that in one 

portion of the Bill.  And that is also a part of this whole Bill 

that causes them a great deal of concern. 

 

The third item that I want to raise, and I raise that from the 

perspective of some of the things that have been happening . . . 

we've seen happen from government side is that the 

government is taking it upon themselves that the minister may 

without warrant enter facilities. 

 

And I want to take that as a serious infringement on personal 

rights of property.  And I want to point that out, that it is, in my 

opinion, a serious problem and it deals with how the 

government and the minister may take a look at various parts of 

the individual's books.  He may take a look at his facilities.   

Without a warrant he can enter.  And I don't think that those 

things are right. 

 

And I think that the government should take a serious look at 

how they have put this into place and how they are dealing 

with it. 

 

I want to point out that these three items, among others, are 

areas that we will be bringing forward in Committee of the 

Whole.  There are a number of other questions that we're going 

to raise.  One of those is that, are the control areas in the 

province going to remain? 

 

We acted in that way prior to the last election and we want to 

ensure on behalf of the people who milk in this province that 

they have that freedom to know that the restricted areas, P.A. 

(Prince Albert) as an example, will have that same opportunity 

to develop their milk industry that they have today.  And I 

wanted to make sure that that happens. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to ask the minister a number of 

other questions.  I think that he'll be forthcoming at that time. I 

want to know whether on the board, whether he has any idea of 

replacing the general manager, who is the chairman of the Milk 

Control Board, with another person who would be appointed to 

that position.  Those are some of the questions I plan on asking. 

 

The reason this is a very sensitive issue is because the 

producers have evolved what they have today over 50 years.  

They have evolved a production industry based on managing 

the supply within themselves.  And they've done it according to 

what they believe to be the right thing to do.  They've managed 

to keep their production something close to their consumption.  

And that's an important part. 

 

They're sensitive because they've had a decline in their quotas 

because of the national concerns raised by Quebec for example, 

because they've had a major, lion's share of the production.  

And also, Mr. Speaker, they have had a significant export 

opportunity which the people of Saskatchewan have not had. 

 

The other item that is very sensitive is that, as it relates to our 

volume of production in fluid milk and in the skim milk 

industrial milk process, that portion, those two items in the 

fluid milk, the province has stayed very close to its production, 

to its population base as a balance.  But in the industrial side it 

has not been able to get enough quota back from concerns in 

Ontario and Quebec.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, it's a very 

sensitive issue and we're going to raise that as we deal with it in 

questions. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I will allow the Bill to proceed and we 

will be asking those questions in committee and deal with it at 

that time.  But I want the minister to prepare himself for 

discussion in those areas so that we can have time to fairly deal 

with the kinds of things that are very sensitive and very 

concerning to the milk producers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker: -- Before we turn to the next item, I wonder if 

the members, by leave, would allow the Speaker to introduce a 

guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I notice a friend of mine and a long-time 

colleague has entered the Chamber, sitting in the Speaker's 

gallery.  Karl Baumgardner is in the Speaker's gallery.  Karl is 

a long-time educator in this province.  I had the pleasure of 

having Karl as my boss at E.D. Feehan High School for four 

years, from '82 to '86 when I was put on leave by the people of 

Saskatchewan from this Assembly. 

 

I want to welcome Karl here this afternoon.  I ask all members 

to join with me in giving a warm welcome to Karl 

Baumgardner. 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 49 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 49 -- An Act 

to amend The Mortgage Protection Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the Bill 

we have before us would discontinue totally The Mortgage 

Protection Act.  I think we just need to take a moment to 

remind people across this province of the reasons for the 

introduction of the Act a number of years ago in the early '80s. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at that time we're all very familiar with the high 

interest rates that people were facing.  And certainly it wasn't 

just affecting the agricultural sector in our province, but it was 

affecting consumers across this province, and in many cases 

young consumers who had just moved to purchase new homes 

in the late '70s when interest rates were somewhat reasonable 

and then found themselves on short-term mortgage programs, 

and then when their mortgages came due, only to find their 

interest rates rising from the nine and three quarter, and the 

twelve and three quarter to the 17, 18, and 21 per cent which 

we all recognize, Mr. Speaker, created a hardship and in many 

cases would have seen the fact of many of these home owners 

and consumers losing their homes because they just weren't in 

a financial position to pick up the burden that was being placed 

on their back by the increase in mortgage payments. 

 

Therefore The Mortgage Protection Act was brought in at that 

time which put a ceiling of twelve and three quarter per cent 

interest on home mortgages.  And then back in 1986 it was 

dropped to nine and three quarter per cent interest as interest 

rates fell, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then again it was increased, I believe, back in 1989.  It 

went back up to the twelve and three quarter rates because at 

that time interest rates had come to the point where the fee . . . 

It was a strong feeling within government that we needed to at 

least consult with consumers and encourage consumers to 

maybe take additional looks at reopening their mortgages, 

going to financers or to lenders, and maybe tying in long-term, 

low-interest loans. 

 

Now I can see the government at this time bringing in an Act to 

totally eliminate the program.  But one begins to wonder. Yes, 

we are facing very low interest rates at this time.  However, 

Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that the very low interest 

rates we're facing are very short term.  When a person goes to 

apply for a loan, you may get a yearly term but it's very 

difficult to get a long term. 

 

And it would have been my feeling, Mr. Speaker, that maybe it 

would have been appropriate . . . or I think it would have been 

appropriate for the government to set a 

ceiling on what the protection would be.  And if the interest 

rates fell below that, then the consumer would be picking up 

that . . . they would be paying for it. 

 

And what it would have done really was then suggested to the 

consumer -- and maybe through consultation they should have 

taken the route of talking to consumers and seeking their 

guidance and suggesting they look at re-amortizing their loans 

through the private mortgage system, or going to many of the 

local banks and renegotiating their loans and getting them in . . 

. I believe today you can get mortgage loans in that 

neighbourhood of 8 to 9 per cent interest. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we really don't have a lot of major problems with 

the Bill that's before the House.  But as I indicated, the feeling 

is, we just wonder how long we will see interest rates at this 

low level that we see today.  And one only knows, we may 

only be 24 months or 36 months away from higher interest 

rates again which would then put an added burden on home 

owners and may even put the government in a position where 

they may have to take a second look.  And maybe it would 

have been more appropriate, rather than bringing in another 

Bill down the road, to set a ceiling, set a cap, and having it in 

place where it would have automatically picked up. 

 

But at this time, Mr. Speaker, we don't have any other 

comments on second reading and therefore, we will let it go to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 50 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that Bill No. 50 -- An Act 

to amend The Financial Administration Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I don't 

have a lot of comments to make on this particular Act today.  I 

have taken the liberty of sending across to the Associate 

Minister of Finance, some proposals that the opposition would 

like to see in the way of amending provisions of this Act. 

 

They deal with the public accountability side of it whereby we 

are proposing that not only the members of Public Accounts be 

limited in receiving this particular information that the 

government would table, but that in fact any member of the 

Legislative Assembly would receive that information upon its 

tabling with the House. 

 

And we think it's the type of amendment that works with the 

government in promoting accountability of the Legislative 

Assembly, that it puts the onus on individual members in this 

House to avail themselves of information as it comes forward. 

 

Certainly some of the things that the Act talks about, where 

you would have changes in the operating grant to Crown 

corporations and how it would affect that Crown corporation if 

they were in a net loss position or in net gain position and what 

would happen to those monies, 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

are important items to the legislature. 

 

And we would just, at this time, allow the Bill to proceed into 

committee so that the minister has the opportunity to review 

our proposed amendments to the legislation and we can discuss 

it at that time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 32 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 32 -- An Act to 

amend The Public Trustee Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, at this time we don't have a lot of 

further comments regarding the present Act.  We do realize it 

does give increased ability of the Public Trustee to act on 

behalf of persons under their responsibility, such as children or 

people who are incarcerated or say a mentally dependent or 

handicapped adult.  And just by looking through the Bill, we 

don't have major problems with it; therefore we will allow it to 

proceed to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 42 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 42 -- An Act 

to amend The Consumer Products Warranties Act be now read 

a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, we don't have any comments to 

make on this Bill at this time, but certainly during the 

committee stage we have some questions that we will be 

directing to the minister.  And at this time we're going to let the 

Bill move on to committee stage. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 45 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 45 -- An Act 

to amend The Business Corporations Act be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Once again the 

tenets of this Bill are such that I don't think any further 

comments needs to be made in second reading on it.  The 

questions that we have will be done in better in Committee of 

the Whole.  And we at this time would like the Bill moved 

forward. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 

proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 47 

-- An Act to repeal The Health Research Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bill 47, we have 

some grave concerns about this Bill.  In itself it appears to be 

somewhat a simple Bill because all it does is it repeals The 

Health Research Repeal Act.  Now by having a repeal Act like 

this, what you're doing is essentially destroying the board that 

has been set up for research.  And that board was set up prior to 

this through legislation.  And you cannot adjust or manoeuvre, 

or perhaps manipulate would be a better term, a board and the 

conditions on which it has been set up if every time you want 

to do that you have to go through the process of making 

amendment to an Act.  It's rather a complicated process in this 

legislature. 

 

Now what we see here is The Health Research Act being 

shelved.  It's being repealed.  It will no longer exist.  And all of 

its obligations, rights, assets, and liabilities are going to be 

transferred over and become the rights and obligations of the 

health services utilization and research commission.  And that's 

quite a mouthful, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But basically what it means is that this board is no longer going 

to exist, and a commission is going to be set up rather. And 

obviously this commission is now going to be set up by an OC, 

an order in council.  It is going to be cabinet that's going to not 

only appoint the members on this newly formed commission 

but it's also going to have the right, willy-nilly, almost on a 

daily basis to make adjustments and to change the parameters 

under which this committee is going to work.  In other words 

it's going to become a creature of cabinet, a creature of order in 

councils. 

 

And that is a strenuous objection that we have to this heavy 

handed manner in which this government is going to be acting.  

So we have some severe concerns about this procedure, Mr. 

Speaker, and in committee we are going to be addressing those 

concerns. 

 

But at this point, Mr. Speaker, we won't be asking for a further 

adjournment, but rather let this Bill now go before the 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1500) 

Bill No. 27 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 27 -- An Act 

to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well this is quite a 

lengthy Bill.  And it has been gone over I think rather 

thoroughly by the minister in charge in the last administration. 

 

The Hon. Neal Hardy, who is no longer here, had gone to some 

length to consult with the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities and with various reeves and interested people 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

throughout the municipal structure in our province.  It was one 

thing that you could always give him credit for was that if he 

was going to do the job he would take as much time as he 

needed to consult with everyone before he made a final 

decision on how things should go.  He did an excellent job of 

that. 

 

He was well respected throughout the entire country.  The rural 

area people would see him coming and folks would just stop 

whatever they were doing and say, hi Neal, how are you doing?  

Everybody knew him.  Everybody knew that he was a fair man, 

that he was above reproach in every way, and that if they had 

any kind of a just cause, he would stop, take the time to 

consider it, and would react appropriately.  He knew that rural 

people were not frivolous or foolish and he reflected that in the 

way that he dealt with the public. 

 

I guess the members opposite don't agree with that position but 

it happens to have been the truth.  And because he is not here to 

defend himself, I will do it for him.  He was probably one of 

the best ministers that this province has ever had and especially 

in the area of rural development. 

 

We who served as reeves and councillors during his period of 

administration were always happy to see him there.  And we 

always encouraged the government to keep him in that position 

because he did truly reflect an honest opinion to us of being 

genuinely concerned with our problems and genuinely willing 

to try to help with everything he could. 

 

In fact I recall him making a statement at one point that he 

would take his entire treasury to the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities) and let them tell him how 

he should spend it for the betterment of rural Saskatchewan and 

the department that he served.  And he in fact did that in his 

own way.  He laid it right on the table.  And people in the 

SARM assisted him to decide where the money should best be 

spent to serve rural Saskatchewan. 

 

As a reeve, I was phoned personally and asked my opinion.  

And I placed a very high regard on that kind of a personal 

approach to administrating the funds in the province. 

 

At that time we were short of gravel on many of our roads.  We 

in our municipality are fortunate, Mr. Speaker, in that we have 

a lot of gravel available.  A lot of municipalities don't have 

that.  But at the time we were having trouble with cash flow, as 

many of you may recall, and I guess that's not a new problem 

for anybody.  But in municipalities we sometimes find 

ourselves without the dollars to get things done. 

 

So we found that we couldn't get the gravel from the pits onto 

the roads because of cash flow problems.  We didn't want to 

increase taxes for that purpose at that time.  And Mr. Hardy 

decided to come up with the rural gravelling program. 

 

And that gravel program assisted in a way that allowed many 

thousands of miles of roads that were previously just dust and 

dirt and mud, to become gravelled, 

all-weather roads serving school buses and farmers and 

business people in all of the other industries throughout our 

province. 

 

Now when we take a look at this particular Act here today, we 

see that an awful lot of changes are being made.  But in reality, 

as we studied it through, we found that fortunately an awful lot 

of the work that Mr. Hardy and his department had done last 

year and about half of the year before that. 

 

In reassessing the Act -- which I have a copy of here in my 

hand; it's rather a big thing -- but in reassessing that Act, they 

went through it pretty well page by page, line by line, with the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

representatives. And most of those recommendations for 

change that I guess we would best term as a housekeeping 

approach, were taken care of at that time but they were never 

legislated. And we find that they are now showing up in this 

particular Bill.  And we're happy for that part of it. 

 

Unfortunately, there are a couple of things in here that reflect 

the nature of this government.  And I hate to offend the 

members opposite so early in the afternoon, but the reality is 

that they have a tendency to do the sneakiest, devious kind of 

things occasionally.  And it reflects their whole approach to 

government so far in the last seven or eight months. 

 

And I guess that, Mr. Speaker, is why people out in the country 

have started to come to me and say how distressed they are that 

they don't feel they can trust the government of their province.  

Because everything they do seems to be almost above board 

and then something sneaky slipped in underneath. 

 

And in this one we have, for example, a whole Bill of changes 

that reflected probably a year and a half of consultative work 

done by the previous administration, and then at the last minute 

they slip in something like this. 

 

And I'm just going to read this one little clause so the people 

are sure to understand exactly what's coming here.  And when 

we first read this over, we had to go back and reflect on it 

again.  And it's under section 4(1), and it's a section to amend.  

And under (c) of that section it says: 

 

 by adding the following clause after clause (d): 

 

  "(e) may amalgamate municipalities by combining two or 

more municipalities into a single municipality". 

 

In other words, Mr. Speaker, the old Act provided the minister 

with the power to do separations within municipalities and to 

amalgamate part of one municipality to another in the event 

that there was a request by the municipalities for that. 

 

If a municipality, for example, had one division cut off from 

the rest of the municipality by a river or a range of hills or 

some other natural obstacle, it might be in the best interests of 

the folks who lived in that area to have that part of their 

municipality join with another municipality.  And so it made 

eminent sense for the minister to have the 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

ability and the power to grant a request by municipalities to 

transfer a part of those properties from one place to the other. 

 

We have situations where school boards don't follow the same 

boundaries as municipalities, and that same kind of common 

sense approach for the minister to be able to take, say, two or 

three townships out of one municipality and apply the tax base 

to another municipality, thereby giving a family access to a 

school that is closer or a legal right to be on a school bus that 

takes their children to a closer school. 

 

Those kinds of things make eminent sense to have the minister 

have the power to make the necessary adjustments and 

changes. 

 

But this doesn't allow for the kind of changes that were 

provided for before.  This provides a minister with the actual 

power to set up a county system.  By a stroke of the pen, the 

man can sit down and realign the boundaries of the entire 

province into counties.  And there would be no further question 

in this very House in this very Assembly.  Because once this 

Act is passed, the minister will have the power to set up a 

county system because he can amalgamate more than one or 

two or three or five municipalities into one unit, and he can do 

it by his own discretion with a stroke of the pen and set up a 

county system. 

 

For many years the people of Saskatchewan have resisted that 

change.  Now I won't stand here and tell you that county 

systems are bad.  I'm not even sure they are the worst thing in 

the world, but I do know that the people of Saskatchewan have 

resisted them most emphatically.  Through the 1970s, there was 

a great campaign against moving to the county system in our 

province.  And people showed beyond any question of a doubt 

in rural Saskatchewan that they did not want their 

municipalities to be amalgamated, that they did not want to go 

to a county system. 

 

And here we have a Bill that slips in one little clause under the 

table -- probably in the dark of night -- that allows the minister 

to set up a county system without any reference whatsoever to 

accountability to the people that it will affect.  There is no 

provision in here that the minister would go to people and 

request from them their opinion.  There is no provision in here 

that the minister in charge would talk to folks, that they would 

have to request it first, or anything like that.  He might simply 

decide to do it. 

 

And now I'm sure that the minister in charge will sit there and 

say -- as we've heard once before in this Assembly -- I'm not 

that kind of guy, he'll say.  And I'd probably have to agree.  

Maybe he's a nice fellow.  Maybe he would never do that. 

 

But how long would he be the minister in this particular 

cabinet?  He might not be there next year, and the new minister 

with this new power might say, well shucks, we'll just make 

south-west Saskatchewan one municipality.  And we'll fire all 

those administrators that write us all these nasty letters about 

taking away our FeedGAP, about turning our pasture lands into 

wildlife habitat programs -- all these administrators that do the 

kind of work that municipal councils and the ratepayers ask 

them to do. 

 

They are hired because for the most part they are well educated 

people who can type well and who can formulate good quality 

letters.  And this government with a new minister might say, 

well just get rid of them all.  We'll amalgamate them all.  Have 

one municipality, and then we'll only have to get one letter 

from the whole area. 

 

Well, I mean, that's carrying it to an extreme, but it does point 

out to you exactly what this one little clause can do to an entire 

Bill.  It can give dictatorial powers to one minister to 

absolutely abolish the entire municipal system.  He could 

amalgamate every municipality in this province into one and 

have one municipality in the province of Saskatchewan.  

Absolutely ridiculous.  Bill 27, that's what we're looking at.  

Take a look.  Read the lines.  No. 4 on page 2, and it says he 

"may amalgamate municipalities by combining two or more 

municipalities into a single municipality." 

 

In other words, he can take as many municipalities as he wants 

and put them together by arbitrarily declaring it to be so.  He 

can make that decision on his own.  The minister will have that 

power.  It is an awesome thing to ask after so many people 

have gone to so much trouble for the last 30 years to declare 

their resistance to the county system in Saskatchewan. 

 

It's not likely, I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, that the minister in charge 

intended when he wrote this Bill that it would have that 

sweeping a power.  But it does have the power, and therefore it 

must be considered.  And it must be considered with the power 

that it has.  And that power has got to be reconsidered and 

removed because, quite frankly, I think it's unfair. 

 

And to put people in a position where they might have this 

imposed upon them without so much as a hearing, without so 

much as a discussion, would be the epitome of foolishness in 

this province.  Because people would simply declare that this is 

a revolutionary move and I think we would probably end up 

having a major protest on our hands that could quite simply be 

reduced or even eliminated simply by going back to the old 

wording of the statute which quite adequately, Mr. Speaker, 

took care of the needs of the province as it was. 

 

There is no need, absolutely no need, for the minister to have 

this kind of power.  The wording under the old Bill provided 

the minister with all of the discretionary power he needed to 

provide people with the changes that they requested from out in 

the country.  If they requested a change he had that power, but 

he didn't have the power to arbitrarily amalgamate the 

municipalities. 

 

I think that most of you are aware that in Alberta they do use 

the county system.  And in all fairness, I will say that it appears 

that it can work well.  But it's not fair, in my opinion, to put it 

into a Bill that the minister has the power to make that change 

unless the people themselves are not only consulted.  If this is 

the secret plan of the government, then let's consult the people; 

let's write it into the legislation that they will at least have a 

vote on the matter or some input into it before it is sprung on 

them. 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

And if that isn't the intention of the government to use this 

power, then why take it?  Why have it? 

 

And so I'm saying that it is either a devious plot to introduce 

the county system or else it's far too heavily worded and far too 

heavily weighted law in favour of the minister.  And if that is 

the case, then if it's not the plan to use it, then why have it?  We 

should remove that part of it.  We should go back to the old 

wording in the old Bill.  And I would very seriously, Mr. 

Speaker, ask the minister to withdraw the wording, to lay at 

rest the concerns and the worries that are out in the country 

because of this statement. 

 

And it was thought by SARM . . . when I first became aware of 

this Bill, I phoned them and talked to them and they thought it 

was the same housekeeping Bill that they had worked on for a 

year and a half prior.  And they said that in that event they were 

quite happy that the housekeeping was being done.  But when 

we read the fine print and pointed out to them that this 

particular statement was in there, they became very, very upset 

by the fact that this wording had been changed to the way it is, 

because it has nothing to do with what was negotiated or 

discussed with the SARM people over that past year and a half 

when Mr. Hardy was in charge. 

 

And so if it isn't something that you need, take it out, because it 

has a lot of people worried.  If it's something that you feel you 

need to have in there and you leave it in there, then you are 

telling us that you intend to use it.  And if you do intend to use 

it, you are going to run into some very stiff opposition out in 

the country. 

 

(1515) 

 

I wonder if you folks have taken the time to realize how many 

jobs you will eliminate if you go to a county system in 

Saskatchewan.  And maybe that's something we will have to 

look at in the future.  But in a time of recession when the 

province is desperately in need of jobs for people, if we can 

possibly afford the structure we have now, we provide a lot of 

good jobs for people as administrators and secretaries in the 

structure that we have.  If we eliminate municipalities we 

eliminate a lot of those jobs.  If we eliminate a lot of those jobs, 

an awful lot of the spin-off goes with it.  There's that aspect of 

it to consider. 

 

If you're thinking of amalgamating municipalities into larger 

municipalities or some kind of county system, you also have to 

consider the fact that you're going to lose that personal contact 

with your individual people in rural Saskatchewan.  Folks no 

longer will have access to an office that is close to home.  

Because as soon as you amalgamate you're naturally going to 

have to centralize your offices to bigger centres or to some 

obscure other place.  And if you do that, people just by nature 

of having to travel further to get there, won't have that same 

kind of contact that we've developed with the rural people in 

the municipal offices. 

 

It has almost become a sort of an educational process, an 

extension service, if you would.  Now I realize that the 

Agriculture department provides agricultural 

representatives that do extension work in the country.  But rural 

administrators in rural municipalities do as much of that kind 

of work right now as any other department set up by the 

Department of Agriculture.  You will be hard pressed to find an 

administrator in Saskatchewan that can't answer just about 

every kind of problem or question that comes up with regards 

to provincial policy, whether it be Rural Development or the 

Department of Agriculture.  And it would be a shame if we 

were to put in jeopardy that whole process and that whole 

system, just because somebody decided to slip one little line 

into a piece of legislation. 

 

Now once again I will reiterate: if you don't need it, why not go 

back to the old wording.  If you feel that it has to stay, then you 

are sending a signal and that signal will be read loud and clear 

by the SARM and by every municipality in this province.  And 

that message they are going to read if you leave this line in this 

legislation is that you secretly intend on challenging the 

boundaries of the municipalities in this province. 

 

And we cannot let that go unnoticed, and I hope that you have 

taken very serious attention to this question.  I have no 

intention of personally trying to hold the House up any longer 

with this Bill.  We're going to let it go into the committee so 

that we can get on with the process, but we are aware of what 

the potential is in the Bill.  You now know that we are aware of 

it.  You know that every municipality in this province is aware 

of it because we have told them.  And you are aware that 

SARM knows what's going on because we have told them as 

well, and they have taken the time, Mr. Speaker, to speak out 

against this Bill at their district meetings throughout the 

province. 

 

I wasn't at the meeting but it has been reported to me that the 

president of SARM spoke at least for 15 minutes himself at 

their district meetings in opposition to that one line in this Bill.  

And I think it would not be fair for me to collect my wages if I 

didn't bring it to your attention here today, so I've done that. 

 

And I want you to be very serious about this.  There's a lot of 

people out in the country that are very concerned about one line 

in this Bill.  And it is a big one, it concerns a lot of stuff, but 

there's only one line in it that really frightens them and scares 

them.  And I encourage you to pull that line out and use the old 

wording. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:19 p.m. until 3:23 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Shillington Serby 

Koskie Sonntag 

Goulet Flavel 

Atkinson Roy 

Carson Scott 

Cunningham Wormsbecker 

Upshall Crofford 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

 

Hagel Stanger 

Bradley Keeping 

Koenker Kluz 

Lorje Carlson 

Murray Haverstock 

Hamilton  

-- 29 

Nays 

 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

-- 8 

The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 

Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 36 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Cunningham that Bill No. 36 -- An Act 

to amend The Parks Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  An Act 

to amend The Parks Act is rather a difficult Act to understand, 

and as result I did make available this Act to many of the RMs 

(rural municipality) in the other areas and jurisdictions that 

would be affected by it because I could not figure out exactly 

whether to agree or to disagree. 

 

And to give you an example, on section 5(2)(g), it says: 

 

 "(g) contained within the boundary commencing at the 

intersection of the east bank of Hanin Creek and the bank of 

Candle Lake; thence north-westerly along the bank of Hanin 

Creek to the north boundary of the north-east quarter of 

Section 31, in Township 56, in Range 23, west of the Second 

Meridian; thence east along the north boundary of the 

north-east quarter of Sections 31 and 32, in Township 56 . . ." 

 

And it goes for a page and a half of single-spaced, small 

typewritten. 

 

And not knowing exactly how to react to it, I sent it to the 

various RMs, Mr. Speaker, and I'm pleased to report that they 

see no substantial problems with it.  Not to say that there won't 

be questions in the Committee of the Whole later on, on some 

other issues.  But having made those preliminary remarks, I 

will say that we will allow this Bill to go to committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1530) 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

haven't had a chance to have a little debate with you since the 

Appropriation Bill back in the end of May, but I don't really 

enjoy debating with you because you got a record of the 

minister with no answers.  You just don't do it.  But I'm hoping 

you're going to be in a different mood today, Mr. Minister, and 

you're going to answer some questions. 

 

I had a problem in my riding, and I suppose it's all over the 

province.  And maybe this has been addressed, Mr. Minister, 

but here's the situation.  Where a person made a contract prior 

to the E&H (education and health tax) being raised to the 8 per 

cent -- it was still at 7 -- now the ones that wrote 7 per cent in 

their contract, E&H tax to be added to the contract, now I've 

been asked by them to what's going to happen when they have 

to pay the 8 per cent.  Do they still pay the 7 or do they pay the 

8? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you for the question, and I 

took a little time because I wanted to find out what has 

transpired over a period of time.  I am told that in 1987-1988 

when the E&H tax rate went up from 5 per cent to 7 per cent, 

there was this difficulty of contractors who had in fact had 

contracts in place and were caught with the 2 per cent change.  

What has happened in the interim is contractors have been 

advised that when they do write contracts that they should 

make provisions for the possibility of some tax changes of this 

kind, and therefore have been under that advisement. 

 

And so with the change in the tax rate from 7 to 8 per cent, it 

applies in their case. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying, if that 

contract was written up at 7 per cent and now they're coming 

down to settling their contract and if it's at 8 per cent, they'll 

have to pay the 8 per cent.  Is that what you said, Mr. Minister? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I don't think this is fair.  That's another one 

of your tax grabs.  It's unreal. 

 

Now for the contractor out there that just wrote in, plus E&H 

tax, he's all right.  But I've got several in my constituency.  

Some are real small.  I got a plumber in my area that it means 

$450 to him.  But $450 when you're going broke is a lot of 

money.  But I also got a contractor that built a school.  And he 

had 7 per cent written in his contract, and he's pretty worried 

about this 1 per cent breaking him. 

 

Surely to goodness, Mr. Minister, there must be some way that 

you can do something for these people because you've done 

enough . . . this government's done enough to hurt contractors 

out there.  They got to belong to unions even to get a contract. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I would like you to . . . I ask you sincerely 

if you can do something for these contractors that have written 

a contract in good faith at 7 per cent E&H -- it's been now 

changed to 8 per cent -- and if somehow or other we could be 

some compensation for 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

this 1 per cent. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, that has been a 

long-established practice which contractors are familiar with.  

This is a practice that was applied in 1987-88.  It was fair 

1987-88 . . . or not fair in 1987-88.  The same thing would be 

in the case in 1992.  There's nothing changed.  This is the way 

it has always been done. 

 

The only difference is that since 1987-88 people were notified 

to prepare for this kind of possibility.  This is the practice that's 

applied at the federal government level.  It's a practice that's, as 

far as I know, applied at every other provincial government 

level.  So it's not as if we're doing something different or 

unique or extreme here. 

 

The contractor will have to renegotiate or try to renegotiate 

with the person with whom he has the contract.  And I know 

that in most cases some of those arrangements can then be 

made because the people with whom the contracts are made, 

school districts for example, will recognize that that's the way 

the system works. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you say they've been 

contacted.  You keep going back to 1987, '88, '89, and 

whatever, when this happened before.  And you said they were 

contacted.  Were they contacted now? 

 

You won the election in the fall of '91 and there's been 

contracts written up after that date before you changed your 

E&H and grabbed your other 1 per cent.  Now be it as it may, 

were the contractors in this province contacted before you done 

that to make sure that they wrote in their E&H tax or 8 per 

cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, the contacts that were made 

were made after the '87-88 period.  Certainly as the member 

from Thunder Creek will tell the member from Arm River, we 

cannot in advance indicate to people that there's going to be a 

tax change.  If that were done, you know the difficulties that 

that would create and the advantages that some people might 

take out of it.  So it is not possible to let people know ahead of 

time that there is going to be a particular tax change 

particularly such as this one because of the unfairness that that 

would apply. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, that doesn't make any sense 

whatsoever.  You said before they were contacted and notified.  

All they'd have to do is . . . And you say they were notified 

then.  That doesn't help a new contractor, a contractor that's 

brand-new since those years, and which there would be . . . 

under our government there was naturally lots of new 

contractors.  They're going to all disappear under your 

government, we know that, because they won't survive with 

these kind of tax grabs. 
 

I asked you if you notified them.  You don't have to say there's 

going to be an increase in taxes.  All you have to do is notify a 

contractor that when they write up a contract, plus E&H tax.  

The ones that did that, the bigger contractors that knew this 

could happen, they just put in their contract, plus E&H.  

They're all right because they can write in the 8 now.  But the 

ones that knew that it was at 7 per cent and wrote in the 7, 

they're stuck for another 1 per cent. 

My question, Mr. Minister, do you realize that there could be 

many, many contractors in this province who made a contract 

last fall, knowing that things were tight, and just tried to break 

even to keep employment for their staff and what not, and 1 per 

cent can break some of them.  It's serious.  If you have a large 

contract, 1 per cent is serious.  Is there not some way that these 

people can be compensated, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, the onus is on the 

contractor.  I've not been involved in that kind of a business, 

but I've been close enough in my working life to be involved 

with contracts to know that any contractor in the business will 

have provisions in the contract which will say: here's what the 

contract is; here's what my price is, subject to certain 

uncertainties that could develop which one can't predict. 

 

You have those provisions in there for wage changes.  You 

have those provisions in there for tax changes.  That's a normal, 

standard contract that any contractor who signs a contract will 

have in it.  In your case I don't know the case.  If it's an 

individual case and he wants to . . . he or she wants to indicate 

to us what the particular circumstances are, I will look at it.  

But I'm not going to give a commitment that we're going to 

make some provisions because there's nothing unusual here.  

We're following commonly established practices which the 

business community knows and usually makes provision for. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- That's right, there isn't anything unusual, 

Mr. Minister.  You said yourself back in 1987-88 that the 

contractors were notified, but under your government it isn't 

unusual.  It looks to me like it's a tax grab or a change of 

contract just like you did in the GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program.  I mean that's what's causing this uproar in 

Saskatchewan.  It's what caused these bells to ring for 18 days 

and may cause them to ring some more.  Your government's 

even trying to bring in rule changes to change it so we can't . . . 

you can't bring the GRIP Bill back in.  That's how bad this 

government is. 

 

So now you're saying, well we didn't notify all the contractors 

that you should write in your contracts, plus E&H.  Now 

maybe most of the big ones did, Mr. Minister, maybe they did 

say, plus E&H tax.  But what in the world are we going to do 

for the likely dozens and dozens and dozens of little contractors 

out there that just said, plus 7 per cent tax? 

 

Now I think this is very unfair, Mr. Minister.  And I think that 

surely to goodness if there's only a few out there or whatever, 

that if their contractor is going to be held to pay 8 per cent and 

they're only going to pay him 7, that could break him.  That 

could be . . . 1 per cent could be the difference whether he 

survives or not. 

 

I think you can do something.  Surely to goodness you can do 

something. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Is there a question? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes, I said surely to goodness you can do 

something.  Can you not do something?  You just  



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

finished saying two or three times you have no intention of 

doing anything.  But you did say to me, if you have an 

individual he or she . . . there's more than one or two 

individuals.  You can find out there's hundreds out there in this 

province, of little contracts. 

 

I mean I'm only talking about one from Davidson, 

Saskatchewan now, Len Schmiedge. That's the one that's on 

my mind.  It was $450.  But he was just a small plumber and a 

small contract.  And he has to pay that extra $450. 

 

And then I have a big one, Con's Construction, out there that is 

involved in building a school.  And he wrote 7 per cent in. 

 

They're asking me to ask you to have some heart for them and 

do something about them.  We'll have the big contractor that 

knows how to write these contracts up.  And I would say that 

they probably were putting plus E&H tax -- plus tax.  But for 

the ones that wrote it right in their contract, 7 per cent, surely, 

Mr. Minister, something that could safeguard these people. 

 

Will you do something about it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well there's nothing I can do about 

it, Mr. Chairman.  The practice is there.  People in the business 

world know what the practice is there.  Anybody in business by 

and large knows that when you write a contract you have to 

have provisions in it which protect you against certain things. 

 

We can't protect every single individual who may have not had 

such a provision in.  Because when you have government 

policies you have to apply equitably across the piece as a 

provincial policy. 

 

Quite frankly, for the member's opposite information, I have 

yet to receive a communication in my office from anybody 

who's been caught in this.  That's not saying there are some 

people who haven't been.  But I think the fact that there has 

been no communication or correspondence in my office tells 

you that it's not a widespread concern. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, you stated it just right on the 

money.  You said a contract and you're breaking the contract.  

Because if this individual did write 7 per cent into the contract, 

whether it be 7 per cent, 5 per cent, 8 per cent, whatever, he 

had a contract.  Now why would after he . . . and that's when he 

started his work, took on the contract. 

 

Why would this government at the end of the contract make 

him pay the other 1 per cent?  I can see that if he just wrote in 

there, plus E&H tax.  If you raise it to 8, 9, 10, they should 

have to pay it.  Whoever they're doing the work for would have 

to pay him.  But if there's 7 per cent in the contract, now maybe 

some people are just paying the 7 to you.  That's the unfairness 

of it. 

 

And I'd like you to check into that, Mr. Minister, because 

maybe some people got a 7 per cent contract.  Maybe they even 

had a deposit on that contract last fall, and maybe they're even 

paid for.  And then when they come to settle up, naturally it's 

only at 7 per cent because the contract . . . 

So what you'll be doing is actually breaking a contract.  You 

can't go back and say to somebody, because you've raised the 

tax today it's at 8 per cent.  I'm not talking about that.  A 

contract was written prior, and it's written as a contract at 7 per 

cent. 

 

Is it the policy . . . Let's ask it this way because maybe there is 

a misunderstanding out there in Saskatchewan.  Maybe there is 

a . . . And that's why you're not getting letters.  Maybe it's only 

some people that are saying, I guess I got to pay the 8 per cent.  

Maybe some are only paying the 7.  Can you find that out from 

your department whether those people are paying the 7, when 

they had a contract written up prior to the increase, or how is it, 

Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, we're not 

privy to the individual contracts.  It's none of our business.  

And it's not a contract which the government has.  It's not the 

government's contract.  The government isn't breaking a 

contract. 

 

The government is applying a taxation measure, which people 

know and contractors know from time to time governments 

have to do.  And that's why business people and people in the 

contracting business always have or should have in the contract 

a provision for -- here is what my cost is, subject to tax changes 

or wage changes or any other such certain things. 

 

If the member will look at any contract, the kind of which he 

talks about, he'll see that those provisions are there.  It's a 

standard form in a business contract.  We're not changing any 

of that.  We just have to assume that most business people if 

not all business people will know that that's the way you do 

business. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, let me ask you this way, Mr. 

Minister.  Here's a contractor or an individual.  He makes a 

contract, and we'll say it was in September or October, 

November of last year, before your increase of your 1 per cent.  

So they have a contract for X amount of dollars and cents, and 

it's plus 7 per cent E&H tax, plus 7 per cent. 

 

All right, he gets paid for that contract after . . . or the 

remainder of his contract after the 8 per cent is in.  And he just 

collects 7 per cent and sends it in.  Maybe that's all he's paid, is 

the 7 per cent. 

 

My question was if you have some way of finding out whether 

some people are paying 7 and some are paying 8? 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, that's a useful question.  

The answer to the question is yes, there is a way in which you 

can determine those things by the normal audit process.  Now 

it's too early to do that but when the audit is taken in this 

particular case, then the same determinations will be made.  So 

the answer is yes.  In the normal audit process we will be able . 

. . or the department will be able to determine what kind of 

standing the contractor has and what provisions have been 

made. 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Minister.  Now when you 

audit that and you find out that a contractor has sent in 7 per 

cent as per what his contract was at the time of making up his 

contract and you find out he paid 7, will you be going after him 

for the other 1 per cent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is that legally he's 

responsible for 8 per cent. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Where do you draw the line, Mr. Minister, 

when that contract was written . . . You said to me yourself that 

a contract's a contract.  And these contractors all know what 

they have to pay.  Where do you draw the line legally here?  

Because let's make sure you're right.  That a person's got a 

contract at 7 per cent interest . . . or 7 per cent E&H tax and he 

pays 7 per cent but at the time that he actually gets paid and 

pays it, it is at 8.  Now does he pay at the 7 per cent it was at 

the time of contract?  Does he really by law owe the 8 per cent?  

Because I don't think you really have that clear.  We may have 

to get an answer from Justice on that one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  If the individual, the case in 

point, purchased materials prior to the implementation of the 8 

per cent, at the 7 per cent tax rate, the 7 per cent tax rate will 

apply.  But any materials that were purchased after the time of 

the tax measures putting into place, then the 8 per cent would 

apply. 

 

So depending on the circumstances, that's why the audit is 

important.  Depending on those circumstances a determination 

can be made on what he actually owes on E&H tax. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay.  Then what you're saying that if a 

contractor, whatever he's building, whatever -- a house, a 

school, a hospital, or whatever, whatever it be -- and he bought 

his material at 7 per cent and he'll be charging his contractor . . 

. or whoever he's building for, he'll be charging them 7 and he 

gets to be charging 8 on what he bought after the fact.  That's 

what you're saying. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sorry.  And I guess maybe I was 

misunderstanding the line of questioning.  That's exactly right.  

If he has a contract for X number of dollars and he bought his 

materials and paid for those materials before the E&H tax came 

in, then the 7 per cent . . . before the increase came in, then the 

7 per cent would apply.  Any materials he buys after the date of 

the increase in the E&H tax, he would then pay 8 per cent on 

those things that were purchased after the E&H tax came in. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right that could be fair enough.  But now 

I ask this question.  There is sometimes a contractor . . . would 

it be applied the same this way then?  That a contractor has a 

contract to do the work, and whoever he's doing the work for, 

they're buying a lot of the material.  And this is where I think 

some of the problem's coming in. 

 

So I ask you this, Mr. Minister, because this is kind of . . . we're 

kind of getting it out here.  I think we understand each other, 

and I do have just the two individuals in my constituency . . . 

and why I was saying . . . and they told me there's more.  And 

maybe there's misunderstandings.  Can I have your 

undertaking, Mr. Minister, that if I take 

this information back to my two contractors -- it's Schmiedge 

Plumbing and Con's Construction.  It was a lot of money for 

him, it was building of a school -- that I could send them to 

your office to get this straightened out. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well sure, we would be interested 

in trying to help them out and getting this clarified so they 

know where they stand.  They should contact the revenue 

division in the Department of Finance, and they'll give them an 

interpretation and indicate what the situation is.  Or you can 

contact my office except you'll just go to my office and they'll 

send you down there.  So you're better off to go straight to the 

revenue division in the Department of Finance and get the 

goods. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister.  I just have 

one more question I'm going to ask you.  And I don't know, 

some of my colleagues maybe have some more here.  Why -- 

I'd like to have in your words, Mr. Minister and Deputy 

Premier -- why when at election time and prior to election time 

you said there would be no tax increases, why have we even 

got this 1 per cent here.  Give me in your words why you broke 

your promise? 

 

That's what you did.  You literally broke the promise that there 

would be no tax increases.  And I don't want you, Mr. Minister, 

to stand to your feet and say, well the Tories left us in such bad 

shape because we . . . and that we had to do these things, when 

we know that you know that it's on the record where you said, 

you admitted that there was a $3.5 billion deficit when we took 

over, so you can't come back with that line. 

 

And I'd just like in your own words as Deputy Premier and 

Minister of Finance, to ask me why you put the 1 per cent on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well the answer is very 

straightforward, one which I have given in this . . . on the 

committee in this Bill many times over.  The government is 

faced with a situation of a deficit.  Under the status quo, had we 

left things as they were at $1.2 billion this year, I don't think 

the member from Arm River will disagree that the $1.2 billion 

deficit is impossible.  You could do it.  The question is whether 

you'd be able to borrow enough money on the market to pay for 

it.  That's a serious . . . 

 

When you have credit rating agencies saying of Saskatchewan 

because of the huge debt, what they have been saying, that is 

tantamount to being on the cliff of a crisis.  So we had to bring 

that down. 

 

We were able to reduce it from 1.2 billion to 517 million.  I 

would have dearly loved to have it be less than 517 million.  In 

fact if I could have eliminated it totally in the first budget and 

the government could have eliminated it totally in the first 

budget, that would have been the preferred route. 

 

First of all we looked at where we can save this on the 

expenditure side.  And so we cut some expenditures -- they 

were difficult as well -- we cut expenditures by $344 million.  

That's a major, major cut in expenditures.  Our expenditures, 

separate from the interest on the debt, actually are lower this 

year than they were last year.  I 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

don't know of any other government in North America, 

certainly no government in Canada, that's done that. 

 

After a $344 million cut in expenditures we were still left with 

an over $800 million deficit and that couldn't be sustained, and 

so we had to look at revenues.  And so we tried in as 

progressive a way as possible to raise additional revenues and 

that's why we have had to have a 1 cent increase . . . or 1 per 

cent increase in the sales tax as part of that revenue, to spread it 

out. 

 

And there was never a commitment that there would be no tax 

changes.  The only commitment we made was the expanded . . 

. and I have it here, the election program -- that the 

commitment was to do away with the expanded 7 per cent PST 

(provincial sales tax).  That's what the program card said. 

 

But you can't get to a balanced budget without either making 

some cuts on your expenditures or getting some additional 

revenues.  We were faced with that, we made the tough 

decisions, and that's why the increase is there. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that sounds nice.  You 

get up and you talk smooth and it sounds nice, but it's not the 

facts.  That isn't the facts. 

 

And you chose, this government, your government chose not to 

use harmonization and chose . . . you wouldn't use anything 

that the Tories were using, good or bad; the good things and the 

bad things, you chose not to use them because it was a Tory 

idea. 

 

And it's becoming more evident every day, no matter where 

you go.  No matter where I go in this province now they say 

well, we thought you guys were doing a bad job and that's why 

we tossed you out, kicked you out, but these guys are 

unbearable. 

 

In fact I had one person tell me just the other day, an NDP right 

out of my home town, that I thought you had some ministers 

who were doing foolish things, but compared to the front row 

of the NDP they all like Billy Grahams compared to them -- 

compared to you guys. 

 

Mr. Minister, I asked you -- and you see I wasn't . . . I'm not 

against whether you have to get some more taxes to balance the 

budget, whether it had to be an 8 per cent or harmonization or 

whatever, I know it has to happen. 

 

But what the public is against you about and what I am angry 

with you about is that you won an election under false 

pretences.  You went out there and said: we are going to 

balance budget, lower taxes, and leave the utilities the way they 

are, and we're going to go to Ottawa and get money and save 

all the farmers.  You can't do it.  You've double-crossed 

everybody you ever talked to; the only group of people you 

never hurt out there is the group you haven't met yet. 

 

So there's no sense arguing with you, Mr. Minister.  You get up 

and you just go on that smooth way, so I'm not even going to . . 

. you don't have to even respond.  It's not a question.  I'm just 

telling you a fact, that you've broke your promises. 

Every time you look at a Bill on here you can see broken 

promises. 

 

We're just talking about here, Mr. Minister, the Bill just before 

this about bringing in . . . changing a Bill in rural affairs for the 

county system.  And people don't want it.  Who in the world 

ever said they wanted a county system?  It's you people that 

want it.  You never asked anybody. 

 

The member of the Liberal Party, she's right in there.  The Grits 

and the Reds are right together.  I can't believe it.  But it's great 

for us.  So keep up this kind of stuff, Mr. Minister, and you 

won't be sitting there very long.  Thank you.  My colleague's 

got another question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, would you be 

able to provide for me a list of agriculture exemptions that are 

there for E&H? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We'll get you a detailed list.  I'll 

send out . . . We don't have them here, but that list is actually 

published, so I'll get it for you. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have, Mr. Minister, a volume of 

dollars that accrue to the E&H tax volume that come from 

agriculture? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to the 

question is, very minimal.  From the agriculture sector, from 

the point of view of inputs that farmers use in the farming 

operation, is essentially practically no tax involved.  Before we 

get the details of the exemptions, if you'd look to page 38 of the 

budget speech, there is a list of the tax expenditure accounts, 

and that is the tax exemptions that are exempted from the tax 

system. 
 

And you'll find -- this is just the general terms -- farm 

machinery and repair parts are exempt, so this year that's a 

saving of $37 million to the farm community.  Fertilizer, 

pesticide, and seed are exempt; that's a saving of $41.4 million 

for the farm community because there's no tax applied.  And 

that's $78.4 million worth of savings.  So in general terms, 

those are what the exemptions are, but we'll undertake to get 

the specific list.  I think that's available. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- If a farmer goes and buys a battery, is that tax 

exempt?  If a farmer goes and buys a battery, is that tax 

exempt? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes.  If it's a battery that's 

specifically purchased or designed for farm equipment, it is 

exempt. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I just want to point out 

you're in error there.  The batteries are designed by large 

companies.  They'll sell you batteries.  We buy batteries, three 

or four a year, and we always have to pay E&H tax on them. 
 

Then why are some batteries exempt and some not? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well because in some cases some 

batteries have dual functions.  And you may be purchasing it 

for either your truck, which is using your input and your cost of 

production, or for your car, which is used for other purposes.  

And that's the reason why. 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'll tell you where the 

batteries are exempt.  They're exempt when they are purchased 

together with an implement.  Your tires are exempt when you 

purchase them together with your implement.  However, 

they're not exempt when you buy them individually and 

separately for repair.  Now I want you to indicate to this 

Assembly how many dollars of value that would be in relation 

to the volume we have across the province. 

 

I'll tell you about other items that are exactly the same.  

Hydraulic hoses that are purchased to be used on equipment is . 

. . you pay tax on it.  You pay that tax on a whole host of things 

and items -- oil, all of those things.  You pay tax on all of those 

items.  They're not exempt.  If they come with a tractor, if they 

come with the equipment, you don't pay the tax on them. 

 

However, farmers don't buy a new tractor when they want to 

buy a new battery.  And they don't buy a new tractor when they 

want to buy a new tire.  And they don't want to buy a new 

tractor when they've got to repair the hoses on their farm hand 

or their front-end loader to have the equipment be made usable. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is the question I asked.  And if you 

state to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that 

farm supplies are exempt from tax, you're grossly in error. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I stand by what I 

said earlier.  If the part, whether it's hoses or batteries, are dual 

purposes, they are not exempt because they can be used for 

purposes other than actual farm operations.  If they're 

specifically manufactured or specifically designed for a piece 

of equipment which is used in farm inputs in the cost of 

operation, then it is exempt. 

 

That's not different than it was in 1991 or 1990 or 1989 or 

1987.  That's the way the tax is applied.  There's no other way 

in which you could administer such a tax unless you have that 

kind of a rule. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will you contend then, Mr. Minister, that if I 

buy a battery for my tractor from a hardware store, that I have 

to pay the tax of 8 per cent on it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If it's a dual purpose that can be 

considered a dual purpose battery, the answer is yes, you have 

to pay your tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that amounts to a 

significant amount on my place and on every farmer in 

Saskatchewan's farm and ranch.  That amounts to a significant 

amount.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Minister, if I were to compare 

what I have to pay in GST (goods and services tax) and 

compare that on the place that I have a business on and my 

ranch, I have to pay about $10,000 worth of goods and services 

tax.  And, Mr. Minister, that tax I get back.  And that same 

volume is transferred in education tax at 8 per cent.  The same 

goods that I purchase from a hardware store or whatever, that I 

would use in my business or on my ranch, I get back in GST 

but I do not get back in E&H.  None of it. 

And that, Mr. Minister, you can say all over this province that 

farmers don't pay E&H tax.  That is totally in error -- 

absolutely, totally a misrepresentation of fact.  And you can 

read from your book and I will say to you, that is an error in 

fact. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is the point we want to make as it 

relates to exemptions for farm equipment, small business, big 

business, whatever the business, they are getting the double 

taxation.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why we have 

people who prefer to go to Medicine Hat to buy the stuff -- 

from my constituency, from the Maple Creek constituency, 

from Shaunavon constituency.  And, Mr. Minister, you're 

losing businesses, you're losing small businesses in this 

province.  You're losing people, job opportunities, all over the 

place. 

 

Now my question to you is, can you provide for me a list or a 

volume of dollars of those volumes that agriculture provides 

through E&H tax?  Agriculture buys this very important part of 

their production and the process of production. Will you give 

me a volume of dollars for that component? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, that's not possible to do.  

Because when the member for Morse goes out and buys a 

battery, there's no way to know whether he bought that battery 

for his tractor or whether he bought it for his son's car if he has 

. . . I don't know whether the member even has a son. 

 

So it's not possible to make that kind of a calculation, whether 

you bought a battery and gave it to the local contractor who 

may be using it.  When you have a tax system, you have to 

guard against those kinds of things.  And so it's not possible to 

determine an answer to what the member asked.  You can't 

have that kind of a number provided. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I believe, Mr. Minister, that when I was 

on that side of the House, we did have some of those answers 

provided to us, because I believe that you do have them.  I 

believe that you understand it.  As a matter of fact, when we 

had the Estimates done on production, I believe that they were 

provided to us as to the component of the benefits that would 

accrue if we had harmonization.  And that's what I'm asking 

for.  And I ask you to check that again. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, when the 

harmonized PST was being brought in by the former 

government, the impacts that were talked about were impacts 

that were going to happen some time down the road.  They 

weren't immediate impacts in many cases.  And the information 

that was developed and provided to the legislature -- I know it 

well -- was done in some pretty optimistic terms in order to 

make that particular tax move of the former government look 

good.  So I don't put total stock in the information that was then 

provided. 

 

Going directly to the question, can we break down the exact 

amount of dollars that would be affected, the answer is yes, for 

the reasons which I explained earlier. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have any idea of the volume of 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

dollars lost on the west side of the province due to people 

going to Alberta to buy their hardware for agriculture purposes 

that they would have to pay tax on in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, because unless you sort of 

police the border and checked on everybody coming through 

there, it's not possible to do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, then I'll tell you about 

what the impact is.  The impact is on Maple Creek.  It's on 

Leader.  It's on Richmound.  It's on Golden Prairie.  It's all on 

those communities on the west side of the province who have a 

significant economic loss because of the way the tax is 

structured.  You just move it from 7 to 8 per cent, and it's high 

volume. 

 

As a matter of fact, those people would possibly be prepared to 

buy those items in Saskatchewan if they were tax free, and 

probably get them at a significant benefit.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, is what harmonization would've provided to those 

small businesses. 

 

And what would that have done for jobs in those communities?  

It would've had a significant, positive effect.  The town of 

Richmound has not got very many people in it, but it has a car 

dealership.  Why?  Because the oil patch goes and buys its cars 

. . . or it has been buying its vehicles out of there.  If they 

would've had harmonization, those opportunity to purchase 

those vehicles would've been at a status even with Alberta.  But 

now they're not.  And that, Mr. Minister, is where we're 

suffering the loss. 

 

You have an erosion in those small towns already that is 

causing us a whole lot of problem.  You're going to cut back -- 

and this is education and health tax -- you're going to cut back 

the funding for senior citizens' homes and you're going to cut 

back for hospitals, which was designed to have this money 

flow into.  And you're going to cut them back even more. 

 

And my contention is that under harmonization, small business 

would have benefitted across this province on that basis.  And 

they would have benefitted by providing more job 

opportunities than you're ever going to provide.  In fact you 

said you're going to lose perhaps 2,000 jobs, and you could lose 

more than that by triple or quadruple on the volume of the jobs 

you're going to lose because of this tax.  That's one side of it. 

 

In my constituency we've got the oil patch besides.  And have 

you figured out how many of the small oil field service 

industries are losing business today because of the fact that 

Alberta, they can provide the service into Saskatchewan 

without having to pay the E&H tax? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, the member's not quite correct 

because when they provide the service in Saskatchewan, they 

are required to pay the E&H tax.  So the assumption that the 

member makes isn't totally accurate. 

 

But I want to make another comment for the record, because 

it's important.  You talk about the impact on small business of 

the PST, GST.  Well I want the member 

to know, because I'm not sure he was here the other day when 

we had this debate on this very issue, that in 1991 calendar year 

when the GST, PST was brought in, retail sales in 

Saskatchewan dropped by a full 7 per cent. 

 

That's a major negative impact on small business.  Now this 

year, Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to say that's not the case.  It is 

predicted that the retail sales this year will increase over last 

year.  That's to a large extent partly because of a renewed 

confidence by the consumer because of a stronger economy, 

but to a large extent also because of the removal of the 

harmonized PST which had a very negative impact on many 

businesses in the province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the same impact was felt 

right across Canada, so it isn't going to be measured in terms of 

Saskatchewan by itself.  I want you to be able to tell me what's 

the difference between an individual farm who would be able 

to get a $10,000 rebate from his GST and would not be able to 

qualify for an equal amount, whether it's provincial sales tax on 

E&H, given that it was at 7 per cent. 

 

Can you tell me what the difference on what the farmer pays 

today and what the farmer gets from GST, what's the difference 

in lateral transfer or the exemptions that are there for your GST 

and not for your provincial sales tax?  Can you tell me the 

difference? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Because we can't . . . as I said 

earlier, we can't break down that kind of information into those 

kinds of specific terms. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm going to tell you this.  

You could take the time to do it and then you would have 

understand the economic impact and the benefit it would have 

been to agriculture in Saskatchewan on a cross-Saskatchewan 

basis.  And that, Mr. Minister, would have impacted positively 

for businesses in the west side of this province very 

significantly. 

 

You say that your oil patch has to pay when they've come in.  

Well, Mr. Minister, when are you going to get enough 

policemen on every grid road to counteract the influence of 

being able to buy the service from Medicine Hat versus from 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I'm told we have a very 

effective audit program.  That's the purpose of the audit 

program.  And I invite the member opposite, who I know is 

interested in the well-being of the province, that if he is aware 

of any abuses please be so good as to let the Department of 

Finance know or my office know, and we will apply the audit 

and make sure that the people who are doing work in 

Saskatchewan pay the same kind of taxes as every other citizen 

has to pay. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Do you have the freedom to audit companies 

in Medicine Hat, in Provost, and every other city in the 

province of Alberta as well as those in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If a firm carries on business in 

Saskatchewan we regularly carry out audits for the firms in 

Alberta.  That's standard practice.  It's not new.  It's 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

always been the case.  They are done effectively and the 

opportunity is there. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the capacity to do that 

was never completely given and nor was the responsibility 

carried out when I was on treasury benches nor is it today, and 

that's what causes the serious concern that I have. 

 

People all over the west side have traditionally bought the 

service and paid for the service in Alberta.  And they go in and 

out of the west side of the province and they have for years, 

delivering services from Medicine Hat that cannot be paid for.  

I challenge you to put up enough policemen to stop that going 

on.  You'll have every border, every grid road covered all the 

way across the west side, and I don't believe you're doing that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I think the member's talking about 

two different things.  If it's a consumer there is no way you can 

do this audit.  But if it's a business and it's doing business in 

Saskatchewan the audit is there.  It's carried out, it's effective, 

and it does the job that's required. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister be able to tell me how 

many people in Alberta were checked out in 1991 for an audit? 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm told we do have information on 

the number of audits that are conducted and the amount of 

revenue that comes, but we don't have it here of course.  But 

that's information that is available in the department. 

 

I will undertake to examine whether there are any implications 

in making that public which may be contrary to sort of the 

taxation system.  But that information is on record in the 

department, I am told -- the number of audits that are 

conducted out of province -- and is available.  But I don't want 

to make a commitment that I'm going to make that public until 

I know whether it has some negative implications. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well we're not asking for any names to have 

public a negative focus on individuals.  We're just asking for 

the overall numbers. 

 

Can you provide for me the numbers of audits that you do on 

the west side of the province as it relates to those people who 

have purchased goods and services outside of the province and 

brought them back in as individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I can get back to the member on 

that.  I've asked my officials to look at the number of things 

like electrical contract audits of work that's done in the 

province.  And we'll try to get it together and I'll talk to the 

member about it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- What about those items like appliances, 

dishwashers, washing machines, dryers, anything like that?  Do 

you do an audit of those individual things that come into the 

province from outside that you have no control over or almost 

no control? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not possible to have that 

information.  The only way we'd know that is if somebody 

advised the department or the auditors that this was happening, 

that somebody was transporting something over. 

 

You can do that with cars because cars have to be registered 

when they're brought over for licence and insurance purposes.  

If you buy an appliance in Edmonton's -- whatever it's called -- 

Edmonton square mall and bring it over, there's no need to 

register.  And so you can't keep a record of those things. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there any need to register a licence under 

5,000 kilograms to enter this province?  I don't believe -- or to 

re-enter -- you don't need to go through weigh scale to do that 

either, do you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm sorry, I don't quite understand 

the question.  If you're a transport or a trucker and you're 

moving stuff . . . things back and forth, I don't think that you 

register every time you cross the border. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well the point I wanted to make is that we 

have thousands and thousands of pick-ups going across the 

border on the west side all of the time that can be moving a 

dryer that comes back into the province of Saskatchewan, a 

television, a microwave.  It can do all of those things and there 

is no audit done on any of those kinds of items. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now fortunately we don't live in 

the police state.  We can't, nor should we stop every half-ton 

pick-up that travels across the border to find out whether there's 

a microwave hidden under a seat.  Police sometimes do that 

with regard to drugs, but that's a different circumstance.  But 

that's not the way the system works. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Precisely, Mr. Minister. And that's why I'm 

pointing out to you that the problem exists with goods and 

services provided back into Saskatchewan on a regular basis on 

the west side; that you have no idea how much volume of 

business is lost because of that.  And that's the point I want to 

make, that harmonization would have provided a flat, a level 

playing field on the majority of those kinds of goods.  How 

much value is placed on the loss in the economy on business 

done, cross-border shopping to the west? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member keeps referring to how 

the harmonization was going to solve all this.  But in this 

report, Impact of Harmonization on Saskatchewan, prepared 

and tabled by the Hon. Lorne H. Hepworth, minister of Finance 

when that was being brought in, I quote what he said: 

 

 However, the problem persists for consumers.  The expansion 

of the sales tax base, both in April 1991 and January 1992, 

increases the incentive for consumers to purchase their goods 

and services outside Saskatchewan. 

 

I mean this is a problem that wasn't created on November 1 or 

May 7.  It's a problem we've had in Saskatchewan for 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

some time.  And on an ongoing basis, we have to address to see 

how we can come to grips with it. 

 

But even in the admission by the member's own government 

when they brought the harmonization in, stated in this report, 

they said that harmonization was in fact going to make the 

problem more difficult because -- on things like he's talking, 

the half-tons, bringing over the microwaves -- because there 

would have been a harmonized PST, there would've been the 

GST on everything except food and groceries and prescription 

drugs.  So the problem would have been greater. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I want to point out to you 

that that is exactly what's happening with fuel.  That's exactly 

what's happening with tobacco.  That's exactly what's 

happening with liquor.  That's exactly what's happening with 

services that are provided to the oil patch.  That's exactly what 

I'm trying to point out is that all of the services provided from 

Medicine Hat in my part of the province is provided from there 

on a regular basis. 

 

And I see these vehicles without a licence for Saskatchewan 

doing business, driving across Saskatchewan, using 

Saskatchewan highways, Saskatchewan business, and they 

don't have to report to anything.  They just drive in, drive out.  

And between No. 1 Highway and the No. 32 Highway from 

Maple Creek to Leader, there are a whole lot of grid roads that 

go across there into Oyen and through south there into 

Medicine . . . or west there into Medicine Hat. 

 

And I don't believe you have any idea at all on the volume of 

business that is lost to the people of Saskatchewan because of 

the provincial sales tax being applied not on a harmonized 

basis.  How much dollars are you losing? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's not possible to know that.  I've 

said that time and time again, because nobody can keep a 

record of those things.  And it's not possible to know what 

amount of purchases are made in, say, Alberta or in fact in the 

United States, because there's no system in place which can 

check all of the goods that are brought across the border -- 

Alberta, United States, or Manitoba. 

 

Now the federal government has agreed on the United States 

side to collect the tax on alcohol and cigarettes.  That's one 

thing that'll get looked after.  The negotiation's in place 

between the province and the federal government to expand 

that process.  We're not about going to start doing that 

interprovincially between the provinces.  If the member is 

suggesting we do that, then he might want to suggest that. 

 

But I repeat again, this is not a problem that's new.  It's a 

problem that's existed in this country and in this province for 

many tens of years.  We have to deal with it as best we can.  

We know that it's there and we know that there's some 

revenues lost because of this.  But to be able to determine how 

much, it's not possible. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you provide for me the method that you 

use to ensure that there are no services and machinery 

purchased in Alberta that would be used in servicing the oil 

fields in Saskatchewan, the gas fields in Saskatchewan?  

What's the method that you use to make 

sure that this is all . . . the services provided are all taxed in the 

way that they're supposed to be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I'm told it's not possible to 

determine every single service that is performed and whether 

it's tax free or not.  But as I said earlier, we do have an audit 

system which as best as it can, determines where there needs to 

be a tax applied because of services they're providing in 

Saskatchewan even though the company's from Alberta.  Not a 

perfect system but to the best that possibly can be done, it's 

done. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think there's really only 

one oilfield service company left in Swift Current, and I can 

recall when there was between 10 and 15 of them.  There might 

be a few more in Gull Lake, but that is just about the limit to 

what there is.  And the reason is because in Alberta they buy 

their trucks for 7 per cent less . . . 8 per cent less than they do 

here. 

 

And if they had an opportunity to buy those same vehicles here 

under harmonization, they would have the same level playing 

field that agriculture would have with Alberta, as any other 

business would have with Alberta.  Now they don't have.  Can 

you explain the difference in the volume of dollars between 

those two things? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Once again I think the member is 

incorrect.  If the truck is purchased in Alberta by a service 

company and it comes to Saskatchewan and registered and is 

used in the service work here, they'll pay the tax. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, the minister doesn't understand.  Have 

you ever been to the Alberta border?  It might pay for you to 

drive up and down there and check out a few things that are 

happening over there. 

 

I want to point out that the services provided are coming in on 

Alberta vehicles through grid roads and through various areas 

like that.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the services that are being 

provided by individuals from Medicine Hat all the way clear 

through to Meadow Lake from the west side of the province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think there's 

more I can add.  I mean I think I've explained how the audit 

system works.  I've explained how if you purchase a vehicle 

and you register in Saskatchewan, you have to pay for it, the 

tax on it; there is no other answer.  It's not any different than it 

was in 1991 or whether it was in 1990 or 1989.  The member 

was on this side of the House; he knows how it worked.  Now 

there's nothing more I can add. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The fact of the matter, Mr. Minister, is this: 

that harmonization would have allowed the individual to buy 

that same half-ton, five-ton, big Mac, or whatever, Peterbuilt, 

on this side of the province, and not have to pay the tax just 

like he would on the other side.  And that, Mr. Minister, is the 

reason why there's no business on this side along the west side. 

It's all in Alberta.  They will minimize their opportunity and 

they will reduce their risk by moving to Alberta. 

 

You tell me why Nowesco decided to move all of their 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

trucks to Alberta.  Can you tell me that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Chairman, I can't tell the 

member that because I don't know why an individual company 

makes some kind of decision.  Companies make those kind of 

decisions all the time for all kinds of reasons.  And the answer 

to the question is, I can't have the answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Just to pursue this line of questioning a moment 

with the minister.  Mr. Minister, just so that we know that you 

understand harmonization, if we have business people in the 

province . . . we have some farmers in the audience.  You know 

with harmonization, Mr. Minister, that if a farmer was to 

purchase a $20,000 truck for his farm, that he would get 

rebated the 7 per cent GST and the 7 per cent PST if we have a 

harmonized system.  Now on a $20,000 truck, that's $2,800 that 

you would get back because you're sales tax free as a farmer or 

as a business person.  Would the minister acknowledge that's 

accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I will 

acknowledge this.  The members on the other side of the House 

introduced a harmonized PST which increased the tax on 

almost all commodities and services by 7 per cent on top of the 

federal per cent GST.  Members on this side of the House, 

when we were on that side of the House, disagreed that that 

was an appropriate tax because the public of Saskatchewan said 

that the harmonized process and system that was being brought 

in by the former government was unacceptable. 

 

Would that have made a difference in a significant way in 

cross-border shopping and the impacts that we have that that 

creates?  The answer is yes and no.  In some specific cases it 

would have. 

 

(1630) 

 

But I remind the former premier that once again in his own 

government's Impact of Harmonization on Saskatchewan, it 

was clearly stated that there were some pretty severe negative 

implications from the harmonized PST. 

 

It says here: 

 

 The Government's decision to expand the sales tax base in 

1991 to apply to goods such as restaurant meals and clothing 

provides added incentive for consumers to purchase goods 

outside Saskatchewan.  Broadening Saskatchewan's tax base 

in this manner increases a number of goods that 

Saskatchewan residents can now find at lower . . . prices on 

the other side of the border and increases the tax savings 

available to cross-border shoppers. 

 

That was not my statement; that was your statement. 

 

It went on to say that: 

 

 However the problem persists for consumers.  The expansion 

of the sales tax base, both in April 1991 and January 1992, 

increases the incentive for consumers to purchase their goods 

and services 

outside of Saskatchewan. 

 

So when you balance it all out, when you balance all of the 

impact out, it had a negative impact on the Saskatchewan 

economy.  And we may debate -- I'm not going to debate that 

because I'm not at this point an expert on it -- how much impact 

it may have on jobs and opportunities. 

 

But the fact of the matter is, even by your own admission, it 

was going to have a negative impact because it was going to 

create incentive for people to buy a wide range of goods and 

services outside of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, you're not going to get away 

without answering this question.  You have the potash industry 

and the farming industry and the oil patch and manufacturing 

and processing that would become sales tax free with 

harmonization.  I want you to acknowledge that.  We can talk 

about consumers and we can talk about industry. 

 

The hog farmer or the livestock man or the industry person that 

bought a $20,000 truck under full harmonization would get 

$2,800 return because this province would be sales tax free for 

that individual on that purchase.  Now I want you to 

acknowledge that.  The same applies to a $30,000 Quonset.  

He's building a steel building and he had to pay 7 per cent 

GST, 7 per cent E&H; you get 14 per cent back, which is 

$4,200. 

 

Now that's why the potash industry and the farming industry 

and the pulp and paper industry and the manufacturing and 

small business and chambers of commerce said, harmonize if 

you need the tax anyway, because we can be sales tax free to 

compete with Americans, particularly when we do all this 

competitive work and resources and in agriculture.  Now I want 

you to acknowledge that if you applied this to a half-ton truck 

and you're on the farm, you would save $2,800; GST back and 

the PST back.  Is that true or not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well once again, I can only refer to 

the document which the former government tabled when they 

tried to explain and provide the rationale for the harmonized 

PST. 

 

On a $20,000 truck, it is true there would have been a rebate of 

$1,400.  No denying that.  But it also says in your documents, 

sir, that an individual of $40,000 would have had an increase 

because of other taxes they paid -- whether it's a farmer or 

otherwise -- of $650 because of the expanding PST.  Over three 

years that would have been $1,950.  A truck, hopefully, should 

normally last for about five years.  So in net terms, this 

individual would have been worse off under the PST because 

the tax load with the expanded PST would have been greater 

than what he would have gained on that $1,400 rebate on the 

purchase of the truck. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, what we're trying to establish 

here is if industry and small business would like to be sales tax 

free . . . Because they know you're going to tax and every 

government is going to tax . . . There's going to be sales tax, 

and you're trying to raise taxes 16 per cent 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

here now from 7 to 8.  That's true. 

 

But what farmers and industry and other people are saying, we 

don't want to be taxed twice.  Once as a consumer and then 

secondly as the farmer or as the industry or as the miner or as 

the processor or the manufacturer because we're not doing this 

to consume.  We're doing this to build.  So if you're sales tax 

free in the province of Saskatchewan in industry, you're much 

more competitive which allows you to compete with Alberta or 

Manitoba or anybody else that has sales tax -- or Americans. 

 

So I want you to acknowledge that if you bought a Quonset for 

$30,000 and you had a harmonized tax system that you would 

get 7 per cent GST back, 7 per cent E&H back which is 14 per 

cent which is $4,200 you had got return.  Is that accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course it's correct.  You would 

have got the 7 per cent provincial sales tax back. 

 

But I want to acknowledge something else.  The member from 

Estevan is saying businesses shouldn't pay taxes, shouldn't pay 

any E&H tax.  The member from Estevan is saying that the 

consumer should pay it for them.  The member from Estevan is 

saying that the worker at IPSCO or the plumber's helper in 

Davidson or the teacher in Estevan should have taken all of this 

tax load, $440 million worth, off of business and put it onto the 

consumer. 

 

Well that is a basic difference between the approach by the 

member opposite and this government over here.  That's what 

he wanted -- to shift the tax load to the consumer.  We're 

saying the taxation has to be fair and equitably distributed.  

And therefore that was an inappropriate way to go. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, now we're 

getting at the nub of the NDP's philosophy.  Because the NDP 

say they like a progressive tax system so that if you make 

money you pay income tax, and big companies pay more 

income tax. 

 

We're talking about farmers and small business, manufacturers 

and processors, people who are right on the margin, tens of 

thousands of small business. And you know, Mr. Minister, that 

small business creates most of the jobs in the province.  And 

you're saying, I'm going to pick on these small businesses, and 

at the same time you're going to charge E&H to the consumers.  

It's now going to be 8 per cent if you get this Bill passed. 

 

So you're charging both.  Everybody's losing: the small 

business, the farmers, the consumers.  There's no choice.  

There's no competitive advantage.  There's no comparative 

advantage. 

 

You see you're getting to where you're just squeezing 

everybody.  If you're concerned about small business, and you 

purport to be, and all the little independent businesses, all the 

small-business people who make manufacturing, processing, 

even the service industry.  If you redo your restaurant, and you 

want to talk about hamburgers and coffee, all of that is returned 

to you.  The 

sales tax, you become sales tax free for every business -- small 

business and farmers and ranchers -- here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now you're telling me you didn't want to do that because you 

don't want to stick up for business and you think all those small 

businesses should pay when they don't have to pay in United 

States or they don't pay in other provinces where they 

harmonize. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to acknowledge.  Is it true that 

most of the jobs created in Saskatchewan -- and certainly under 

your so-called philosophy you don't want to do megaprojects; 

it's small projects -- it would be a large advantage if small 

business didn't have to pay tax twice, that is once as a 

consumer and secondly as a small business?  Wouldn't it be an 

economic advantage to them to be able to have the PST and 

GST returned to them so they could create the jobs that you're 

talking about?  Would not that be the case, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well first of all, Mr. Speaker, two 

points.  Because we acknowledge the important role of small 

business, we reduced the small business corporate income tax 

rate in this budget by 1 percentage point.  That's an incentive to 

small business because we recognize the job that that sector of 

the economy plays in job creation. 

 

Secondly, the one thing that the member from Estevan should 

keep in mind is that in order for the small business in 

Saskatchewan to survive, the consumer has to have money to 

spend.  And if you take the money out of the consumer's pocket 

at the rate of $440 million which the harmonized PST was 

doing, that's that much less money that was going to be spent in 

the small business of Saskatchewan and that's one of the 

reasons why the retail sales trade in 1991 in Saskatchewan took 

a nosedive of 7 per cent. 

 

Now the member from Estevan says we should not have 

business pay any E&H tax. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Instead, he says, senior citizens 

should pay more because senior citizens didn't . . . Oh, he says 

yes.  Senior citizens didn't get any rebate. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Sure did. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Not if they didn't have any children.  

Because it was based on families; it was based on children.  

Senior citizens would have had to pay more. 

 

He's saying that school children would have had to pay the PST 

on their school books and their textbooks.  That's the way how 

it worked.  He's saying that average individual citizens should 

take up this massive tax load so that businesses would be able 

to get a big tax break. 

 

Well I'm sorry.  I believe that businesses should get a fair tax 

system just like I believe citizens who are students or seniors or 

working people or anybody should get a fair tax system.  But 

simply to shift the tax system from one sector of the economy 

in a massive way to another sector, in this 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

case the consumer, I think that that would be wrong. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, this 

simply doesn't square.  You are taking 1 per cent more on the 

E&H and you are taking a 10 per cent surcharge on individual 

income.  Your argument doesn't hold water. 

 

Mr. Minister, would you then give us the comparison.  You say 

that under harmonization the average taxpayer was going to 

pay X amount of dollars more so that these businesses, the 

productive sector in our society, would be competitive.  Give 

us that same comparison, adding on the 1 per cent on the E&H 

and the 10 per cent and the utilities, personal surtax.  On one 

hand you are getting the benefit of no sales tax for your 

productive sector, and on the other hand you are taxing them in 

many other ways. 

 

You must have the numbers, Mr. Minister, to make that 

comparison with that average person that you just talked about. 

That plumber's helper that makes X amount of dollars.  That 

teacher in Estevan.  You have made significant changes, Mr. 

Minister, in the way that you are taxing people, with none of 

those benefits accruing back to our productive sectors. 

 

Give us that comparison with the taxes that you have added on, 

Mr. Minister -- all of the taxes. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the taxes that 

are directly related to individual people -- the member 

mentioned the deficit surtax.  That's going to raise this year 62 

million.  The E&H tax, the 1 cent is going to raise 65 million.  

That's an increase of 127 million. 

 

The one thing that's not there which was there under the PST -- 

so one will have to subtract this; I haven't done that -- is that 

the PST would have applied on utility charges, on power bills, 

on telephone bills, on all kinds of utilities.  The PST is not 

applied to that.  So there's a saving there.  That's the kind of 

numbers we're looking at. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you also forget to 

mention that there was a child tax credit component to 

harmonization, of some significance.  I believe it was about 

$35 million.  So all of those children's school books and those 

children's clothing and those various items that were there that 

would benefit families under harmonization, you have 

effectively taxed that back, sir.  So you've got to add that on 

top. 

 

Now we're looking at $140 million here without including all 

of the utility taxes and the other various surcharges, the 

prescription drugs that you have added on since.  And I think, 

Mr. Minister, when you're making fair comparisons and 

analysing the impact on the Saskatchewan economy, and who 

will hire the folks, who will provide the employment, and who 

will drive whatever type of economic development policy your 

government comes up with, you know that that comparison 

comes out squarely, Mr. Minister, on the side of harmonization. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you admit those figures? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to 

add something else, because the member raised the 

child tax credit.  Well I want to say that in this budget we 

increased the low income tax deduction on an annual basis of 

$50 a child.  So some of that's being look after.  Some of that is 

being looked after already. 

 

Now the member says that the rebates were $35 million.  Well 

you take $35 million from $440 million, and you still have 

$405 million. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, if we would have taken the GST 

on the place that I run my business on . . . was $10,000 last 

year.  If I would have taken provincial sales tax and gotten an 

opportunity to get a rebate equivalent to that, Mr. Minister, we 

would have taken one person off of the unemployment list, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And how many other farmers and ranchers across the province 

of Saskatchewan would have been able to do exactly the same 

thing?  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what I'm talking 

about.  You want to take away the opportunity to create jobs by 

taxing them right out of the province.  And that, Mr. Minister, 

is what causes the problem. 

 

Now those numbers are legitimate.  It was $9,979 in GST that 

we got back last year, and that would have been almost 

equivalent to what we'd have got back in PST.  And, Mr. 

Minister, under harmonization I would have been able to 

employ. 

 

The second thing that I want to point out: if I wouldn't want to 

have employed someone, I would have had discretionary 

income.  And I'll tell you something else, Mr. Minister, and for 

the member from Quill Lakes who doesn't understand 

agriculture.  Maybe he should sit and listen to the conversation 

and then draw his own conclusions. 

 

Mr. Minister, $20,000 for our ranch would have been a 

consumable amount of money that would have been issued for 

my discretion to the people and businesses in the city of Swift 

Current and surrounding area if you would have given me the 

opportunity to do that. 

 

The third thing I want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, it 

would've been greater than any other subsidy given by the 

federal government, provincial government, or any other 

subsidy given to my farm or ranch.  And that, Mr. Minister, is 

significant.  At three different areas that we could've had 

discretionary in.  I could've used it to pay down debt.  Other 

farmers could've used it to pay down debt, and helped in many 

other ways. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you choose to ignore the opportunity to 

build this province.  That's what causes us the concern.  And 

that, Mr. Minister, is the reason why all of your members just 

fail to understand, because they've never lived beside a tax-free 

province.  Why don't you guys go over to the west side and 

find out how the real world ticks over there?  Then you'll 

maybe begin to understand. 
 

I want to point out and ask the minister: is that a fact that I 

would've received almost equivalent in PST back that I would 

in my GST? 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I don't know if it's a fact.  I'm not 

going to comment on the member's opposite personal business.  

But I'm going to say this, that compared to the E&H tax 

measures and the surtax, deficit surtax on income in this 

budget, to the PST, here's the difference. 

 

On a 40,000 two-income family, the surtax and the E&H will 

have $170 impact; the PST would've had a $650 impact.  On a 

$50,000 two-family income, both couples working, the surtax 

and the E&H tax will cost them net $233. Under the 

harmonized PST it would've cost them a net increase of $835 

million.  That's the kind of impact it has. 

 

Sure there may have been some benefit, as the member says, to 

business.  I don't deny that.  We've got to find other ways to be 

able to assist business, as we have by reducing the 

small-business corporate income tax rate by 1 per cent this 

year; and by, in over three years, eliminating the E&H tax on 

processing agents and manufacturing agents.  You have to use 

selective, targeted tax measures to build this economy, to create 

jobs, rather than the approach that the PST was going to do. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I think I heard you just say that 

there would have been some advantage to small business to 

have a harmonized tax system.  Would you care to reiterate 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Sure.  The E&H would have been 

done away with the PST for business, but they would have lost 

business because of the major impact that the PST would have 

had on the consumer where the small business sells a lot of 

their product. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You're saying, Mr. Minister . . . just so that the 

chamber of commerce and businesses throughout 

Saskatchewan will know that their Minister of Finance says 

they're going to lose business if they pay no sales tax in 

Saskatchewan through harmonization because the consumer 

isn't going to be able to spend the money.  And that's what 

you're saying. 

 

So I want you to acknowledge the fact that you're saying 

harmonization would have hurt business because the tax breaks 

that they received wouldn't have compensated for the downturn 

in the consumer expenditures in the economy.  Is that what 

you're telling the chamber of commerce, the board of trade, and 

other people who are in industry here in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, that's what I'm not telling.  I'm 

telling them that -- and something which they agree with -- is 

that the net impact on the economy would have been negative 

and it would have impacted on the business sector in 

Saskatchewan.  Ask the CFIB, the Canadian Federation of 

Independent Business, did they agree with the way the 

harmonization of the PST was going?  They represent small 

business of Saskatchewan.  They were dead against it.  Seems 

to me that they're pretty credible spokesmen for the 

small-business community.  I agree with him.  That's the 

answer. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- No, no, Mr. Minister.  They didn't like the 

methodology, but they said harmonization had one tax. 

That's what they've always said -- one tax.  Do it at 5 per cent, 

do it simpler, do it something else. 

 

What I want to get on record here is you're saying in a province 

like Saskatchewan, where most of the economic activity and 

jobs comes from us producing and marketing things outside the 

province of Saskatchewan -- meat, potash, pulp, paper, oil, gas 

-- all the processing and manufacturing and raw commodities 

that we know that we export to the United States, into Alberta, 

into Ontario, into the Pacific Rim, are not local consumers.  

And a good amount of this industry in Saskatchewan, which 

you're going to learn eventually, is based on export.  And our 

export is extremely important. 

 

We have Agribition here.  We have business shows here.  We 

have people come from the uranium business and the potash 

business and oil and gas, and they export all over the world.  

And you're telling me that if we become sales tax free in 

Saskatchewan for the resource sector and small-business sector 

that it isn't going to pay us and create economic activity when 

we can compete with Americans and Japanese and Koreans and 

people in Europe?  You're thinking that Saskatchewan is this 

little wall you're going to build around us, and it's only the 

local government employee that's going to drive the economy? 

 

Mr. Minister, you must acknowledge or you'll have figures; go 

get us the figures then.  What per cent of our GDP, gross 

domestic product, here is export and what is domestic?  And 

what percentage of our resources create the jobs here because 

they are linked to the service industry and the manufacturing 

industry and the raw resource industry?  So that in fact we can 

find out whether you know whether you know what you're 

talking about.  Because for us to be competitive internationally 

with United States is very, very important. 

 

So I want you to tell me, Mr. Minister, wouldn't you 

acknowledge that a good amount of our business in the 

province of Saskatchewan is based on export, whether it's 

wheat, cows, pulp, paper, oil, gas, uranium, potash.  And if it 

is, therefore becoming tax free in the province of Saskatchewan 

really helps our businesses compete and create jobs and helps 

our economy.  And therefore, Mr. Minister, becoming sales tax 

free for business in Saskatchewan is good for our economy -- 

not negative. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I recognize 

that exports are important.  They are important to any 

economy, or most economies.  That's why . . . we don't have 

those kind of numbers with me. 

 

But I can say to the member opposite that the reason why we 

have reduced the sales tax or the corporate income tax on small 

business by 1 per cent is to assist the small business to maintain 

the jobs that are there and create new ones. 

 

The reason why we have announced that in three years we'll 

phase out the E&H tax on agents using manufacturing and 

processing is that we want to make sure that that industry 

grows and is able to compete. 

 

So we're using targeted tax measures to achieve 



July 6, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1241 

economic development in Saskatchewan.  We will continue to 

refine them.  We are in the process of consulting.  I met 

recently with a number of business people on this subject and 

have invited them to give us their ideas and their suggestions 

which we can take into consideration. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- I beg leave to introduce a guest. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Deputy Chair, I would like to introduce Mr. 

Brian McHolm, who is a lawyer with the firm of Jamieson 

Bains in Saskatoon, and he is a recently appointed member of 

the province's labour liaison committee.  And he is down in 

Regina today for the inaugural meeting of that committee.  I 

would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 

welcoming him and wishing that committee all the best in their 

deliberations. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 29 (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, if will help to get a little more 

focused here, would you acknowledge that sales tax 

harmonization is definitely a large advantage to companies in 

Saskatchewan that are involved with or connected to goods and 

services that are exported out of the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is that you cannot view 

tax policy in isolation.  Sure that there would have been 

businesses, some of them more than others, who would have 

gained from the harmonized PST -- no doubt about that. 

 

But I, different than the member opposite, I'm prepared to look 

at the total impact of tax measures.  And the PST had a total 

overall impact on the economy of Saskatchewan -- negative.  

And that affects everybody: small business, business, 

consumers.  And that's my position.  The member opposite has 

a different position.  That's his choice.  But that's my position. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask you to get your 

officials to acknowledge or to give us, ballpark, how significant 

the export business is for the province of Saskatchewan so that 

we can figure out -- if they were sales tax free here, competing 

outside the world -- what it's worth to them and what 

percentage of our economy is linked to that, directly and 

indirectly.  Therefore the overall benefit might have been quite 

positive because you will admit, Mr. Minister, that for the 

potash industry and the oil industry and the agriculture industry 

that competes on international markets it's a win-win scenario.  

Absolutely win. 

The second point I want you to find out -- and you can provide 

this -- if in fact you said that there was a negative impact on 

retail sales as a result of the GST, would the minister provide 

that sales figures for other jurisdictions, which I'm sure is 

public knowledge, so we know the impact of the GST in 

Ontario and in Saskatchewan, so that you can't just focus on 

Saskatchewan, so that we look at the figures in 1991, the 

impact of harmonization in Saskatchewan, but look at other 

provinces as well.  When they introduced the GST, how did it 

compare across the board?  So they can't just pick on us here. 

 

So I want you to get those two things so that we can check and 

compare.  Because perhaps, Mr. Minister, your logic isn't 

sound.  Perhaps you've missed the real, big benefit to 

Saskatchewan because a large percentage of our jobs and 

businesses are in the export business that would like to be sales 

tax free.  That's the first. 

 

And secondly, the negative impact would certainly be offset in 

Saskatchewan where we have that huge sales tax rebate here 

through harmonization.  And compared to other jurisdictions 

maybe we weren't any worse off to start with.  So that would 

really show that your argument with respect to the decline in 

sales tax was the GST related. 

 

I can say one last point.  I have talked to retailers like the Dairy 

Queen and others in this city and they've told me sales were 

never any better.  They went from 1990 to 1991 on into 1992, 

doing fantastic.  Well if that's the case, Mr. Minister, maybe 

you have no validity at all saying that harmonization hurt 

Saskatchewan.  Maybe your Associate Minister of Finance was 

right all along.  Maybe we become sales tax free for industry 

and business which is largely export.  Maybe we save 5 million 

a year in administration, which is efficiencies, which is like in 

your terms a GigaText a year you could save through 

administration because you're so worried about that particular 

project.  And third, maybe the impact on the economy is in fact 

positive because of the economic activity generating income 

and therefore they're spending more. 

 

And fourth, then you wouldn't have to go back and raise the 

utilities on senior citizens.  You wouldn't have to go back and 

raise the prescription drug program from 125 to $380 a month 

or a year.  You wouldn't have to raise the deductibles and raise 

the taxes on all kinds of income and surtax and sales tax that 

has no relief, and particularly for senior citizens because there's 

no choice. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I want you to get me the kind of 

information necessary so we know the importance of exports 

and industry in the province of Saskatchewan.  And then check 

and compare Saskatchewan across the rest of the country when 

we're looking at the decline in the sales tax, because I don't 

frankly believe that you are accurate saying that only in 

Saskatchewan was it 6.9 per cent decline in 1991 . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well I want to make the comparisons. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I know that it's 

almost 5 o'clock, but yes, sure I will undertake to have 

information on the story of retail sales across in other 



1242 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 1992 

jurisdictions.  I will bring them for the member and make them 

available. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


