




















































Hansard: June 04, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 883 

 June 4, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce a group of 

high school students today from Sonningdale School, grade 7 

and 8. There are eight students seated in the west wing.  The 

teacher with them today is Blair Frederickson and their driver 

is Linda Osmachenko. 

 

I had the opportunity of meeting with them before the 

legislature sat this afternoon and was properly asked very good 

questions today on the operation of the House.  Thank you very 

much. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 

this Legislative Assembly sitting in your Speaker's gallery 

members of the Saskatchewan Round Table on Environment 

and Economy. 

 

This morning the round table presented the Premier with a 

conservation strategy for sustainable development in 

Saskatchewan.  And I'll be making a statement about that 

strategy later this afternoon.  I'd like to introduce some 

members of the round table to you today.  There's Jon Gillies, 

co-chairman of the round table, an agricultural engineering 

professor at the University of Saskatchewan; Frank Arnie, 

co-chair of the round table and past president of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation; Dr. David Henry, professor 

of environmental design at the University of Calgary; Dr. 

Stuart Houston, professor of radiology with the University of 

Saskatchewan; John Nightingale, chairman of the 

Saskatchewan Mining Association; and Bert Weichel, 

environmental consultant, past president of the Saskatchewan 

Environmental Society. 

 

In addition I'd like to introduce a former executive director of 

the Round Table Secretariat, Sheldon McLeod, who is now the 

director of strategic planning for the Canadian Council of 

Ministers of the Environment; and Jon Jonsson, senior 

economist with the Round Table Secretariat. 

 

I'd like to acknowledge the round table members who can't be 

with us this afternoon -- Bill Gaynor, Lindsay Milne, Sister 

Phyllis Kapuscinski, Ken Naber, Doug Chekay, and Chief 

Roland Crowe. 

 

I would like to ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to 

join with me in welcoming them this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On behalf of 

the opposition, I would like to welcome the committee 

members from the Round Table on the Environment.  And 

we all wish them well in their work. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Anguish: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and members of the Assembly this afternoon a group of 

13 students from St. Joseph School in North Battleford.  They 

are seated in the east gallery.  They are accompanied here 

today by their teacher, Denise Carignan; and their chaperons, 

Barbara Tatchell, Elwood Fuchs, and Susan Pruden. 

 

I'd like the Assembly to welcome these students.  It's not often 

we get a group from The Battlefords area. In fact in the past six 

years, I believe this is only the fourth group of students who 

have attended the Assembly.  So I wish you well in the 

afternoon.  I look forward to meeting you after the question 

period this afternoon.  I ask members to welcome my guests 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you today and to all members, 10 

students from Riverview Collegiate in the city of Moose Jaw.  

Mr. Speaker, these are grade 12 students from Riverview. 

 

I would like you to know, Mr. Speaker, that their collegiate, 

RVCI (Riverview Collegiate Institute) has a reputation for 

academic and athletic excellence, as well as a reputation for 

innovation and a further reputation, Mr. Speaker, in that the 

current mayor of Moose Jaw, the current Member of 

Parliament for Moose Jaw, and the current member from 

Moose Jaw Wakamow are all graduates of this high school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting the . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And the minister from Churchill Downs.  Mr. 

Speaker, I look forward to meeting with the students following 

question period, and I hope they enjoy their time and their tour 

of the Assembly, which I understand will be conducted in 

French. 

 

Welcome to the Assembly.  And I'd ask all members to join me 

in that welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Trew: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure today 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly some 56 grade 5 and 6 students from 

Rosemont School in Regina.  I'm standing in for my colleague, 

the member for Regina Rosemont, who is unable to be here 

today.  His loss will be my gain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these 56 children are accompanied by their 

teachers, Ms. Stephenson, Mr. Ingham, and chaperons, Mrs. 

Miles, Mrs. Kauk, and Mrs. Cattell.  It will be my pleasure to 

meet with the group for photos and drinks, at the expense of the 

member for Regina Rosemont I'm delighted to say. 

 

I look forward to meeting with this group that is seated in your 

Speaker's gallery.  I ask all hon. members to join me 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

in welcoming Rosemont School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Each year, Mr. Speaker, the organization of 

arts councils . . . the Saskatchewan organization of arts councils 

-- OSAC (Organization of Saskatchewan Arts Councils) -- with 

the assistance of host arts councils, presents the Saskatchewan 

show-case of the arts.  In 1992 the annual conference of the arts 

will be hosted in Prince Albert.  That happens this weekend. 

 

OSAC is a provincial cultural organization which represents 

numerous arts councils in Saskatchewan.  They have grown 

over the past 23 years and now represent approximately 64 arts 

councils.  Three hundred and fifty conference participants are 

expected, including arts council members, performers, visual 

artists, art suppliers, government officials, federal and 

provincial arts organizations, and other guests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, OSAC deserves a vote of gratitude from the 

people of Saskatchewan for their dedication to making quality 

performing and visual arts accessible to all parts of 

Saskatchewan.  And I extend best wishes to the hard-working 

volunteer hosts in Prince Albert for a most successful 

Saskatchewan show-case of the arts. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand today, Mr. 

Speaker, to congratulate two grade 11 students from the 

William Derby High School in Strasbourg.  The two students, 

Gail Fuessal and Jocelyn Youck, won a gold medal in the 

biotechnology category at the Canada West Science Fair in 

Sudbury, Ontario.  This fair not only had representation from 

across Canada, but also had projects from Sweden, Japan, 

Taiwan and Australia. 

 

They won for their project, "walking on air".  And as a result of 

that win, Mr. Speaker, they won themselves an 

all-expense-paid trip to Montreal this week -- which they are 

there now -- to attend the biotechnology conference that's being 

held this week.  I think it shows, Mr. Speaker, that creativity is 

still alive and well in our young people in Saskatchewan.  And 

I want to again congratulate Gail and Jocelyn and wish them all 

the best in their future endeavours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Renaud: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in 

Kelsey-Tisdale, we're fortunate to have one of the finest 

provincial parks in the province.  It is not only enjoyed by 

tourists from Canada, but also the U.S. (United States), and 

also many local residents from the district that make 

Greenwater Provincial Park their holiday spot.  They wish to 

commend the Hon. Darrel Cunningham for his recent 

announcement of the ability to transfer annual park entry 

permits. 

 

In 1992 users will be able to purchase a permit which provide 

convenience and flexibility, Mr. Speaker.  Their permit can be 

transferred from vehicle to vehicle.  To the 

local families from communities like Tisdale, Archerwill, 

Chelan, Porcupine Plain, participating in the many winter and 

summer activities such as golfing, fishing, swimming, 

picnicking, snowmobiling, and camping, this is really 

appreciated. 

 

Last week's Tisdale Recorder states, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Parks and Renewable Resources people have come up with a 

great new idea -- transferable annual provincial park vehicle 

entry permits. 

 

 In the past if you had an annual provincial park vehicle entry 

permit it was stuck on a window and you had to drive the 

same vehicle to the park all the time or buy another sticker. 

 

 Well not any more, although you can still get the one-vehicle 

type at a cost of $22 including GST; you can also now opt for 

a $32 permit (Mr. Speaker) that is transferable.  This means 

that you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Mr. Speaker, starting today for a period 

of three days, thousands of people in Regina including many 

from other parts of Saskatchewan, other provinces, and the 

United States will celebrate the 25th anniversary of Mosaic, 

Regina's annual multicultural celebration.  Mosaic is a festival 

which enables many of the ethnic groups located in pavilions 

throughout Regina to demonstrate to the community their 

unique cultural traditions, handicrafts, dances, and food -- lots 

of food, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Regina have responded enthusiastically over the 

years to this festival of cultures.  Thousands make the annual 

Mosaic rounds to eat, drink, and be merry, but more 

importantly, Mr. Speaker, to learn and understand something 

about the cultural backgrounds for their neighbours.  In a world 

that seems at times to be consumed by tribal and ethnic 

conflict, events like Mosaic in Regina and Folkfest in 

Saskatoon give us all hope for our future characterized by 

understanding, compassion, and respect for one another and 

never mind the differences. 

 

Mosaic is made possible, Mr. Speaker, because many hundreds 

of volunteers -- indeed thousands over the last 25 years -- work 

hard to make it such a success.  Mr. Speaker, I ask members to 

join with me to congratulate the organizers of Mosaic and the 

people of Regina for reaching this 25th anniversary milestone, 

and to salute the thousands of volunteers who have made this 

celebration possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I rise today to speak to a tragic situation which is 

unfolding in the town of Martensville, which is in my 

constituency -- the revelation that numerous charges of 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

abuse against the most vulnerable in our society, our children, 

have been laid.  And that has the entire community and, indeed, 

the nation reeling with horror and disbelief. 

 

It would be an understatement, Mr. Speaker, to say that these 

are difficult times for the community and for our province, and 

a great deal of questions are going to have to be answered. 

 

To the community of Martensville I say, you are not alone in 

your time of need.  Unfortunately and sadly, the problems 

encountered here are pervasive throughout our society.  And in 

my former position of minister of Social Services, I became 

acutely aware of the devastation wrought by these kinds of 

unspeakable acts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am sure members of this Assembly, the people 

of Saskatchewan, and all Canadians join with me in expressing 

our heartfelt sympathy and support for the children, the 

families and friends, and for the citizens of Martensville.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, June 

1 I was invited to the annual Girl Guides banquet in Biggar.  

The girls marked a successful year of achievement, and I want 

to thank them for the invitation. 

 

One of the Guides had received a prestigious award.  Ms. 

Cheryl Plysiuk, 17 years old, an 11-year veteran of the Guide 

program has been selected as the provincial representative to a 

Girl Guide conference in England in late July.  There are only 

14 participants selected across Canada.  Ms. Plysiuk has gone 

through an extensive selection process.  I met her, and she will 

make a fine representative of the province, her Girl Guide 

groups, and her parents. 

 

I hope the legislature would show their appreciation to Ms. 

Plysiuk in embarking on her adventure. 

 

Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1345) 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, 88 of the best 

young drivers in Saskatchewan were in Regina to compete in 

the finals of Rodeo '92.  They were the top drivers from a 

group of more than 2,500 young people who competed in local 

and regional events. 

 

Rodeo is a test of the driving skills and knowledge of drivers 

aged 16 to 19, sponsored by SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance), Saskatchewan Safety Council, and Volkswagen 

Canada. 

 

I attended the banquet following the competition and had the 

pleasure of meeting some of the participants and their families. 

 

The message behind this competition is a very serious one.  It 

is the need for young drivers to improve their safety 

record.  Although 10 per cent of Saskatchewan drivers are 

under 21, they account for almost 19 per cent of people killed, 

23 per cent of people injured, and 30 per cent of people 

involved in alcohol-related traffic accidents.  They are twice as 

likely to be involved in a traffic accident and four times as 

likely to be charged with a traffic offence. 

 

Too often we only react to such grim statistics with fines and 

jail sentences after the tragedy.  I commend SGI and its 

co-sponsors for being proactive in sponsoring such an excellent 

event to improve driving skills of our youth and reduce the 

number of deaths and injuries on our roads. 

 

Congratulations to the winners and participants in Rodeo '92, 

as well as SGI, Saskatchewan Safety Council, Volkswagen 

Canada, and all the volunteers that made such an excellent 

event possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Effects of Health Care Changes on Diabetics 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, my question this afternoon is to the Minister of 

Health.  Madam Minister, Ken McColm, a diabetic from 

Quebec, blinded by his affliction, has stopped in Regina to 

raise public awareness about diabetes and the many 

complications that can arise therefrom. 

 

Madam Minister, I am wondering if you will endeavour to 

meet with this courageous gentleman such that you can learn 

firsthand the difficulties and hardships that must be endured by 

diabetics. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

would be pleased to meet with Mr. McColm.  He hasn't, as far 

as I'm aware, asked to meet with me.  But if he wishes to meet 

with me, I would be pleased to meet with him. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I don't know either whether 

he is going to be asking for that.  I was wondering if you would 

take the initiative.  That's what my question was. 

 

I would hope that you would do that, Madam Minister, for each 

day that passes brings more and more examples of the hurt and 

betrayal that you have put on the people of Saskatchewan.  

Even more outrageous than your ill-advised decision to triple 

the deductible amount for prescription drugs and to increase the 

co-payment from 25 to 35 per cent, is your callous treatment of 

diabetics whose dependence is on insulin.  There is not an 

option for these people. 

 

Madam Minister, can you tell this Assembly your reasons for 

removing the 50,000 Saskatchewan diabetics from special 

coverage under the plan, and while you're at it, could you tell 

us with whom you consulted? 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to diabetics, 

the facts of the situation are that in 1975 a program was 

instituted where diabetics would pay $1 a vial for insulin.  At 

that time it was 25 per cent of the cost.  Today that dollar per 

vial of insulin is 4 per cent of the cost. 

 

In the province of Saskatchewan we have a number of people 

such as asthmatics and hypertensives who have at least as high 

drug costs as diabetics, and they pay for their drugs under the 

drug plan.  The intent behind the change of course, Mr. 

Speaker -- and we regret having been forced to make very 

difficult choices like this -- was to attempt to equalize these 

individuals. 

 

The fact of the matter is, as there have been concerns that 

raised with us, it's my understanding that the Department of 

Health is looking into the matter and talking to people.  And 

Mr. McColm, we're prepared to meet with Mr. McColm.  If the 

opposition has his number, has his address, and have spoken to 

him about the potential of us meeting with him, we'd be 

prepared to do this. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, 

Ramona Verity, president of the Outlook chapter of the 

Canadian Diabetes Association has said recently, and I'd like to 

quote a brief passage from her: without access to blood glucose 

monitors, strips and lancets, the diabetic's ability to practise 

preventive care is severely compromised.  This increases the 

risk of complications, namely blindness, non-traumatic 

amputations, kidney and heart disease.  This inevitably means a 

significantly higher health cost burden to taxpayers through 

increased hospital care. 

 

Madam Minister, did you consider any of these factors in 

throwing diabetics out of the drug plan, or is this your idea of 

preventative health care and wellness model? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there are programs in the 

government and in the Department of Health that will provide 

assistance for people on low income who have difficulty 

paying for their drugs.  And I have explained at length in this 

legislature what some of those programs are.  Anyone who 

cannot afford insulin can come to us and can be looked at from 

the point of view of income to determine whether or not they 

would qualify for special assistance. 

 

And I want to say this with respect to the members opposite, 

that when they were mismanaging this province, and pushing 

that debt up to something like $8.2 billion in the Consolidated 

Fund, when they did that, Mr. Speaker, they should have 

thought about the consequences of their action. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the same minister.  Madam Minister, it took you three 

questions before you began to realize that you really didn't 

have any answers for me and you fell back on your 

standard, true and tried political rhetoric. 

 

Madam Minister, Jane Johnson, mother of a diabetic child, has 

said that last year she spent at least $3,000 on accommodations, 

travel expenses, and baby-sitting during her son's bout with the 

flu, which was complicated by this disease.  She said that, and I 

quote: the money we spend on drugs, testing supplies, and the 

special dietary needs add up to more than some people's 

mortgage. 

 

Madam Minister, at one time you described $125 deductible as 

forcing people to choose between groceries and drugs.  Tell us 

what you will do for this family now that you have tripled the 

deductible and removed their son from the special status.  Tell 

us, Madam Minister, what are you going to do? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, there's a cap on 

the drug plan of $750 a year which was not there before -- not 

there before.  And there would have been unlimited 

expenditures under the old plan.  So this is an improvement. 

 

Secondly, with respect to the allegation of politicizing the 

process, I think that the member opposite, in his very 

self-righteous manner, should not be taking that position 

because that man over there and his colleagues have virtually 

driven this province into bankruptcy so that we can no longer 

afford the sort of social programs that keep people in a 

comfortable fashion as we've had in the past.  The minister 

opposite . . . or the member opposite and his colleagues, Mr. 

Speaker, are responsible for the fact that this province can no 

longer afford the kind of social programs it had before. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you have inflicted additional hardships on diabetics given the 

complications and effects their disease has on their eyes.  The 

Saskatchewan Association of Optometrists has indicated that 

diabetes is a major cause of blindness in those who are aged 

between 30 and 64.  They recommended early detection by 

regular examinations such that these problems can be treated. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, you have also removed eye 

examinations from medicare.  Many diabetics will visit their 

optometrist twice a year, visits that will now cost them at least 

60 . . . or up to $60 per visit. 

 

Madam Minister, you speak fondly of your wellness model and 

of preventative care.  Would you not agree that this double hit 

on diabetics is in direct contradiction to that policy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, what is de-insured under 

the optometric plan is routine eye examinations.  If a person 

has a medical condition they are still entitled to go to an 

ophthalmologist with respect to that condition and be looked 

after. 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

It's routine eye exams that have been de-insured.  And let me 

say, Mr. Speaker, that there are other provinces across this 

country that do not insure optometric routine eye exams, so this 

is not an exception with respect to Canada. 

 

I want to point out once again that the very high debt burden 

that we face in this province makes it impossible for this 

government to continue many of our social programs . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I appreciate you cutting off her rhetoric. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question?  I 

would ask the member to get to his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- This is a new question, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, it is painfully evident from what we have heard here 

this afternoon from your answers that you have no idea, you 

had no idea, what you were doing as you went hacking and 

slashing through health care.  No analysis, no consultation, no 

idea. 

 

Madam Minister, will you now admit that you have made a 

mistake, that the hardship that you are afflicting upon diabetics 

is beyond reason?  Will you, Madam Minister, now to commit 

to this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that you will 

reverse your decision and reinstate diabetics under special 

status in the prescription drug plan? 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you, will you reverse your decision? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, of course this government 

is concerned about people who are sick in Saskatchewan and 

we have provided programs for low income people.  And we 

will do what we can to maintain quality health care services. 

 

I want to know whether the member opposite will finally 

admit, after 10 years of mismanagement, that he has virtually 

bankrupted this province and made it impossible for the people 

of Saskatchewan to enjoy the programs that they had before.  

And it's right here, Mr. Speaker.  It's right here in the news 

release from Standard and Poor's where they say that the New 

Democratic Party will increasingly have difficult choices to 

make.  Difficult choices. 

 

And the member opposite -- that member who blew the money 

of the provincial treasury now with his GigaText, with his 

privatizations that have cost the taxpayer millions -- I'm telling 

you, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is responsible for the 

plight of this province and he should admit it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Attraction of CF-18 Squadrons to Saskatchewan 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   My question is 

to the Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade. The 

Canadian Armed Forces announced that it is closing two 

European bases in Lahr and Baden-Baden.  By 1993 the federal 

government will remove all of this equipment from Europe and 

intend to place it at Canadian bases.  And among the units 

moving are going to be two CF-18 fighter squadrons. 

 

As Minister of Economic Diversification, have you asked the 

federal Minister of National Defence to have these squadrons 

located at the fully equipped airfield in Moose Jaw? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that the members of my staff are dealing with 

these kind of issues on a daily basis.  I'm sure they'd be 

interested in the idea, your ideas and others.  I'm sure they've 

probably already been thinking about it, if not approached the 

federal government department of . . . the federal department, 

probably will be doing so in the very near future. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If Saskatchewan 

should get these squadrons, Mr. Minister, it would be a 

tremendous economic boost to the province.  They collectively 

contain at least 54 aircraft, numerous well 

_trained ground crews that would require supplies, housing, 

fuel, would pay taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I'd like to know what exact steps your government has taken to 

bring this important development to Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well what I will do here, I will 

bring for the member information as to the exact steps that 

have been taken.  Clearly I want to say to you that the armed 

forces has played an important role in Saskatchewan, and I 

intend, we intend, to do what we can to make it happen that any 

increase in this area would come to Saskatchewan. 

 

So I want to say to the member opposite that I will get for her a 

detailed report on what we're doing in that area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I wish to thank the minister for that.  I 

want him to know that I have checked with Moose Jaw and 

indeed they can more than accommodate this.  We're talking 

about $1.2 billion in expenditures, Mr. Minister, and unlike 

attracting Promavia or Piper, this endeavour will cost the 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan nothing. 

 

Now last week in this legislature your ministers, Mr. Premier, 

knew nothing about the opportunities that could be afforded 

through hydrogen research, and this week it appears as though 

your Minister of Economic Diversification and Trade does not 

know about this particular opportunity for Moose Jaw. 

 

When will you form a Saskatchewan economic development 

authority as suggested in the Liberal Party 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

platform of 1991, where it would find and attract ventures such 

as this to our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I want to say to the member 

opposite that she may be opposed to Promavia and she may be 

opposed to the Piper arrangement as her question would 

indicate and she may want to do away with those economic 

developments and build CANDU 3 (Canadian deuterium 

uranium) reactors, but I'm sure there are many people in the 

province who disagree with her vehemently on her strategy for 

economic development.  But in areas where you have ideas, we 

will look at them and I'll bring you back a detailed report. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, you know full well what my 

stand on Promavia and Piper have been and it's on public 

record for it.  I said, unlike attracting these, which cost 

taxpayers' monies in Saskatchewan, this would cost us nothing.  

There's a big difference. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I would remind the 

member she is not to get into a debate with the ministers, and 

she is to direct her questions through the Chair. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  How can the 

people of this province be confident that your government has 

an economic development strategy, given your performance to 

date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- If the member would look at the 

housing sales in Saskatoon, in her home city, where the number 

in April was up by 23 per cent over the previous year, she 

would know that there was a lot of excitement in Saskatoon in 

terms of housing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Many of the Saskatoon business 

people, including the mayor, were at a press conference on 

Monday, announcing some chemical warehouses in Saskatoon 

that will mean many jobs and job creation. 

 

The member opposite, in her push to have AECL (Atomic 

Energy of Canada Ltd.) build a CANDU 3 reactor and waste 

disposal in Saskatchewan, she says it wouldn't cost the 

taxpayers anything to do these kinds of projects.  Obviously it 

would cost over a billion dollars of taxpayers' money in 

Saskatchewan to build a CANDU 3 reactor. 

 

If you believe that bringing military and military development 

doesn't cost taxpayers any money, I don't know how you do 

your numbers.  Because obviously the military is totally paid 

for by the taxpayers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Minister, I am also on record about what I believe in terms of 

research dollars to Saskatchewan, not building nuclear reactors. 

 

One of the things that I would like to ask the minister is 

this.  It appears as though you are not familiar with what it is 

I'm talking about today.  This past week your Minister of 

Energy confessed he knew nothing about the potential for 

hydrogen research dollars coming to this province and trying to 

exercise our right in bringing those here. 

 

I would like to know, when are you going to have a 

Saskatchewan economic development authority with people 

who are not politicians -- people from the private sector, from 

labour, from agriculture, and others with expertise -- who will 

help us to find ventures to bring them to Saskatchewan for our 

benefit? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I wonder where the member 

has been because we have had numerous meetings that have 

been reported in the press with business people.  We've worked 

with the mayor of Saskatoon in discussions on the development 

of an economic development authority in Saskatoon that was 

announced this week.  The Premier sponsored a meeting with 

many of our friends in the business community to talk about 

economic development.  We'll be coming forward with a white 

paper as a result of that and other discussions. 

 

I wonder . . . I'm not sure what you're referring to that we 

haven't met with, and consulted with, business people.  We've 

done a great deal.  In fact I would argue many things have 

happened in the last six months.  And I advise the member to 

bring her ideas forward, and we'll include them in the white 

paper that we're planning on bringing forward. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Consultations with Energy Industry 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

question for the Minister of Energy and Mines in regard to Bill 

10.  Mr. Minister, as you know, that Bill has been the centre of 

great concern in the industry, so much that you had to pull the 

Bill from the daily business and go consult.  Will you give the 

Assembly a progress report on your consultations in regard to 

Bill 10? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would be very 

happy to debate Bill 10 with the members of the opposition as 

soon as they would give it second reading in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Give us the 

results of your consultations so far that you've had with the 

industry, and then we'll debate it. 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, the Bill would give you the power 

to simply decide that a mining company has cheated on its 

taxes and, by your opinion alone, send the company a bill for 

the taxes you have deemed they have cheated on.  Mr. 

Minister, did you have these provisions reviewed by the 

Minister of Justice before you included them in Bill 10? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I would 

be happy to debate this with these members of the 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

opposition any time they're ready to pass it through second 

reading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, we would like to know 

what the minister has been doing in the meantime since the Bill 

was introduced to the House, to where it is now.  Mr. Minister, 

in regard to Bill 10, as you know, there are substantial 

provisions for retroactivity throughout the Bill. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I think the member is fully aware of 

my decision yesterday not to get into details of any particular 

Bills that are before the Assembly.  And I would . . . The 

member knows my decision of yesterday.  If he has a more 

general question in regards to government policy, he can direct 

that to the government.  But if we get into particulars of Bills, I 

will rule the member out of order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too 

would like to direct some questions to the Minister of Energy.  

Mr. Minister, I believe you met yesterday morning with some 

members of the industry, and being the opposition member 

responsible, I'm very interested in the outcome of those 

meetings.  Mr. Minister, I had meetings with members 

concerned of the industry.  They've been contacting me on a 

regular basis and I'd like to be able to answer some of their 

questions. 

 

Would you today, or could you today, report to the House on 

the outcome of your meetings with those people yesterday? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I personally did not 

meet with the people in the industry and my department has not 

given me a report of the results.  When they are available, I'd 

be happy to discuss those with the member. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, I'm a little bit surprised that you 

didn't find time to meet with those people yesterday.  I was at a 

meeting in Saskatoon on Monday and I heard you say that you 

were prepared to be consultive, co-operative, and supportive.  

And you were applauded, you were applauded.  I was one of 

them that applauded you for that.  And now you tell me you 

never had time to meet with these people. 

 

Mr. Minister, we all know, as you said in you keynote address, 

the oil and gas industry is vital to Saskatchewan's economy, 

and keeping it viable is important to our province's economy.  

You said that.  We also know that the gas and oil industry 

under the NDP in the 1970s was practically non-existent. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it your intention and the intention of your 

government to push the energy industry right out of the 

province again? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do appreciate 

the fact that the member opposite was 

listening when I spoke, because this is the first indication that I 

have from the members opposite they've ever listened to 

anybody on this side of the House or ever read any document.  

The answer to your question, however, Mr. Speaker, is no. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  And, Mr. 

Minister, in this Bill, you're talking about retroactive legislation 

back to 1974.  Now that's 18 years -- 18 years. 

 

Mr. Minister, you claim that you want to encourage industry, to 

encourage growth in Saskatchewan. Yet your actions, Mr. 

Minister, on energy, prove just the opposite -- just the opposite.  

Have you done any studies of what the effects of your energy 

decisions will be on the industry, such as how many jobs will 

be lost, how many companies will move elsewhere, and what 

effect retroactive legislation will have on the industry.  Mr. 

Minister, would you please tell us what those studies are today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

commended the member opposite a few minutes ago for 

listening, and then he immediately turns around and shuts it off 

right there.  So I don't have a lot of confidence in the people 

opposite when you tell them something or when you pass them 

a piece of paper. 

 

We have consulted widely with the industry.  And just for the 

record, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to read one letter that I 

received from a major company in Calgary.  And it simply 

says: 

 

 LASMO would like to congratulate you on the deliberate and 

forthright manner of the Budget and we particularly want you 

to know how much we appreciate the frank and open 

communication afforded us and the industry by you, your 

staff, and the Department. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker.  Kind of strange.  It's kind of strange.  I read in here 

from the mining industry concerned, it says, "we weren't 

consulted."  I quote from a Mr. John MacDonald who says, "we 

weren't consulted." 

 

Mr. Minister, you never had a meeting with those people till 

about two weeks ago because of our opposition in the House.  

You had another one yesterday.  And I was at that meeting in 

Saskatoon and they said to me, we're having another meeting 

because of the pressure.  And I commend you on having that 

meeting.  Now don't stand there, Mr. Minister, and tell me that 

you have consulted with that industry because you have not. 

 

Mr. Minister, previous to forming government you promised 

the people of Saskatchewan that you would be open and that 

you would be accessible and that you would be consultive.  

That was your motto -- open and honest consultant.  So far the 

only consultations that took 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

place happened because you were forced into it.  Now you 

stand there in your . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I have a question. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well then ask your question. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, is it a committee of the NDP 

(New Democratic Party) Party running the Energy department?  

And has there been any nuclear agreement, or is it that you are 

truly incompetent, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I find this is a 

very interesting question.  If I have to judge on my own 

incompetence or competence here, I'm not sure that I'm willing 

to do that. 

 

I find however, Mr. Speaker, that I guess my level of 

self-righteousness just doesn't measure up to those on the 

opposite side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I would just like to repeat again for the 

members opposite that we have consulted widely.  And I will 

not read this letter, Mr. Speaker, but I have another letter which 

says similar to the one that I just read before.  And there are 

many more of this kind if they would like to hear them. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what's your point of order?  Order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The point of order is that in response to the 

minister's last statement, yes we would want that letter tabled 

that he quoted from during question period. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I'm not aware that the minister 

read from any . . . He didn't read from any statement at the end.  

He said, I could read from this letter, and he did not read. 

 

All right.  The members are asking for the tabling of the letter 

that the minister read from and that is a tradition of the House.  

And the minister has said he will table it. 

 

Order.  Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, the point of order that I would 

like to speak on is, during question period my colleague from 

Souris-Cannington was sat down because of some reference . . . 

a vague reference made to a Bill.  And, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I made my decision on it yesterday 

and that decision stands.  I've made my decision. 

An Hon. Member: -- I've got another point of order, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of clarification, does this mean 

now that the opposition has no opportunity to put forward its 

position? 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, during question 

period, the member from Wilkie, I believe, quoted from a 

document and I wondered if he would table that. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  We don't need any further 

clarification of that.  Members know full well that private 

members do not have to table documents that they read from.  

If the member however wishes to do so, he may do so.  But 

there's no, there's no compunction on the part of a member to 

table a document. 

 

Order. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, with thunderous applause, 

I would request the leave of the Assembly to introduce some 

guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the House a delegation of 

Australian trade union and employer representatives who are 

sitting in the gallery opposite me.  And they are in Canada 

visiting various provinces to study work-place reform 

initiatives and to share with us their experience on the same 

subject in Australia. 

 

I'd like to introduce them at this point: Mr. James Armstrong, 

who is the secretary-treasurer for the Australia Postal and 

Telecommunications Union; Ms. Monica Gould, who is the 

president of the National Union of Food Workers; Mr. Patrick 

McCarthy, who is the manager of change integration and mail 

technology at the Australian Postal Corporation; and Mr. Max 

Ogden, who is an advisor for the Australian Council of Trade 

Unions; and finally Mr. Ron Robson, who is the chief 

executive of Anderson Rea Ltd. 

 

I have a meeting with this distinguished group of friends from 

Australia in another room in this building immediately 

afterwards, at which time we're going to share some 

experience, and they have a full program in Saskatchewan over 

the next several days.  So, Mr. Speaker, would members of the 

Assembly welcome our guests from Australia. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 38(1), which 

states: 

 

 . . . oral questions may be asked seeking information from 

Ministers of the Crown relating to public affairs, and to other 

Members relating to any bill, motion or other public matter 

connected with the business of the Assembly . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you know, the rules and procedures of this 

Legislative Assembly are the supreme rules of this House, 

overriding precedent, Beauchesne's, and any other reference. 

 

Mr. Speaker, rule 38(1) explicitly provides the right to ask oral 

questions about Bills as was raised by the member from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've made my decision 

yesterday and . . . Next order of business. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You've got no right to do that. 

 

The Speaker: -- The members know full well if they disagree 

with the Speaker's decision you can move a substantive motion 

in this House of lack of confidence in the Speaker.  I've made 

my decision on . . . My decision was made yesterday.  I fully 

explained it to the members yesterday what my decision was. 

 

Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'd like to introduce some guests to you. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, sir.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to members of this 

Assembly, Mr. David Tindall, a restaurateur and STC 

(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) agent from the town 

of Gravelbourg, and his daughter in the west gallery.  This 

family is a hard-working and enthusiastic members of our 

community, and I'd ask the members of the House to welcome 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Saskatchewan Round Table on Environment and Economy 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This morning 

the Saskatchewan Round Table on Environment and Economy 

presented the Premier with the Conservation Strategy for 

Sustainable Development in Saskatchewan. 

 

The conservation strategy culminates three years of work by 

the round table and the contribution of more than 800 

Saskatchewan people through advisory groups and public 

meetings.  The strategy, with its 64 

recommendations and 203 action items, is a starting point 

which sets out a broad path to environmentally sustainable 

economic development. 

 

The strategy includes recommendations on how to achieve 

sustainability in areas such as agriculture, transportation, 

energy, mining, and wildlife, to name a few.  Some of the 

strategy's key recommendations are developing comprehensive 

strategies to managing our water resources, develop a 

sustainable energy path, manage our forests sustainably, 

minimize wastes, protect our soil resources, and maintain 

Saskatchewan biological diversity. 

 

The Saskatchewan government strongly endorses a concept of 

sustainable development.  We believe in protecting and using 

our resources wisely so that they are available for future 

generations to use. 

 

Many people are focussed this week on the Earth Summit in 

Rio de Janeiro.  World leaders are discussing how to integrate 

the environment and the economy.  It is important that we, in 

Saskatchewan, do our part. 

 

I think this conservation strategy for sustainable development 

addresses many of these important issues.  It is important that 

we find a balance between protecting the environment and 

creating economic opportunities. 

 

The government has already begun initiatives compatible with 

the conservation strategies planned for sustainable 

development: in the area of waste management and 

minimization -- an expanded beverage container recycling 

system, a white paper on waste minimization, a $1.75 million 

five-year municipal solid waste management assistance 

program; and to protect Saskatchewan species and eco-systems 

-- a $225,000 contribution to the Saskatchewan Conservation 

Data Centre; to protect our air -- a clean air strategy to be 

developed by a task force of Saskatchewan stakeholders, and 

advancing the deadline of 1995 for phasing out ozone depleting 

CFCs (chlorofluorocarbon). 

 

To plan and conserve our energy, we have already established 

the Saskatchewan Energy Conservation and Development 

Institute to manage our energy needs into the next century, and 

to protect our environment from hazardous substances, tougher 

regulations on the storage; to promote business opportunities, a 

five-year $1.5 million environmental technology development 

program; and to empower local communities and people, the 

community environmental management program; the 

Saskatchewan Green Works, incorporating cost-effective 

environmental improvements at Regina's public works fleet and 

the Victoria Square Mall; and to help better educate the public, 

an environmental resource network with its hundreds of 

information centres. 

 

Work is under way to reform Saskatchewan's environmental 

assessment legislation and shortly we'll be introducing the 

charter of environmental rights and responsibilities. 

 

The initiatives I have just mentioned fit right into the 

conservation strategy's plan for sustainable development. 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

The conservation strategy outlines what all of us in 

Saskatchewan should consider doing in support of the 

environment and the economy.  The Saskatchewan government 

believes the environment must be considered in all economic 

decisions if we are to survive as a province.  By developing our 

province in an environmentally sustainable manner, 

Saskatchewan's economy will benefit. 

 

The Premier has asked me to head a cabinet committee in 

sustainable development.  We will review the 

recommendations in the conservation strategy and advise 

cabinet on how we can achieve environmental, economic, and 

social sustainability. 

 

Once again, I would like to thank the people of the Round 

Table and the people of Saskatchewan for their contribution to 

the conservation strategy for sustainable development. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to table this document. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

thank the minister for presenting me with her speaking notes 

here a few minutes ago.  The Saskatchewan Round Table on 

the Environment, Mr. Speaker, has presented their report to the 

Premier and as I look over the minister's statement, I find a 

number of very interesting things that we can agree with. 

 

It talks of water management.  Water management is very 

important, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, as we see from the 

Lake Diefenbaker project and from the Rafferty-Alameda 

projects.  Sustainable energy path -- sustainable energy, Mr. 

Speaker, is very applaudable.  Co-generation is one of the 

means in the future by which we will all be provided with our 

electricity -- biomass is another means, wind and solar.  Mr. 

Speaker, we live in Saskatchewan, an area of the world that has 

a great amount of sunlight and -- even though a lot of it may be 

generated in this Assembly -- we have a lot of wind. 

 

Mr. Speaker, soil conservation:  our soil resource as an 

agricultural province is very important to us.  And soil 

conservation in the sense of minimum till and chemical fallow 

is part of that conservation effort.  One of the items, Mr. 

Speaker, that I think would aid in soil conservation would be a 

change to the quota system as instituted by the wheat board. 

 

If we had a quota system based on 160 acres per quarter rather 

than on cultivated acres, there would be less need, less desire, 

to break up those areas of the province which are marginal 

lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will be discussing with the minister the Bill 

she has before the House, debating them, Bills 1, 2, and 3.  The 

environment is very important to the Saskatchewan people and 

to the world, Mr. Speaker.  We are willing to work with the 

minister to develop our environment and our economy in the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I would like to 

join everyone in this House in commending the group, the 

Saskatchewan Round Table on the Environment, the excellent 

work and recommendations that they've put forward to us, and 

given the information from the Earth Summit, it was 

embarrassing at least, and I think disgraceful at best, that we've 

discovered that as a nation Canada uses more energy per capita 

and creates more waste per capita than any other nation in the 

world.  And I commend the hon. minister and the Government 

of Saskatchewan for doing everything in its power to attempt to 

make us better citizens of the world.  I congratulate you and I 

hope to work alongside with you to make sure that this 

happens. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 45 -- A Bill to amend The Business Corporations 

Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of 

The Business Corporations Amendment Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 46 -- A Bill to amend The Income Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Income Tax Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 47 -- A Bill to repeal the Health Research Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a 

Bill to repeal the Health Research Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

QUESTIONS PUT BY MEMBERS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, no. 20 to 38 inclusive, I would ask 

these questions be converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motions for return (debatable). 

 

(1430) 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 -- An Act to amend The Revenue and Financial 

Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

make some brief explanatory remarks on the Act to amend The 

Revenue and Financial Services Act before 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

I move second reading. 

 

The Revenue and Financial Services Act regulates the 

administrative requirements of many of our provincial taxes.  

Mr. Speaker, most of these changes were publicly announced 

and have been in effect since January 1, 1991.  What we are 

doing now is putting into legislation what should have been 

done in that time. 

 

Businesses are now allowed to obtain a deduction for the tax 

portion of their bad debts.  As well, the limitation period for 

obtaining refunds of tax overpayments has been extended from 

three to four years. 

 

Another change included in this Bill is the repeal of a provision 

which permitted a vendor to avoid the obligation of collecting 

tax on a sale if the purchaser refused to pay the tax.  This 

change is retroactive to April 1, 1991 at which time it was 

implemented and has been in operation since then, in excess of 

a year. 

 

Because these changes have been in place for over a year and 

they are changes which make tax administration more fair to 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, we are proceeding with this Bill in 

basically the same form in which it was introduced by the 

former government last year. 

 

The Bill also makes several changes to certain procedures in 

the Provincial Comptroller's office.  The major change will 

allow the Provincial Comptroller to examine payments either 

before or after payment is made, thereby creating significant 

payment processing efficiencies.  The Provincial Auditor 

supports this change, Mr. Speaker, and indeed supports it and 

says it is the correct move to make. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, this Bill ensures that the same persons 

who are full-time members of the Saskatchewan Municipal 

Board are also members of the Board of Revenue 

Commissioners.  This puts into law what has been the practice 

for many years.  Most of the amendments concerning the Board 

of Revenue Commissioners and the Provincial Comptroller's 

office were also included in the Bill which died on the order 

paper last year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With these words, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that it is 

desirable to provide a proper, legal basis for these changes as it 

should be for any tax measures or administrative measures of 

the government.  And therefore I am pleased to move second 

reading of this Bill, An Act to amend The Revenue and 

Financial Services Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in 

regards to Bill 28, the Minister of Finance is right that some of 

these provisions were introduced previous to this legislature, 

and the opposition, the official opposition, doesn't have a 

problem with some of them. 

 

I might say to the minister that there are a few areas such as 

some of the debt provisions that are in the Bill that we are 

going to want to explore a little bit further with the affected 

parties.  And I think that once that is done that we probably 

won't have any problem with seeing this Bill proceed into 

committee, but I would ask for leave to adjourn today. 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

briefly comment and explain the provisions in this Bill.  As 

members of the House will know, that this and several of the 

other amendments which I'm going to be introducing here 

today are dealing with tax measures, are implementations of 

budget provisions that were announced during the budget 

address on May 7 earlier this year. 

 

This is an amendment to The Education and Health Tax Act.  

What this amendment does, as announced in the budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is increases the sales tax rate to 8 per cent on that 

narrow sales tax base which is applied in Saskatchewan  

_- far narrower than it is in most other provinces except of 

course in Alberta where there is no sales tax. 

 

I would much rather of course, Mr. Speaker, be speaking to tax 

reductions and boasting about our financial wealth as was once 

possible to be done in this province of Saskatchewan in 1970s 

when there was last a New Democratic government in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  But I would be quite misleading 

to myself and to the public and to this House if I was to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, during the past 10 years there were decisions 

made on expenditures without balancing those expenditures 

with appropriate revenue measures, and therefore we face 

today in Saskatchewan a huge debt.  We face in Saskatchewan 

today a reduction by two of the rating agencies to BBB.  

Standard and Poor's recently reduced our credit rating to a BBB 

plus. 

 

It was, Mr. Speaker, decisions that this government has made 

in this budget, which although the credit rating agency reduced 

our credit rating to a BBB plus, they applauded and recognized 

that the government was taking the appropriate steps to bring 

this province back to financial responsibility and fiscal 

responsibility and preparing for a positive and sound future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the problem that we face today was a problem 

that was created by the refusal of the former government to 

face reality and to react responsibly to what was then the 

situation in Saskatchewan.  You cannot have growths of 

expenditures on the average of 6 per cent a year when your 

revenues are only going up by about 3 per cent a year.  And 

that was the case, on the average, during the last 10 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I detailed the severity of our fiscal situation in the 

budget address, and I have made a few comments on it.  And I 

will not state much more on that in my remarks here this 

afternoon. 

 

As stated by our Premier, this government has decided to 

confront our financial problems.  Indeed our first priority is to 

get the deficit under control.  Unless we do that, Mr. Speaker, 

there is no future; there is no financial freedom for the people 

in Saskatchewan and for the government. 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

We believe that this government was elected, Mr. Speaker, not 

to plunge the people of Saskatchewan further into debt, but 

rather to take the measures required to get us back onto our 

financial feet.  We must take these measures to ensure that our 

children will enjoy the quality of life which we have enjoyed 

and will continue to enjoy.  If we are to provide the same level 

of government programs and services to our future generations, 

then we must take action to reduce the deficit and we must do it 

now. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan resisted the previous government's 

expansion of the education and health tax base.  While in 

opposition we also opposed the expanded PST (provincial sales 

tax).  The expanded PST was an unfair and an unbalanced way 

of increasing taxes.  It unfairly prejudiced certain sectors of the 

economy.  Booksellers, restaurant owners, and others saw the 

tax rate applied to their sales soar from zero to 7 per cent, 

especially right after the federal government had imposed the 

GST just a few short months earlier. 

 

The expanded PST created an unlevel playing-field for these 

sectors and we believe that is why the people of Saskatchewan 

rejected that tax.  However, by increasing the general education 

and health tax rate by one percentage point, Mr. Speaker, we 

are asking everyone to participate in our attack on the deficit. 

 

Essentially family items such as food and children's clothing 

and adult clothing under $300, prescription and 

non-prescription drugs, electricity used in homes, natural gas 

and other fuel used in home heating, and reading materials will 

continue to be exempt from the tax. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we considered several options in deciding how to 

generate needed revenue and we feel that this is one of the fair 

options.  Even at 8 per cent, Saskatchewan still has the third 

lowest rate of the provinces that impose a sales tax. 

 

In addition, in raising the tax rate by one percentage point, this 

Bill also makes tobacco subject to education and health tax.  

Six other provinces currently include tobacco in their sales tax 

bases.  Only British Columbia and Prince Edward Island 

continue to exclude tobacco from their retail sales tax bases. 

 

These measures, Mr. Speaker, finally I might add, are expected 

to raise an additional $87.7 million in 1992-1993.  With these 

explanatory comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 

this Bill, An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a 

few points and then adjourn debate.  I'm going to bring to the 

attention of the Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan 

that this government has had an opportunity to make choices.  

We heard about it in question period. 

 

Choices to choose between dealing with sick people and people 

who are in constant need of specialized care.  They had choices 

with those people and they said, we'll increase their costs.  

We'll increase their costs in relation 

to what they can afford to pay.  And those people who are on 

the kinds of things that relate to diabetics are the kinds of 

places and the things that I think that this government made 

wrong choices. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also think that these people made wrong choices 

as it relates to this kind of a tax.  We had, in the province of 

Saskatchewan, an opportunity to: one, make an investment in 

the business community through tax harmonization, and I think 

that that should have been done.  We had in this province an 

opportunity to make concessions to farmers and business men 

and people all across this province, that would relate to 

fairness. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they had choices to make.  They had individual 

choices to make about where they were going to tax and, Mr. 

Speaker, I think they were wrong.  They were wrong as it 

relates to a number of things.  And I want to point it out 

because I live on the west side of this province, and if you go 

the west side of this province you will know that the people in 

Lloydminster, Kindersley, Maple Creek, Swift Current, 

Shaunavon, all have choices to make.  And, Mr. Speaker, they 

do it on a very, very regular basis. 

 

And I want to point out to the minister that his minister 

responsible for diversification and tourism had his department 

go down to Minot to buy stamps to send to the United States.  

And you have choices to make, Mr. Premier, and Mr. Finance 

Minister, and you're making choices.  The same choices are 

going to be made by individuals on the west side of the 

province, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier -- exactly those same 

choices. 

 

When they go to buy an appliance for their home, where are 

they going to buy it?  Are they going to buy it in Swift Current, 

Kindersley, Unity, Wilkie, North Battleford?  No, sir, Mr. 

Speaker, they will go to Alberta.  And then what are you going 

to do?  Set up police along the edge of the border?  That, Mr. 

Minister, is what you're doing to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Minister, last Friday two businesses closed their doors in 

Swift Current.  And what are they doing, Mr. Minister?  

They're taking those opportunities and delivering them to the 

people in Medicine Hat. That's what they're doing.  You're 

making choices, Mr. Minister. 

 

There is a time and a place when you risk the observation that 

I'm going to make today.  That is that the people will choose 

where they're going to spend their money.  They're going to go 

outside of the province. And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what 

they're doing.  If you would have taken one opportunity to take 

a look at the oil patch and one very important feature in this 

province to give a level playing-field . . . Mr. Minister, you just 

raised it another point higher and people are going to move out 

with another point on the E&H (education and health) tax 

because every truck they buy in Swift Current or every truck 

they buy in Kindersley or Lloydminster or wherever, is not 

going to be bought on the Saskatchewan side. 
 

That opportunity is going to be . . . the investment is going to 

be made by the people who purchase their vehicles, their 

equipment, in Alberta.  They're going to move to Alberta, and 

they're going to deliver the service to 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

Saskatchewan out of those provinces. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you'd reach a point of no return in this 

pretty soon.  And that's what's going to happen, and that's what 

is happening. 

 

You gave the people of Saskatchewan a choice, Mr. Premier, 

and Mr. Minister.  You gave them a choice as it relates to their 

business practice, the things that they're going to do.  You did it 

for the home owners, you did it for business, you did it for 

farmers.  And they're going to choose not to buy in 

Saskatchewan if they can at all possibly help it. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, if you would have done the very honourable 

thing and allowed harmonization to become a part of the 

process, you would have had an opportunity to balance your 

books over and over again.  And that, Mr. Minister, would have 

given . . . Mr. Premier, that would have given an opportunity 

for the businesses in the province of Saskatchewan to succeed. 

 

(1445) 

 

And what's happening to these people today?  They're slowly 

leaving.  And I don't have to count the numbers of people who 

have already left Swift Current because of this kind of 

intention.  And there are going to be more.  The oil patch is 

slowly going west and they will continue to go -- threatened, 

Mr. Premier, and Mr. Minister, by taxes and an overwhelming 

desire on your part to absolutely regulate and control them out 

of business.  And that, I think, in the long run is exactly what 

you want to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that, but what he has provided to this 

Assembly, even in spite of the high tax increases, is still a 

budget that has a deficit that is the second largest in the history 

of Saskatchewan.  That, Mr. Minister, is what people are 

complaining about. 

 

They said . . . or you said, over time you could operate this 

government on four a half billion dollars.  You said it over and 

over again.  And I heard it from people standing on this side of 

the House when you were in opposition -- four and a half 

billion dollars is enough. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, you have said that, and 

you know what your budget did?  You spent 4 . . . or no, $5.1 

billion is what you're spending.  You said four and a half was 

enough. 

 

That, Mr. Minister, is exactly why the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan are saying, I'm tired of it; I'm not fighting any 

more; I'm leaving.  And they're leaving, Mr. Minister, from the 

west side of the province over and over and over again. 

 

And I want to ask the members of this Assembly who are 

perhaps on the other side, and they will say, ask the members 

from the west side what exactly is happening.  When it comes 

to buying tires for their implements, buying equipment for their 

oil patch -- all of those things -- what are they doing?  They're 

not buying them in Swift Current, Lloydminster, or Kindersley.  

They're buying them in Alberta.  In Meadow Lake they're 

buying them in Alberta, right on.  And why?  Because they 

don't have to 

pay 8 per cent sales tax.  That's zero in Alberta, Mr. Minister, 

and that's why they're doing it.  And over and over again 

they're doing it.  I know, Mr. Minister, that this tax is wrong 

and therefore I am going to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital 

Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to 

move second reading of this Bill, An Act to amend The 

Corporation Capital Tax Act.  In speaking to it I just want to 

address a number of things.  First of all, I want to address the 

continuous comments by the members opposite when they rise 

in this House and they talk about choices.  I think, Mr. Speaker, 

it's not unfair to ask the members opposite, what are the 

choices?  What choices would they make in the circumstances 

that this province faces today?  And maybe even more 

important, because it sets the stage for where we are today, is 

what kind of choices did those members opposite make when 

they were on this side of the House and when they were of the 

government of the day from 1982 until 1991. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was obvious that they spent without any 

due regard for the capacity of this province to pay those bills 

which they incurred on the credit card.  Those are the kind of 

choices that the member from Morse made.  He would sit at the 

cabinet table and he would sit in his caucus and then he'd come 

along with his colleagues into this House and simply spend 

money, borrowed money.  He didn't think it was any skin off 

his back because he thought it wasn't his money. What the 

heck, the people and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, that's 

going to be their problem.  He was kind of independent.  He 

could probably sell whatever he owns and go somewhere else.  

No regard for the future of the new generations who would 

have to live in Saskatchewan and pay the price, Mr. Chairman, 

Mr. Speaker, of the folly, the economic and financial folly, of 

the former Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

A result of that has created a situation which requires these 

motions and these second reading Bills that I'm introducing 

here today.  Mr. Speaker, one result -- a $15 billion debt.  Now 

you can put your head in the sand, one can as an elected 

member of this House or as a cabinet minister, and ignore that.  

The point, Mr. Speaker, is that the people who lend us the 

money will not ignore that and at some point in time will stop 

lending us the money.  And if the member thinks that under 

those circumstances that some of the measures we have taken 

in the budget this year are severe, he should just stop and 

contemplate on how severe it would be if the province was 

unable to borrow all the money that is needed to pay the daily 

bills.  We would actually lose whole programs. 

 

If we don't take the actions we're taking here, Mr. Speaker, we 

would lose a good portion of medicare down the road.  This 

government is not prepared to let that happen.  We're going to 

make the hard decisions that are necessary to get it under 

control.  We're not prepared to continue spending $760 million 

a year and growing of interest charges because we believe that 

money would be better spent on health care and education and 

industrial 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

and economic development. 

 

Those are the choices we're making, and it's unfortunate that 

the members of former Conservative government refuse to 

make those kinds of choices.  Mr. Speaker, if the right choices 

had been taken in the last 10 years, we wouldn't be having to 

introduce some of this legislation that's before us today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, harmonization could have been introduced.  

Harmonization would have cost $440 million out of the 

taxpayers' pocket, and therefore we have to introduce Bills like 

this Corporation Capital Tax Act, Mr. Speaker, because The 

Corporation Capital Tax Act is an example of spreading this 

share of paying for the bills in Saskatchewan among everybody 

rather than singling out one sector of the Saskatchewan 

population, as the former Conservative government had done.  

They were going to single out the consumer, totally and 

exclusively, with the PST.  And the consumer, Mr. Speaker, 

would have had to pay, in fully implemented harmonized PST, 

$440 million a year in the first fully harmonized year. 

 

And you know what?  Only 180 millions of that would have 

gone to the provincial treasury.  Now that's an interesting and 

perverted way of taking the burden off the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer.  That's not the way that this government, Mr. 

Speaker, chooses to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill increases the corporation capital tax rate 

levied on financial institutions from 3 per cent to three and a 

quarter per cent of taxable, paid-up capital of a corporation.  In 

addition the rate of the corporation capital tax resource 

surcharge is increased from 2 per cent to 3 per cent of the 

resource corporations' value of resource sales.  Both of these 

changes are effective on April 1, 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill also makes a minor change to the 

calculation of paid up capital so that effective April 1, 1992, 

paid-up capital includes the long-term debt of a corporation 

where the amount is owing to a pension trust or other trust.  

This change will help to protect capital tax revenue and 

eliminate the potential for inconsistent tax treatment among 

competing firms. 

 

The corporation capital tax is essentially an annual tax on the 

wealth of a corporation.  It is an important source of revenue 

for the province.  In 1992-93 fiscal year, the tax will raise over 

$150 million in total.  The increase in the tax rate for banks, 

and loan and trust corporations, will generate additional 

revenue of approximately $1.3 million in this fiscal year.  This 

is first corporation capital tax rate increase for financial 

institutions since January 1, 1987, Mr. Speaker -- not exactly 

onerous. 

 

Since July 1, 1988, resource corporations have been liable for 

the corporation capital tax resource charge.  The resource 

surcharge was introduced to ensure that large resource 

corporations operating in Saskatchewan paid their fair share of 

taxes.  Prior to April 1, 1992, a corporation's resource 

surcharge liability was the difference between 2 per cent of the 

corporation's value of resource sales and its existing 

corporation capital tax liability.  Effective April 1, 1992, the 

tax rate is increased to 3 per cent of the corporation's value of 

resource sales in 

the province.  The changes in the rate of the corporation capital 

tax resource surcharge, Mr. Speaker, will increase revenues in 

1992-93 by approximately $25.1 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes to the corporation capital tax being 

introduced in this Bill will help ensure that the corporate sector 

contributes to the deficit reduction and the restoration of 

Saskatchewan's financial wealth.  Mr. Speaker, this is one way 

of making sure that the burden of taxation -- and it is a burden, 

taxes always are -- is spread equitably across all sectors of the 

economy.  And that's why I'm pleased to move second reading 

of the Bill to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act at this 

time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  In speaking in 

response to the minister's comments on Bill 30, Mr. Speaker, 

certainly everyone in the province of Saskatchewan expects our 

corporate sector to pay their fair share.  It's something, I think, 

that all governments have looked at over time.  As the minister 

said, the last amendments to these particular areas were done in 

1987 and 1988. 

 

And I think it's important, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk 

about the larger corporate sector, which this Bill mostly refers 

to -- although it does get down to the level of a number of 

Saskatchewan companies . . . I can think of a couple of 

Saskatchewan-based oil companies that are affected by the 

provisions in this Bill. 

 

As the member from Morse mentioned in debate on the 

previous Bill, it isn't so much the changes that the minister has 

made in this one that make determining decisions amongst our 

business community -- the fact that we're going to raise a little 

over $1 million, as the minister said, is not terribly onerous 

when you spread it across the entire corporate sector -- but the 

problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister's other initiatives, 

whether they be in the sales tax area, in gasoline tax, in 

personal income tax, and a whole lot of areas add up to a lot of 

money. 

 

I've been told by a number of resource companies that their 

costs on budget day went up by $500,000 to operate in the 

province of Saskatchewan; $500,000, Mr. Speaker, often will 

make people make decisions as to where they stay, what kind 

of investments they're going to make, what type of profile that 

they are going to have in a long-term business relationship with 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem that we foresee, Mr. Speaker, the problem that we 

foresee, not in Bills such as this one, but in the other things that 

the minister is doing, is that when you don't have a company 

here at all it's very difficult to get any tax out of it. 

 

And I hope the minister very clearly remembers the 1970s and 

how the New Democratic Party drove business after business 

after business out of this province.  They were gone.  There 

was nobody left to tax.  They had simply loaded up their trucks 

and headed outside this province because of people like the 

Finance minister.  And it took another government to bring 

them back again. 

 

Starting in 1982, companies came back in this province.  The 

population started to grow.  And I remind the Minister 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

of Finance when they left office in 1982 that the population 

was somewhat less than it is today, that the province of 

Saskatchewan did get over a million people in the 1980s 

because people were welcomed back to this province to be 

taxpayers.  And if we're going to put such onerous regimes on 

them, they simply will leave again. 

 

The Minister of Finance said to my colleague from Morse, you 

may be one of those people that can pack up leave.  Well I can 

tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Morse, most of the 

members of our caucus here, simply can't hook their tractor 

onto their piece of land and haul it off to Alberta. 

 

The investment that four generations of my family have made 

in this province pretty well guarantees that I'm going to be 

stuck here no matter what the Minister of Finance imposes on 

me.  And there's a whole lot of other people around this 

province, Mr. Speaker, with the same kind of roots and feeling.  

And I would suggest if anyone probably packs up and moves a 

little later on in life it might be the Minister of Finance because 

he doesn't have those same roots down here. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, it's always a very careful balancing act.  This 

one alone, this Bill alone, I don't believe is onerous as long as 

there's somebody left in the province of Saskatchewan to tax at 

the end of the day.  And there are very clear choices, as the 

minister said, very clear choices. 

 

I don't believe for a minute that the taxpayer of Saskatchewan 

should be investing in natural gas pipelines.  We've got $200 

million worth to lay in the next few years.  I don't believe the 

taxpayer should have to do that.  I don't believe the taxpayer 

should take a Saskatchewan-based insurance company into 

other provinces at the taxpayers' cost.  I don't believe that. 

 

And I don't believe for a minute when the minister talks about 

choices that the $1.13 billion that the taxpayer of this province 

sunk into potash mines in the 1970s were a good choice.  That 

money in the bank for a rainy day might have made a whole lot 

of sense in the 1990s. 

 

So I say to the minister, I say to the minister before adjourning 

debate on this Bill, just make sure at the end of the day under 

your stewardship that there's somebody left in the province of 

Saskatchewan to tax, that there are corporations here that will 

pay their fair share.  With that, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(1500) 

 

Bill No. 31 -- An Act to amend the Tobacco Tax Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just 

want to make some brief comments of explanation of this Bill 

to amend The Tobacco Tax Act.  This Bill increases the tax on 

a package of cigarettes from $1.67 to $2.00 effective on May 8, 

1992.  The tax on one gram of fine cut or pipe tobacco goes 

from 4.4 cents to 5.3 cents. 

 

These changes, Mr. Speaker, are expected to yield an 

additional $17 million in this fiscal year of 1992-93.  Prior to 

these changes, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan had one of the 

lowest tobacco tax rates in the country.  In the submission 

prepared by the Canadian Cancer Society this spring, they 

stated that these low tobacco tax rates represented a 

subsidization of the tobacco industry by the taxpayers of this 

province.  They also mention that over 38,000 lives are lost in 

this country each year because of tobacco use, including an 

estimated 1,200 people in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the consumption of tobacco has been declining in 

recent years; much of this has been through people adopting 

healthier life-styles.  However, higher taxes have also 

contributed to a reduction in the use of tobacco products.  The 

reduction in smoking, Mr. Speaker, is in keeping with, I think, 

any responsible approach or in keeping with any goal to 

promote a healthier life-style for Saskatchewan as well as 

anywhere else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well as achieving that, this is obviously an 

important revenue measure with an additional $17 million 

which has been necessary to bring the deficit to the level which 

it is today under this budget, rather than the $960 million which 

it was in the last fiscal year.  We cannot possibly sustain that 

kind of deficit level. 

 

Let us assume that we ran deficits of $800 million a year, 

which was kind of the average of the former government.  That 

means that in that year we would incur an additional charge of 

interest on the public debt of $80 million.  If we did that for 

three years in a row, Mr. Speaker, we would have interest 

charges paid by the Saskatchewan taxpayer in a population of 

less than a million people, with about 360,000 of whom are 

taxpayers, we'd have annual interest charges that they would 

have to pay, of a billion dollars a year. 

 

That's not sustainable.  I'm sure you will agree, Mr. Speaker, 

that's not sustainable.  What that would mean, that for every 

$80 million of interest charges we incurred in the next fiscal 

year, we'd have to find either additional tax revenues or we'd 

have to find further cuts in expenditures. 

 

The only way to solve the problem that we face financially in 

Saskatchewan is to make the hard choices which this 

government has made, such as this tax measure -- although this 

is not as hard as some of the ones that have had to be made -- 

so that we begin to manage our debt, manage our financial 

affairs, and restore financial freedom for the people of 

Saskatchewan in to the future, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I move second reading of this Act to amend The Tobacco Tax 

Act. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a few brief 

comments on Bill No. 31, The Tobacco Tax Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one takes issue with the comments of the 

Minister of Finance as far as the detrimental effects of tobacco 

and their concerns that people in the health community have 

with people who use tobacco.  It's a well-known fact. 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that that was the reason for the 

minister increasing the tax.  I think the minister was looking for 

ways to raise significant amounts of revenue, as have past 

governments in this area.  Certainly we've seen the price of 

tobacco almost quadruple in the last 10 years. 

 

I guess what we really find irritating, Mr. Speaker, about this 

particular Bill, is the fact that everyone in Saskatchewan knew 

about it prior to the budget being released.  And as everyone 

knows, the trade in illicit tobacco products today is one of the 

major concerns of our law enforcement agencies. 

 

We have all sorts of stories about tobacco being brought in 

from the United States illicitly.  We know there's a lot of 

cross-border shopping going on with our neighbouring 

provinces. And as we said to the minister in debate on the 

interim supply motion, when everybody in the province knows 

that a pack of cigarettes is going up almost 80 cents, I think 

people probably took advantage of it. 

 

And I think in Committee of the Whole, the minister had better 

be prepared to answer questions on that fact, that we want to 

make sure that his officials have checked into the fact that his 

budget was widely known ahead of time.  And we are going to 

be asking the minister, when we get into committee, some very 

specific questions about The Tobacco Tax Act and its 

ramifications. 

 

And I stand by what I said then, Mr. Speaker.  With that kind 

of a budget leak, with that kind of sloppiness in the Department 

of Finance, I think it would have been incumbent upon the 

minister to tender his resignation at the appropriate time.  And 

if his department is running as sloppily today as it was when 

they prepared the budget, people of Saskatchewan are going to 

be in for a rough time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the Premier on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that the House 

Leader on this side, the Government House Leader, has spoken 

to the opposition members for me to ask of you, sir, and the 

Assembly, leave to make a statement on the constitution which 

will be of interest, I hope, to members and to provide an 

opportunity for response from the opposition. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Negotiations on the Constitution of Canada 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

And I thank the members for providing this opportunity.  I 

must alert you -- perhaps I should use the word warn you -- Mr. 

Speaker and members that this will be a rather lengthy 

statement, but of necessity.  And I will try to be as succinct as I 

can, but it's a very complex subject matter.  And I thought that 

a full report would be 

more desirable than one which is a little more truncated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as members of the House will know, the 

constitutional negotiations have now been recessed for about a 

week, at least another week approximately left to go, for a 

period of reflection and consultation.  And I've received a full 

report from the minister -- and his officials -- who is 

representing the province of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 

Justice. I might add very ably representing the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- And I believe as well that there have 

been full briefings provided to the official opposition and to the 

Leader of the Liberal Party by the Minister of Justice.  And 

we'll continue to do this as events dictate. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, to you and to the members of the Assembly 

at large, and to the people of the province of Saskatchewan, a 

brief status report as we the province of Saskatchewan see it, 

with respect to the negotiations. 

 

Let me begin first of all, Mr. Speaker, by reminding the House 

what brought us to this juncture.  In part, as most will know, 

everybody will know, Canada is a history of ongoing tension, 

some might describe, a tension which has been deeply 

embedded within our Canadian society. 

 

This country is a diverse one.  It's a country of diversity, 

diversity which frequently is the potential source of discord, 

but which diversity also, I believe, has been the source of one 

of our greatest strengths as a nation.  It's been the healthy 

tension which has resulted in a form of federalism and a society 

which makes this country one of the best places on earth in 

which to live.  Respect for diversity, therefore, is fundamental 

to our national identity. 

 

We are a country of two large language blocks, both regionally 

centred.  We draw much of our national identity within the 

world community from this fact.  When people elsewhere think 

of Canada, they think not only of a very vast land, and 

sometimes I guess a very cold land with a lot of snow and ice, 

but they also think of a nation and a land with linguistic and 

ethnic identities in two of the world's largest language 

communities. 

 

Most of the respect that our country enjoys, or perhaps I should 

say much of the respect that our country enjoys in the world, 

comes from a recognition that our two major ethnic 

communities have co-existed peacefully in one state for such a 

length of time -- 125 years celebration this summer.  And as we 

look about the world, especially today, I think all of us should 

give thanks daily for this peaceful and fruitful co-existence. 

 

Canada has maintained this relationship, as I've said, for 125 

years because of the willingness of our citizens to constantly 

adjust and update the relationships between the two major 

language groups and to do so in a spirit of co-operation and 

compromise. 

 

There has been a great deal of adjustment.  In the years 

following Confederation, the French-speaking 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

community in Quebec was a dominated one ruled in part by an 

Anglo economic lite.  After World War II such a situation was 

no longer acceptable, and particularly after 1960, the Quiet 

Revolution in Quebec, there was resistance and rejection of this 

domination.  It became necessary for Canada to enter into a 

series of discussions and compromises and changes to 

accommodate the new Canadian reality.  Those 

accommodations are not yet complete. 

 

Quebecers are different and they want to know that their 

difference does not make them second-rate Canadians.  This 

then is one of the historical routes of the present negotiations -- 

a profound need on the part of the people of Quebec to be 

reassured through constitutional arrangements that they are a 

valued and equal part of Canada. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the need for constitutional change has other 

historical roots as well.  While Quebec has changed profoundly 

since 1867, so has the rest of the nation.  This is no longer 

simply a country of the English and the French.  Outside of 

Quebec the complexion of Canada has changed dramatically.  

Our communities are now home to dozens of languages and 

ethnic groups.  We are rich now with the diversity of the whole 

world -- a truly cosmopolitan society. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan, as all members know, times have 

changed too.  Permit me a personal example.  Last November I 

had the great honour of being sworn in as Saskatchewan's first 

Premier of Ukrainian descent.  And the cabinet ministers sworn 

in with me that day represent a diversity of ethnic backgrounds 

which would have been unthinkable in this legislature even 30, 

maybe even 20 years ago. 

 

And this is the case with the Assembly at large.  When the 

elected representatives of this House converse in Cree or 

Ukrainian or French or English or any other language, it is 

accepted.  Not only accepted, but it's rejoiced in as a sign of our 

ethnic and linguistic diversity. 

 

Here too then, Mr. Speaker, is one of the roots of the present 

discussions -- the need to accommodate the new reality of 

regional, economic, and ethnic differences outside of Quebec.  

We must ensure that the new arrangements adequately reflect 

that changed circumstance too. 

 

Equally important, Mr. Speaker, new arrangements must 

adequately reflect the rightful place of first people in the 

Canadian mosaic.  Tentatively at first in the 1960s, in the 

1970s, and now more assertively, first peoples have come to 

demand their proper place within Canada, the rightful 

recognition that they were the first stewards of this great land. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, many worry about their demands, about these 

demands.  They fret about the accommodations which are 

necessary to be made, about the ability of our society to 

adequately accommodate the place of the first peoples. 

I want to state clearly that our government does not fear this 

change.  We believe that it will be difficult to achieve, that 

many tough negotiations are yet ahead and will be needed.  But 

we enter this new phase and stage determined to succeed with 

good will and tolerance, secure in our belief that this is a 

change which is profoundly important and long overdue and 

needed. 

 

The roots then of these current negotiations are not to be found 

in the failure of any particular deal or arrangement.  We are not 

in this current round of constitutional negotiations only because 

the Meech Lake accord collapsed.  We are in these negotiations 

because it is necessary to continually revise our fundamental 

constitutional arrangements to take into account the changing 

realities which is Canada. 

 

There's an old saying, Mr. Speaker:  you either grow and 

change, or you die -- and so too with societies.  We must grow 

and change or new pressures and strains will divide us and 

eventually rip us apart.  Peaceful, democratic change  

_- constitutional change -- is needed in Canada now, and we 

must respond in a charitable and compromising way to that 

need. 

 

In that spirit then, Mr. Speaker, we have begun this latest round 

of constitutional discussion and negotiation.  As I have 

reported before, we came to the table with certain goals and 

principles.  Let me outline them briefly in the context of the 

negotiations. 

 

The first principle or goal is that our determination is that these 

negotiations must succeed.  They should succeed, that Canada 

will not be forced to flounder over the inability of negotiators 

to meet or to compromise.  But, Mr. Speaker, even a 

willingness to compromise can falter in the face of intractable 

or unreasonable demands. 

 

And so our second guiding principle is that we do not accept 

the view that these negotiations must be made at any cost, that 

they cannot be made at any cost just to succeed.  There are 

limits beyond which we should not go.  We should not, for 

example, be prepared to negotiate away the fundamental 

characteristics which have shaped our national identity, which 

have been the glue holding Canadians together.  Canada must 

maintain sufficient capacity for independence and autonomy to 

remain a truly different nation state. 

 

We cannot compromise the long-term future of our country 

through short-term political fixes.  Our national government 

must remain truly national, and it must retain the capacity to 

meet national goals and objectives of all Canadians living 

everywhere.  It must have the ability and the capacity to 

maintain the national programs which have kept us together 

and which bind us together. 

 

I believe that these programs -- like equalization, regional 

development, medicare, social assistance, and others -- which 

are currently funded in large measure by all Canadians through 

the federal government, are important national symbols.  In 

addition to being important policy programs, they are rallying 

points of Canadian identity.  These must be maintained and 

expanded where appropriate. 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

To acquiesce to demands that would so decentralize Canada 

that they would seriously damage the ability of the national 

government to function in the way that I've just described is, 

for my way of thinking, Mr. Speaker, simply an impossibility. 

 

In our opinion, with respect to the current round of 

negotiations, none of the changes proposed to date would do 

that although we're keeping a watchful eye on the evolution of 

the discussions. 

 

The proposed revisions, for example, to the restrictions of the 

federal spending power on national programs and the 

affirmations of provincial jurisdiction in several areas like 

tourism, recreation, urban affairs, and others, are crafted in 

such a way to allow for a reasonably strong national role.  In 

particular, Mr. Speaker, for those provinces who lack the 

financial resources to launch or maintain certain social 

programs, there are safeguards to ensure continued vital 

spending by the federal government and equity of access for all 

provinces for different arrangements. 

 

Now I did say to date, Mr. Speaker, because we may not yet 

have had the complete universe of changes unfold before us.  

There may yet be more proposals put on the table, especially 

by the province of Quebec, which as you know is not at the 

bargaining table.  And if this is done, these will require careful 

further evaluation. 

 

Now the Saskatchewan government is also determined not to 

accept constitutional changes which will upset the delicate 

balance of the federal system of government, the delicate 

balance of federation, in ways which weaken the long-term 

stability of the country. 

 

What do we mean by this?  Well whatever arrangements are 

concluded, there must be an ability for all governments to 

participate.  Mr. Speaker, we believe in the fundamental 

equality of the provinces, recognizing that we are different as 

provinces, profoundly different in some respects, and that 

different but equal arrangements might be necessary in some 

instances. 

 

In short, while there is asymmetry in our federation -- the term 

that is used fashionably the last little while -- such 

asymmetrical arrangements cannot be of the type which allow 

access to power by one province and not to another or to result 

in a fundamentally disjointed or fractured country. 

 

To date, Mr. Speaker, I say that the negotiators from 

Saskatchewan see prospects that these principles of equality 

and the proposals which are tabled before us are hopeful and 

consistent with the principle which I have articulated. 

 

Further, we take the view that no arrangement should be agreed 

to which would seriously further weaken a province's power to 

influence its own economic, social, and political future. 

 

Now here, Mr. Speaker, I regret to say that we are very 

concerned about this particular item and in particular one 

matter.  The specific matter of which I speak, Mr. Speaker, 

relates to the federal government's proposals on what is called 

the common market clause.  It's a specific set of 

amendments to the current section 121 of the constitution. 

 

These proposals, as they stand now, in our judgement, would 

profoundly upset the balance of the federation. 

 

Let me further elaborate.  We currently have a clause in our 

constitution which prohibits the imposition of duties or charges 

on goods travelling from one province to another.  In 1980 the 

then Trudeau government proposed changes to the constitution 

which would have substantially expanded the ambit of this 

particular section.  It was called something euphemistically by 

the press as powers over the economy.  It would have 

strengthened the role of the federal government under this 

descriptive term of powers on the economy in a very expansive 

way. 

 

Eventually the federal government of the day did not proceed.  

There was a lot of opposition, primarily from the western 

provinces but others as well, arguing that the balance, the 

delicate balance with respect to the economic arrangements and 

the various jurisdictions of Ottawa and the provinces, would be 

upset by this proposal. 

 

Well although it did not succeed in 1980, this debate was 

revived last fall in the latest proposals by the current federal 

government.  In short, these changes as proposed would, as we 

see it, severely restrict the ability of provincial legislatures to 

effect economic decision making in the best interests of the 

local region or the local province.  It would do so by, one, 

adding new words to section 121 which would expand the list 

of prohibited actions.  To give you an example, the words that 

would be added would in effect say that a provincial legislature 

could not interfere with the free movement of persons, goods, 

services, or capital -- note those words: persons, goods, 

services, or capital. 

 

Secondly, the proposal by the federal government would 

establish a trade tribunal which would act like a court with 

respect to the new, expanded meaning of section 121 and 

which would adjudicate with respect to those matters of free 

movement pertaining to persons, goods, services, or capital, 

and the decisions would be binding. 

 

Now let me make it abundantly clear that our province is in 

favour of reducing unnecessary barriers to internal trade in 

Canada.  We are a trading province.  We trade internally and 

we trade externally, and we depend and know the value of freer 

trade.  But, Mr. Speaker, what we are not in favour is of a 

simplistic, ideological proposition which would effectively 

transfer all of the important power over trade and economic 

matters to yet another and brand-new federal agency -- the 

monitoring agency. 

 

We know that as a small province we must have fair trade 

rules, fair economic arrangements and a fair playing-field.  

This can only be accomplished, in our case as a relatively small 

province, if we retain the ability to have our resources, all of 

the resources, private sector, co-operative sector, and 

governmental, as necessary, martialled in a common cause to 

accomplish our economic and social goals.  That's how we 

have built up the, if I may say so, rather distinct society called 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I repeat again.  We are in favour of reducing internal trade 

barriers, but we believe that this can be done and should be 

done be negotiation and agreement.  And we believe that the 

federal government should have sufficient economic levers in 

order to manage the nation's economy.  However, we believe 

that they have those authorities now, constitutionally, and that 

expanded constitutional authority is not required for them to do 

this.  What is maybe required is political will to exercise the 

current constitutional power that they have in order to exercise 

and implement the appropriate economic and fiscal programs.  

That's the subject of a debate on another occasion. 

 

So we do not agree with the current federal proposals, because 

as we see them, Mr. Speaker, they would fundamentally, and 

not acceptably, alter this balance in a federal system in a way 

which would be not acceptable. 

 

I want to remind the House that this proposal on section 121 is 

not a proposal which has been put forward by the province of 

Quebec.  So it's not on the table because it's part of a request by 

the province of Quebec with respect to that issue.  This is really 

an add-on by the federal government which, in my opinion, 

could and should be withdrawn. 

 

Finally, Mr. Speaker, on another matter and another example, 

we will look very negatively, and are expressing our concerns, 

about proposals that do not ultimately respect individual and 

collective rights in Canada.  There must be a proper respect for 

individual and collective rights. And in addition to that, there 

must be a proper balance between the roles of the elected 

legislatures and parliaments on the one hand and the judiciary 

in the enforcement of those rights. 

 

I'm pleased to report that the minister tells me that so far there 

are no serious proposals put forward to date which violate this 

principle in these areas. 

 

Now our third broad goal or principle in these negotiations is to 

move forward some specific changes of ours -- some of our 

agenda matters.  We believe that several changes to the 

constitution are needed to protect the constitutional union, and 

we have something to offer to this debate and some items 

which we add to the agenda. 

 

Primary amongst them is Saskatchewan's concern with regard 

to the whole matter of transfer payments.  I've described this on 

the occasion of another debate as the constitutional version of 

the CFL (Canadian Football League) gate equalization 

formulas. 

 

Canada is the greatest nation on earth in which to live and to 

raise a family.  We all know that.  Our quality of life surpasses 

most others if not all others.  In large part, as I've said a 

moment ago or so, this is because of our unique national social 

programs like medicare and others.  These programs have 

come to define what it is to be a Canadian, and Canadians feel 

strongly about them and rightly so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if the rivers of commerce are increasingly 

flowing north and south, the highways of social programs flow 

east and west of necessity in order to keep the country together, 

and one balances off the other.  Our social programs are vital 

not only for the well-being of individual Canadians, but as you 

can see by my argument, they are vital to the existence of 

Canada itself. 

 

If we are to continue to be a secure nation in the global 

economic village, an identifiably distinct nation, we must have 

a strong cultural and social identity.  These intricate webbs of 

social programs -- equalization, regional development, 

medicare, and others -- are fundamental to Canadian identity 

and unity, and the weakening of them is a weakening of 

Canada. 

 

(1530) 

 

It's not enough to simply put these programs into a social 

charter into the constitution.  We must ensure instead that the 

practical means to deliver these programs to all Canadians of 

varying capacities to receive these services in all provinces is 

guaranteed in the constitution. 

 

Adequate transfer payments are vital to Canada and its identity.  

They are also valuable to our commitment of equality in this 

province and in this nation.  Transfer payments like 

equalization, EPF (established programs financing), CAP 

(Canada Assistance Plan), and others ensure that the less 

prosperous provinces are able to provide services of 

comparable levels to other parts of Canada, and any lessening 

of commitment to these programs would be a fundamental shift 

in the sense of sharing and equality -- characteristics which 

distinguish Canada from other nations. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the off-loading of the last several years 

-- and here I don't single out the current federal government 

alone because it began before 1984 -- is a very, very serious 

matter indeed.  In order to deal with this matter we have put 

forward, supported by the other western provinces as well as 

Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, proposals to entrench two 

principles in the constitution.  One, good faith negotiations; and 

two, a fixed period of five years for programs. 

 

We fully understand and accept, Mr. Speaker, that in the final 

analysis the federal government must be able to determine its 

own spending priorities, but the process must include the 

concepts of dialogue and continuity, and in our judgement it 

should be constitutionalized. 

 

To date I must report that we have only met with partial 

success on this subject matter. 

 

On equalization and regional development the federal offer is 

for consultation and a two-year notice of change.  On EPF the 

federal government has rejected constitutionalizing such a 

commitment.  Naturally we're disappointed with this reaction 

and we strongly urge the federal government to reconsider its 

position as it heads into the meetings on June 9 and 10. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another matter of great importance I referred to at 

the beginning and I want to come back to it, and that is the 

place of the aboriginal rights, the place of the first nations, the 

first peoples in Canada. 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

We hold the position that this matter has been put off for too 

long.  And I'm pleased to report that considerable progress has 

been made during the course of the current negotiations.  

Negotiators have recommended the entrenchment of the 

inherent right to self-government for aboriginal people.  

They've agreed to a recommendation on a context for the 

exercise of that right.  They have agreed to recommend on a 

three-year period of negotiations to elaborate on what 

self-government might look like.  And there is a 

recommendation of a political accord with respect to the Metis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is also agreement to constitutionalize 

treaties and treaty obligations for first nations.  Now this is a 

very complex and important area and obviously there is much 

yet to do.  But I do believe that we are on the verge of a very 

important and historic breakthrough. 

 

Now we put forward several other matters as well, Mr. 

Speaker.  I won't go into them all today.  The Minister of 

Justice can supplement these remarks on some other occasion 

at a later date.  But I do want to identify a few of them very 

briefly before taking my place. 

 

Another matter which we've advanced is the issue of 

international economic treaties and the role of provinces with 

respect to those treaties.  Mr. Speaker, when the free trade 

agreement was negotiated with the United States, the current 

federal government in Ottawa went to great lengths to consult 

with the provinces and to involve them in that process.  It was 

in many ways an unprecedented effort on their part. 

 

Everyone understood that these types of treaties, or more 

particularly that treaty, will profoundly influence a nation.  We 

understand that all too well in this province.  As I say, we're a 

trading nation dependent upon the world and dependent upon 

our domestic economy.  We accept the fact that we're going to 

be traders to survive and succeed in the future. 

 

We also understand that the nation must speak with one voice 

when it speaks to the rest of the world.  We cannot be put in a 

position of having several discordant voices at the international 

table all claiming to express the views of Canada.  That's the 

role of the federal government. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also understand that the ability of the 

federal government to make treaties -- and I want to underline 

this -- is the ability to reshape federalism, to reshape the 

Canadian federal system, especially if provincial areas of 

jurisdiction are not adequately protected by those international 

treaties or, worse yet, ignored.  The economic and social 

priorities of the provinces or even the regions can be severely 

skewered by the lack of control that can result from obligations 

imposed on the provinces by an international treaty entered into 

by the federal government and another nation without 

consultation involving the provinces. 

 

At present, provincial jurisdiction on this issue is preserved by 

a 1936 decision called the Labour Conventions decision.  But 

this decision has pointed some judges to indicate that it might 

be amended or overturned down the road.  As a consequence, 

Mr. Speaker, 

especially for a trading province like Saskatchewan or, if you 

will, the trading region like the West in this era of global 

trading -- global economics -- more constitutional security for 

provinces on international treaty-making as it affects provincial 

activity, is essential. 

 

An unfettered federal treaty power, together with the current 

proposals one to one that I talked about -- the powers over the 

economy provision -- could spell the end of a meaningful role 

of provincial governments in Canada as we know it, and spell 

the end of the role of that delicate balance which is what 

federalism is all about. 

 

Now, as I say, we believe in a proper balance, an appropriate 

balance, one that has to be adjusted from time to time to suit 

the times.  And I believe that unless the legal situation as we 

know it -- the doctrine in the Labour Conventions case -- is 

entrenched, that balance could be in trouble, especially in the 

face of the Mexico round and, as we know, the current ongoing 

negotiations with respect to GATT (General Agreement on 

Tariffs and Trade), all three of which have profound 

implications, not only for the nation, but for our province and 

for our region. 

 

Now let me be clear, Mr. Speaker.  No one is asking for any 

power to negotiate treaties as provinces at the table 

internationally, or in any way to supplant or to hamper the 

federal government.  We want only to ensure that when a treaty 

is made, that it respects the division of powers as we know it in 

Canada and that there be proper input and consultation 

involving the provinces in this area. 

 

Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, we supported Alberta when they put 

forward the proposals in this area.  We believe that they are 

quite reasonable and attainable.  Unfortunately, I have to report 

to the House that they have been rejected.  Again I urge the 

federal government to rethink its attitude on this question for 

the forthcoming meetings and to come back with what I would 

categorize as a more reasonable response. 

 

One other item, Mr. Speaker.  When we reviewed the matters 

before us, it was also in the light of a recent decision by the 

Supreme Court of Canada with respect to telecommunications 

and the carriers of telecommunications commonly known as 

the AGT cases, the Alberta Government Telephones case.  In 

effect, Mr. Speaker, this decision brought the prairie telephone 

companies -- and this has serious implications for SaskTel -- 

under the control of the CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and 

Telecommunications Commission), a federal regulatory body, 

the composition of which is determined by the federal 

government exclusively and the powers determined by the 

federal government exclusively. 

 

Now I won't go into detail on this particular matter.  But 

members of the House, I think, will remember that they were 

all unanimous in resisting this attempt by the federal 

government through this legislation to regulate our Crown 

corporation, SaskTel.  At the moment there is a Bill, as I've 

said, before parliament which would do precisely that. 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

We have placed the whole matter, therefore, of 

telecommunications and its constitutional place on the table for 

debate and discussion.  We have made it clear that we would 

not pursue this debate if satisfactory arrangements could be 

made to exempt SaskTel from the ambit of the proposed 

federal legislation.  Unfortunately to date no satisfactory 

arrangement has been offered. 

 

Another matter, Mr. Speaker.  We also proposed changes to 

section 92(a) which was one of the results of the 1981-82 round 

of negotiations.  The changes to 92(a) which would better aid 

this province in resource regulation and other changes.  I'm not 

happy to report that no satisfactory result has yet been obtained 

here.  Again I would commend the federal government to 

consider both of these matters, telecommunications and 92(a), 

with respect to the next set of negotiations which we are about 

to embark on. 

 

These then are some of the matters which have been put 

forward by the province of Saskatchewan.  As you can see, we 

have had only limited success.  I deliberately contrast this -- 

meaning our requests for matters to be considered -- with the 

progress on other issues and other agenda items.  And on those 

items there seems to have been substantial progress made. 

 

When I contrast the progress there with respect to the ones 

which we advance, I can only conclude that greater efforts 

must be made, with respect that some of these Saskatchewan 

and western Canadian items, if we are to be a part of any final 

deal.  Because after all, Mr. Speaker, what must be emphasized 

is that this is the Canada round.  And as the Canada round, this 

requires the commitment of all regions and provinces and 

interest groups that are involved to feel a part of the ultimate 

solution. 

 

Let me turn briefly to a couple of other important items put 

forward by other jurisdictions and which have received a lot of 

attention in the press.  On the matter of Senate reform there has 

been limited progress, I'm advised, on what I would describe as 

relatively non-essential elements of that problem. 

 

On the major question, representation in the Senate, it looks 

like we are at a deadlock.  Saskatchewan and four other 

provinces together with the Northwest Territories support a 

Senate in which all provinces are represented equally.  British 

Columbia proposes a regional model.  Ontario, New 

Brunswick, and P.E.I. (Prince Edward Island) support unequal 

representation according to population differences.  There is 

also no agreement thus far on the power of such a new body. 

 

Let me make two points on this issue, Mr. Speaker.  First, we 

have supported a Senate with equal representation because we 

think that it is based in and on a defensible principle.  Why 

should we be interested in a second Chamber, for example, 

which represents only population or which has little power?  If 

there is to be no equal, effective Senate, then perhaps we 

should support and start considering supporting an amendment 

to abolish the Senate. 

 

It is my belief, Mr. Speaker, that this is one of the thorniest 

questions in this process, but I believe that it is also 

solvable on an equal basis.  Mr. Clark in the House of 

Commons has already stated that if there is a consensus on any 

model, the federal government will support it.  I believe that we 

can reach that consensus, or putting it more bluntly, we need to 

return to the negotiating table more determined to reach that 

consensus on the equal model. 

 

I want to turn to the amending formula since this also is a 

contentious matter, and Saskatchewan has put forward a 

proposal for consideration which we think is a compromise 

proposal.  The question of the veto with respect to a future 

amending formula has arisen as part of this debate, and it has 

become one of the priorities for Quebec. 

 

I should explain to all members of the House that Quebec is not 

asking for a veto over everything on the constitution, but only a 

veto on institutional matters and institutional change, the 

so-called section 42 matters set out in the current constitution. 

 

Now the matter of an amending formula is also contentious.  It 

was part of the Meech Lake accord.  That is, section 42 matters 

were to become the subject of unanimous consent by all 

provinces as set out in section 41.  Some believe that unanimity 

is too restrictive for any formula but particularly too restrictive 

for institutional change.  Accordingly, Saskatchewan has put 

forward a proposal which would require two-thirds of the 

provinces, seven, representing 85 per cent of our nation's 

population instead of 50 per cent, the current formula, as an 

alternative.  This would raise the level of consensus but not 

impose a unanimity provision. 

 

I'm pleased to report that my minister tells me that a number of 

the provinces like this idea and agree with this proposal as an 

alternative to the one currently set out.  We hope that it might 

be the basis for compromise.  At least we're going to keep it 

there until it is rejected by the negotiators, if that should be the 

end result. 

 

(1545) 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other items that should be 

mentioned, but time does not permit me to do so, and I thank 

the members for giving me this leeway for the extended 

statement that I make here. 

 

The key here is that some of the important items I've identified 

and the larger key for constitutional negotiations from our point 

of view is that the entire package needs to be looked at at some 

point fairly soon.  The ministers and the negotiators will do the 

best that they can, and at that point we will give a further report 

to the legislature and then decide in consultation with the 

legislature and the public as to whether or not there is a deal 

there. 

 

We hold strongly to the views which I have articulated in the 

statement to the House on these specific issues, but we also do 

so in the spirit that there needs to be room for some flexibility 

and compromise.  I repeat again our concern that progress has 

been made on a lot of the non western Canadian issues, if I 

may put it that way, or at least I'll describe them as 

Saskatchewan issues, and we 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

need to direct the attention of the negotiators in the days ahead 

to come to some compromises and solutions on the other 

matters. 

 

Let me close with the last goal or principle which we have set 

ourselves in this process, namely public involvement.  As many 

of you know, the process which resulted in the Meech Lake 

settlement was found to be totally unacceptable to a large 

number of people in Canada.  This was primarily because the 

matter of change was the result of secret discussions in the 

period between '87 and 1990, and even before that time. 

 

The majority of people after 1990 want a much more open 

process in the future.  As a result, the federal government 

undertook a number of public initiatives such as the Spicer 

Commission, the federal proposals last fall, and the 

Dobbie/Beaudoin joint committee of parliament.  As well, they 

sponsored a series of open conferences on the constitution.  

Here in Saskatchewan the previous government commissioned 

a committee to sample public opinion and to receive response 

to the federal government initiatives, and that committee 

reported just last winter. 

 

And as you know, we have proposed and the members of the 

House have accepted unanimously a standing committee on the 

legislature on the constitution, which committee will have two 

functions; first, to receive the proposed amendments generated 

either here or from parliament or from other legislative 

assemblies and other matters such as the amending formula.  

And the second function will be to undertake public 

consultation if necessary. 

 

We believe that this will go a long way toward involving the 

public of Saskatchewan in this debate.  And of course the 

minister who is at the table, the Minister of Justice and I will be 

speaking to the media and to the legislature giving reports as 

required. 

 

We're also going to hold an open mind to the views of the 

standing committee and others on the question of whether or 

not any proposed constitutional amendments should be put to 

the people of our province in the form of a plebiscite or a 

referendum.  That decision, I think, can be more appropriately 

made once we have a clearer, firmer picture of how the state of 

negotiations have progressed or concluded. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to close in the same way that I began.  

I want to emphasize how important these negotiations are to 

the future of Canada.  In particular, I want to urge again that 

the Government of Quebec return to the table so that we can 

complete these negotiations in an orderly and timely manner.  I 

also would urge the Prime Minister to consider the call of an 

early first ministers' meeting in order that some of the tougher 

issues can at least be discussed if not resolved.  Without 

Quebec at the table and without a first ministers' conference, it 

is going to make things more difficult in order to successfully 

conclude this very complex dossier. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the people of Saskatchewan and the 

people of Canada want us to get on with the other urgent 

business which faces this nation.  We have in our 

own province, as everybody knows, an economic and fiscal -- 

how shall I describe it? -- challenge, if not crisis.  And 

Canadians want their governments, federal and provincial, to 

address this matter of the economy and of finances.  And while 

we're doing as best as we can and devoting as much time as we 

can, clearly overall we cannot do so while the constitution 

overhangs the agenda of all provincial governments and of the 

nation as a whole. 

 

And so therefore I pledge to you today that we will return to 

the table making every effort to ensure a successful conclusion 

to these negotiations, to work diligently in the spirit of 

goodwill and in the spirit of compromise and accommodation 

in order to try to put this matter satisfactorily to a proper 

conclusion and a resolve. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And thanks to the members of the 

House for giving me the opportunity of providing this report to 

you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

too will try to be as brief as the Premier in putting forth some 

of our concerns perhaps and understandings of the 

constitutional process and such.  I would like to say at the 

outset, Mr. Speaker, that many of the points brought out by the 

Premier are certainly points and issues that this official 

opposition agrees with and certainly would encourage the 

Premier and the Minister of Justice as the chief negotiator for 

the government to continue on and bring this to a successful 

conclusion. 

 

However at the same time, Mr. Speaker, I would be defaulting 

my responsibility as the opposition to voice some of the 

concerns that we have, specifically about some of the 

statements made by the Premier as well. 

 

Now I want to lay little bit of a groundwork before I continue 

on with my remarks.  If you check Hansard you may find that 

I've said something similar to this from times past on the 

constitution.  But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that Canada's history 

is a history of two great streams of human activity, and I don't, 

when I say this, refer to the dualism of French and English, but 

the two defining human endeavours that have marked our 

evolution as a nation which are namely economics, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, economics and culture.  And I want to spend a few 

moments talking about them. 

 

I would remind members opposite what the Leader of the 

Opposition said to the parliamentary committee when it visited 

Regina, when he said that Canada was born of fish, fur, wood, 

and wheat.  And I can certainly empathize with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. As a history major and so on, I'm interested in 

the past but not interested in the past alone, but rather how does 

the past affect our present and how can we use those to build 

into the future. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I've always maintained that as a nation 

and indeed as a province, we have been hewers of wood and 

drawers of 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

water, and the challenge that is facing this province and indeed 

this nation is how do we get out of that mould?  How do we 

break out of that mould as being perceived as hewers of wood 

and drawers of water and take a rightful place in the destiny of 

the world. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Europeans came first to our shores for the 

bounty of the fish that once teemed in our waters, a bounty 

that, I'm sad to say, is increasingly being threatened by the 

abuses of modern Europeans.  The fish trade, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, was followed by the fur trade.  And that industry not 

only opened up the entire continent of Canada but of the entire 

continent including the United States.  This brought Europeans 

into both co-operation but unfortunately into confrontation with 

our aboriginal peoples. 
 

So while the fur trade grew and prospered, so did wood from 

our forests give birth to a thriving shipbuilding industry in the 

Maritimes, as well as contribute to a growing export trade.  

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of most importance for our province 

was the occasion of wheat into the young Canadian economy, 

for it was wheat that won this land to an international economy 

and a national partnership. 
 

So there is great truth in the concept that we were born of 

economic activity, and even more basically, that it was the 

natural gifts of nature or, for those that are more spiritual 

among us, by the blessings of God that Canada was created, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

But Canada was also of necessity a great cultural enterprise.  

And because of the nature of our parliamentary system and the 

nature of the people who settled and the nations that were here 

from the beginning, because of human characteristics a great 

cross-pollination began with relatively little armed conflict.  

While we should not forget that blood was shed within these 

borders, we should also not exaggerate those events, for by any 

standards the armed conflict in the development of Canada was 

certainly modest.  Rather all were changed by the contact they 

had with one another.  And it shows to this day in our attitudes, 

our customs, our political institutions, and indeed our values. 
 

It is historically true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the greatest 

dynamic was that between the French and the English cultures 

sharing this country.  But it is equally true for Canada and 

especially true, I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

especially true for Saskatchewan that we were shared by the 

dynamic of many cultures -- of many cultures. 
 

I am a Canadian of German-Dutch descent speaking in a freely 

elected legislature in a country where only 50 years ago 

Canadian Germans were interned and persecuted.  And the 

rapid change, even as recently as after the last war, the rapid 

change from hatred to acceptance is a great mark of the 

character of our people. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that we must continue to 

change.  We must continue to grow.  And the Premier touched 

on some of those things during his remarks.  We cannot be 

static, but we must remain dynamic and evolutionary.  I think 

that we ignore the dual characteristic of our history at our own 

great peril. 
 

Our views on Quebec's distinct needs as a party, as an official 

opposition, are indeed well-known, Mr. Speaker, 

 and I don't know if I have to go into detail with those and 

restate them once more.  But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am 

compelled to speak to some of the more disturbing aspects of 

the Premier's remarks, and I do so without any animosity but 

with a great deal of respect. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the one hand the Premier has stated on 

many occasions that the national government must truly be 

national and have the powers necessary to perform as a 

national government.  On the other hand he states that any 

dilution of provincial powers will be the signal for him that the 

cost is too high to save the country. 

 

And it's with great respect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I remind 

you that on a daily basis in this Assembly, some members of 

the provincial government are condemning the national 

government for not accepting its responsibility in agriculture, 

not accepting its responsibility for health, not accepting its 

responsibility for education, its responsibility for everything on 

the provincial government's agenda.  It's a constant and steady 

diet of how Ottawa is shrugging its responsibilities for the 

entire list of matters that the constitution gives provinces 

control and responsibility for. 

 

Now in other words, Mr. Speaker, the government's position 

appears to me to be that the national government should 

essentially be a bank account where Ontario, Alberta, and 

British Columbia make deposits and the rest of us make 

withdrawals. 

 

(1600) 

 

Now lest my remarks be misinterpreted, Mr. Speaker, it should 

be obvious to all -- and I want to make this very clear -- that I 

do support equalization, and I do believe that this province has 

an excellent track record of obtaining special financial 

assistance for our province from Ottawa.  At the same time I 

personally, as minister of Social Services, had many occasions 

to chastise the federal government for off-loading.  It happened 

in a number of areas, as the Minister of Social Services will be 

aware, in that particular portfolio that I'm most familiar with. 

 

And I would say to the Premier, I would say to the Premier, 

this province needs to continue to defend our budgetary 

position in the federation.  And if you continue on that, you 

will find that the opposition will give you its full support in that 

procedure. 

 

So we do believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the national 

government has a fundamental and vital role in transfer 

payments.  We do not, however, believe that this country can 

have any measure of stability if we return to the kind of 

destructive Ottawa-bashing that was so prevalent back in the 

'60s and indeed the '70s.  We most certainly, we most certainly 

cannot afford to constitutionalize that kind of political culture. 

 

Let me say for the record, my perception -- and I stress this is 

my perception of the Premier's view of the role of the national 

government -- it should provide defence and it should pay the 

bills.  Again with all respect, I must say that I have seen very 

little that the Premier or one of his ministers have not made 

into a matter of provincial power 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

but federal payment. 

 

On trade, the Premier not only rejects an overriding national 

role, but states that a national economic union is too high a 

price to pay to save Canada, which sounds very close to almost 

a threat.  Now I hope that as I say that I'm not putting words 

into the Premier's mouth, but that is the impression that I got 

from your remarks, sir. 

 

On external affairs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier has said 

the provinces must be full partners with the national 

government in international negotiations.  In agriculture, 

health, education, Ottawa should pay the bills but basically 

keep their nose out of provincial jurisdiction and provincial 

policy making . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Premier says 

that he has said exactly the words . . . the opposite, I mean, the 

reverse.  And if that is what you have meant, my interpretation 

of your comments were different.  And I certainly suggest, sir, 

that if that is your position, that you restate it perhaps in a 

manner in which I can understand it to be such. 

 

But I say sincerely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say sincerely that on 

the face of it, the sum of the positions of the government, 

Saskatchewan, resemble nothing as closely as 

sovereignty-association, sovereignty-association.  And those 

politicians who fail to engage in constant and wholesale 

political attacks on the national government are portrayed as 

betrayers of Saskatchewan.  And that is something that I do not 

accept and I don't think that that is something that is acceptable 

to the people.  It was great politics in the '70s but I don't think 

that it's great politics today.  There are signs, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan have matured beyond 

the emotional appeal to select an outside enemy and be content 

in that hatred.  I think the people of Saskatchewan and indeed 

the people of the country have matured beyond that point. 

 

We are playing with fire, I would suggest to you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, if we believe that the old way of tearing down the 

national government while pretending to be nation builders will 

do anything but cause harm for this great nation of ours.  Now I 

don't want to go on at great length, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I 

am not convinced, I am not convinced that as I stand here that 

these particular speeches today were necessary or that indeed 

they were particularly productive. 

 

I do believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Premier has still not 

told us the details of the position he's putting forward on behalf 

of our people.  If he has, from what I have heard then we are to 

understand that Saskatchewan's position boils down to 

essentially two points: number one, we will refuse to sign 

anything that contains provisions for an economic union of the 

provinces; and number two, we insist that the constitution 

contain explicit provisions for more money for the federal 

taxpayers to provincial taxpayers and more power for the 

provinces. 

 

If that is truly the total of our province's position, Mr. Speaker, 

I say with all respect, that we do not have a very admirable 

position.  This country is more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 

country is more than a joint bank account, and it is more than 

10 independent provinces.  This country is more than the sum 

of its total parts. 

And then, while I am confident that I will be subject to 

criticism, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say with all sincerity that 

someone has to speak for Canada.  Yes, even in the legislatures 

of the provinces, the voice of a nation must be heard.  Two 

world wars, a history of pain among our aboriginal peoples, the 

lives of settlers cutting the bush around Rosthern, the women 

who pulled ploughs on their backs to make this nation -- all 

these demand that we see more than our own political interests 

and more than our own provincial boundaries. 

 

All these demand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we speak not only 

for Saskatchewan, but that we also must speak for Canada. 

 

I opened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by mentioning the plight of 

families who depend on fish off of Newfoundland.  And there 

is a link between our children and their forefathers.  That's how 

deep this link goes.  Because, fellow members, as each of us 

knows, we did not earn this country.  None of us here earned 

Canada.  It was given to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in trust by 

those who came before. 

 

We now have the sacred duty of taking that inheritance and 

ensuring that it is passed on in good order to those who will 

come behind us and after us.  To reduce our husbandry of the 

nation to, almost, two contradictory positions would be a 

breach of trust for our forefathers and an act of broken faith for 

our children. 

 

Now before I close, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words on 

a topic that the Premier ended with, on the issue of the 

referendum.  It is reasonable for the government, it is 

reasonable for the Premier, to get up and to say that if the 

federal government holds a national referendum then one will 

not be held separately in Saskatchewan.  It is reasonable and 

that, sir, is acceptable. 

 

We believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it is reasonable.  And we 

believe in fact that it would meet the demands of the people for 

a direct say in their own future.  And that is what the people of 

this province want.  However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the 

national government does not hold a national referendum then 

it is our firm and our intransigent position that the provincial 

government must then hold a referendum here.  People must be 

asked, what do you want?  They have a right, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to be heard on this all-important issue. 

 

It is not possible in the calculus of democracy, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to say that a committee of 10 MLAs (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) shall have a voice that is stronger than 

400,000 Saskatchewan voters; that 10 shall not overrule the 

democracy of the many.  And that is where we shall draw our 

line in the proverbial sand. 

 

I believe that it is a fair advice, and perhaps warning to the 

Premier, that if he proceeds with no referendum vehicle, 

whether national or provincial, if there is no vote, then there 

will be a long and difficult battle.  And please understand that 

the battle will not be over the substance at that stage, but over 

the process -- over the people's right to take back their own 

country. 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish the Minister of 

Justice as our chief negotiator, Godspeed in his important work 

on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan at the negotiating 

table. 

 

Thank you for this opportunity. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member for Nipawin on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Keeping: -- Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure to me to introduce 

to you 43 students from Wagner School at Nipawin.  They're 

the grade 4 students.  They're here visiting us today from my 

constituency.  And they're with their teachers, Bev 

Gunnlaugson and Jack Rowswell and nine other chaperons that 

I won't bother to read their names, Mr. Speaker.  But I ask that 

you and all the members here would make them feel welcome.  

Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENT 

 

Negotiations on the Constitution of Canada (continued) 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I've 

heard it said of politicians that we have a tendency to talk 

things to death. 

 

And if I may paraphrase something that Yves Fortier is 

reported to have said at the constitutional conference in 

Halifax:  no country has ever died from too much dialogue on 

its future. 

 

So I now welcome the opportunity to speak on behalf of not 

only my party, but in particular bring forward three areas of 

concern that are most often raised with me by the citizens of 

Saskatchewan on this topic. 

 

I also wish to publicly acknowledge in this House and to those 

watching today that the hon. member from Fairview, the 

Minister of Justice, took time out of his busy schedule to speak 

with me earlier this afternoon and give me a briefing, and I 

appreciated that very much. 

 

The people of Canada face a constitutional crisis which 

threatens the existence of the Canadian state.  And the irony of 

this is, that measured against any objective standard, Canadians 

have a constitutional history and have achieved a community 

standard of living that is the envy of virtually every peoples on 

earth. 
 

That is not to say that we've not experienced trouble and that 

all have benefitted equally from the Canadian experience.  It is, 

at least in part, because of this latter fact that the future of our 

nation is now at stake. 

Great work, immense sacrifice, and vision, have created a 

transcontinental dominion which boasts democratic traditions, 

peace, and considerable wealth.  While these attributes are 

admirable, as a people we must add to them an extensive 

measure of ingenuity at this time, a sincere compassion for our 

fellow Canadians, and I think a desire to resolve our 

differences.  Like the fathers and mothers of Confederation, we 

must be prepared to adopt what others fear to contemplate. 

 

Now is not the time for anyone to become entrenched in his or 

her position.  Rather we must use our creative strengths to 

imagine ways of not only solving the present crisis, but of 

giving ourselves and our children a better future with greater 

harmony, justice, and prosperity.  And only when we've 

improved upon what we've been given can we be satisfied that 

our lives were indeed lived to the fullest. 

 

Now I wish to comment on several aspects of the constitutional 

proposals.  The initial agenda that was advanced by the federal 

government is very, very lengthy, and some would say too 

much so.  And I don't really want to comment on that.  I leave 

it to others to advance this criticism, as I perceive that there is a 

reef.  And if there is a reef upon which the Canadian country, 

our nation, may flounder, it is that too many of the real and 

self-proclaimed players are beginning to harden their positions 

at a time when I believe flexibility and imagination must be the 

touchstones. 

 

(1615) 

 

It's either my way or the highway, is something that may work 

in the locker room, but seldom will hold a family together.  

And I know from professional experience that too often when a 

family member is confronted with an ultimatum of that nature, 

his or her reaction is to slam the door shut, to the ultimate loss 

of all. 

 

There are problems in our Canadian family.  I don't see them as 

so bad that with some living arrangements that will be 

considered new living arrangements, all cannot both be 

prosperous and self-fulfilled within this Canadian family. 

 

There are many aspects of the federal proposals that one could 

criticize.  And since we are engaged in what I consider to be a 

process of nation rebuilding, I propose to focus on three aspects 

of the proposals around which I suggest that consensus can 

built.  And these are the three proposals, topics, that the people 

come to me most often when they're discussing the 

constitutional crisis and raise. 

 

The first -- and everyone would like to think that this one is 

settled, but it's not -- the recognition of Quebec as a distinct 

society; second, Senate reform; and thirdly, the recognition of 

an inherent right of self-government by the first nations. 

 

Now before looking at the detail of any of these, I would like to 

suggest that what motivates the call for each of these reforms is 

the same.  While the interests of groups clamouring for each 

are superficially different, the same 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

concern underlies each, and that is a need to make our 

government both be and appear to be more responsive to the 

current Canadian reality.  The 20th century may not have 

belonged to Canadians -- as Sir Wilfrid Laurier predicted it 

would -- but without reform the country will not live to see, let 

alone possess, the 21st. 

 

The most significant shortcoming in Canada's constitution is by 

far its meagre ability to address the diverse differences that the 

Premier so eloquently addressed.  The Constitution Act in 1867 

addressed and resolved short-term differences between what 

was then called Canada West, Ontario; Canada East, Quebec; 

and the Maritime provinces.  It, however, is now 125 years old 

and is no longer responsive to Canada's current and future 

divisions.  Canadians face three major divisions which if not 

addressed will continue to seriously threaten the survival of the 

Canadian state, the public well-being, and -- I fear most -- even 

public peace. 

 

Canada is overtaken with linguistic, racial, and regional 

divisions.  There remains a perception that there's an inordinate 

amount of attention to linguistic division of Canada and a 

failure to realize that the other divisions are, to many 

Canadians, of equal importance. 

 

One family member has expressed concerns about the familial 

arrangement that we call Canada.  His grievances and 

dissatisfactions have exposed the grievances and 

dissatisfactions of other members of the family in Canada.  

While the pathos of the first must be addressed, the wounds of 

the others, once exposed, demand equal attention.  The family 

cannot be treated by simply responding to the needs of one.  

The solution to our divisions is not to attempt to eliminate 

them, but to create institutions of government that will 

encourage divided peoples to agreement through compromise. 

 

I'll begin by talking about the recognition of Quebec as a 

distinct society.  Although it is a popular perception that an 

inordinate amount of time has been devoted to responding to 

the needs and the wants of Quebec, it remains appropriate that 

Quebec's concerns be addressed during this present round of 

constitutional deliberations and should be addressed first.  

Given what was agreed upon in the British North America Act, 

it seems somewhat absurd that we're dealing with this in 1992 

and, as Eric Kierans has talked about so very wisely, he has 

indicated that if all we had done was to attend to what was 

agreed upon many, many years ago, we wouldn't be going 

through this today.  

 

This is not to say that the concerns need necessarily be 

considered paramount to those of other Canadians -- the wants 

and desires of Quebec -- and I really don't understand that to be 

the demand of Quebecers.  Although the desire to be expressly 

recognized as a distinct society is but one aspect of the agenda 

put forward by the Quebec government, it has come to 

symbolize to much of the rest of the country the entire menu of 

that province's demands.  Frankly expressed, there is a desire 

on the part of most Canadians, and myself included, not to 

dilute the individual rights and freedoms now expressed in the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

There's a real concern that constitutional entrenchment or 

statement of a unique status for Quebec poses a threat to 

individual rights and freedoms and undermines its commitment 

to them.  There is further sentiment that a constitutional 

recognition of Quebec's distinctiveness undermines the unique 

characteristics of other parts of Canada and thereby creates 

inequality amongst regions and provinces. 

 

Now I see ways to respond to these concerns and would like to 

be on the record.  The majority of Canadians do not wish to 

subordinate their own individual liberties to collective rights, 

and frankly would like to talk Quebecers out of doing so for 

themselves.  Still, if the majority of Quebecers are inclined to 

accept some diminishment of their individual rights and 

freedoms for the protection of their collective position, there 

may be a legitimate concession to accommodate Quebec within 

Canada. 

 

This is particularly so if the only other option is a more drastic 

expression of Quebec's uniqueness in the form of an 

autonomous or semi-autonomous state.  We in the rest of 

Canada recognize that Quebec is distinct; we feel distinct; 

Newfoundlanders feel distinct as well. 

 

The constitution should be made clear that that does not detract 

from the uniqueness and the special attributes of the rest of the 

nation.  Uniqueness is not superiority; uniqueness is not 

inequality.  I do not hear Quebec saying that it is.  But to the 

extent that other Canadians have legitimate fears -- and this has 

been raised on so many occasions with me throughout 

Saskatchewan -- these anxieties must be addressed in the 

constitutional process. 

 

As the Supreme Court of Canada has indicated in a number of 

cases under section 15 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 

equal treatment need not and in fact cannot always mean 

identical treatment.  Similarly, if recognition of Quebec as a 

distinct society is part of the price of Confederation, Canadians 

outside of Quebec need to be reassured that the clause, if 

incorporated into the constitution, will not affect the position of 

those outside of Quebec. 

 

I do not see any intent within the federal proposals to extend 

the application of the provision outside of Quebec, but nor is it 

made clear.  Doing so may provide comfort to Canadians in 

accommodating the aspirations of those Canadians within 

Quebec that are not affecting their own position. 

 

Now on Senate reform.  And I do hope people will bear with 

me here because I'm trying to prove a point in this, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  And so I come up with a proposal that I would like 

simply for people to understand that I did believe there was a 

way of addressing the concern of equal. 

 

Most Canadians see recognition of Quebec's uniqueness and 

the transference of legislative authority to give further content 

to that uniqueness as watchwords in the current constitutional 

debate.  Most, I believe, are prepared to accept this in some 

form to preserve the unity of Canada.  If however the 

recognition of Quebec as a distinct society and the exercise of 

additional powers are part of that province's self-fulfilment, the 

desire of other parts of 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

Canada to participate more fully in the exercise of federal 

powers which now inordinately rest in the hands of two 

provinces is equally legitimate. 

 

I return to the analogy of the family with which I started this 

presentation.  A family cannot survive if the smaller or weaker 

of its members are not equitably treated.  Equality is the 

foundation upon which familial relationships are maintained. 

 

To many Canadians, and not exclusively western Canadians, a 

Triple E Senate has come to represent the mechanism whereby 

the inordinate power exercised by central Canada over matters 

of national importance may be influenced by the less populated 

regions of the country.  Just as it is a legitimate concern for 

Quebecers to say that in matters of particular concern to them, 

Quebec should exercise power disproportionate to its numbers, 

so too is it legitimate that in many matters in respect to which 

the federal parliament has jurisdiction, less populated provinces 

of Canada have interests which are not reflected in simple 

proportion to their population. 

 

Now the first E in Senate reform is elected.  If reformed, the 

Senate must be elected.  The details and timings of elections 

can be debated at another time.  While the federal proposals 

purport to speak to the two other aspects of the Triple E Senate, 

both the equality of the representation and the effectiveness of 

the power to be exercised by the House are seriously diluted by 

those in those proposals. 

 

Now the Government of Canada and the province of Ontario 

oppose the idea for a Senate that distributes amongst the 

provinces an equal number of seats.  And the federal 

government has given a reason for this, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

The federal government suggests that a more equitable 

representation must be achieved that will take into account 

what they call Canada's linguistic reality or duality. 

 

The nearly eighty-fold difference in provincial populations was 

their second concern -- the smaller number of provinces, the 

need for aboriginal representation, and the method of election 

of the House of Commons.  The government, in other words, 

argues that a Triple E style Senate will not meet any of those 

aforementioned aims. 

 

Now it is correct that a Senate that allots seats equally among 

the provinces will not account for the great differences in 

population.  Representation by population, however, is the 

basis for the distribution of seats in the House of Commons.  If 

there were to be an equal distribution of seats in the Senate, this 

principle could be purified.  Certain provinces would lose seats 

and the more populated ones would gain. 

 

For making this compromise -- it was the reverse, actually -- 

the less populated provinces could receive the benefit of an 

equal distribution of Senate seats among the provinces. And 

strangely enough, the federal proposals do not suggest that the 

need for equality among provinces should be taken into 

account in any distribution of Senate seats. 

This factor must be addressed, for the lack of it is precisely 

what continues to drive regionalism.  It is generally and I 

would say mistakenly accepted that an equal distribution of 

Senate seats cannot account for the linguistic duality of 

Canada. And I'm far from convinced that this be the case.  The 

following is but one illustration of how I think that this can be 

accomplished. 

 

If all provinces were granted 10 seats in the Senate, a portion of 

the seats from certain provinces could be allocated to 

francophones.  The province of Quebec, with 10 seats, would 

allocate eight to its francophone majority, or conversely, two to 

its non-francophone minority.  In addition, three seats form 

New Brunswick, one seat from Nova Scotia, Ontario, 

Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta could be reserved for 

francophones.  These 16 francophone members could then be 

given a veto power over matters concerning the French 

language and culture and redistribution that might reduce their 

number. 

 

The equal division of seats between the francophones of 

Quebec and those from outside Quebec would recognize the 

true dual nature of the French community in Canada.  It would 

give francophones outside of Quebec a role in promoting their 

own community and their own language.  Instead of leaving 

their survival in the hands of others, they would be empowered 

to protect themselves.  To this formula for the Senate might be 

added one seat for each territory and representation of native 

peoples could be accommodated.  Ten aboriginal members 

would bring the total number of senators to 112. 

 

Now admittedly the foregoing does not account for all possible 

divisions within Canadian society.  While there are many 

divisions in our Canadian society, the regional, aboriginal, and 

linguistic divisions pose the most serious threat to the 

continued survival of the dominion.  Unlike these divisions, the 

remainder can likely be accommodated by political means 

through our political parties. 

 

Now I don't pretend that the formula outlined is necessarily 

perfect.  It does however illustrate that the divisions that have 

given rise to the current impasse, I believe can be 

accommodated within reformed federal institutions.  If the 

principal central institutions are strengthened by ensuring that 

concerns beyond central Canada are better represented, there 

may be more willingness in the rest of the country to see the 

powers of the federal government strengthened, which rests at 

the heart of other aspects of the federal proposals which I will 

not comment on this afternoon. 

 

(1630) 

 

Of course one other thing that I would like to spend some time 

speaking on but shall not this afternoon, is the paramount E 

that deals with effective.  The other two E's about which I have 

spoken really become moot if we cannot define what roles the 

Senate will have.  And I will hope that we can have further 

discussions on this at a future date. 

 

Aboriginal self-government.  Now at the beginning I indicated 

that it would be a travesty if we were to let the 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

next generation down by in effect squandering 125 years of 

nation building.  To do so is as inexcusable as the squandering 

of most precious natural resources.  This said, if there were one 

member of the Canadian family which has been systematically 

excluded from sharing in the political and economic prosperity 

which Canada has by and large enjoyed, it is the country's first 

nations.  In fact the treatment of aboriginal peoples is such that 

often they do not even consider themselves part of the 

Canadian family. 

 

I accept that behind the federal proposals lies a genuine intent 

to alleviate this historic irony.  I believe that most Canadians 

agree with the goal of the inherent right to self-government.  

Many Canadians are, however, apprehensive.  They're 

apprehensive about recognizing what is presently an undefined 

concept and which will be and is termed a judiciable right in 10 

years.  This is a legitimate concern, particularly given the 

recent history of impasse which has characterized all of the 

constitutional negotiations. 

 

While the concern for the unknown is legitimate and palls in 

the face of the present known, the status quo is unacceptable, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I believe that recognition of the right of 

self-government will focus efforts on giving that concept a 

defined and exercisable content. 

 

In the event full agreement is not reached, perhaps first 

recourse should not be made to the courts but to a special 

tribunal.  It should be possible to negotiate the process for 

future negotiations which will flush out the concept fully of 

self-government during the present round of these 

constitutional deliberations. 

 

The details about the content of the right to self-government 

and the process of future negotiations to give content to it may 

be subject to negotiation in the present round of the 

negotiations.  Aboriginal leaders, for example, have railed 

against a lengthy wait and the outcome of uncertain 

negotiations.  Recognition and entrenchment of the right is as 

legitimate as the demand by other Canadians that their dreams 

and aspirations be realized within this Confederation. 

 

I have attempted to be quite limited in my comments, and I 

hope that I've been positive as well.  Canadians don't just want 

their leaders to be successful in these deliberations; they're 

counting on them to succeed.  And we cannot be allowed to fail 

in our endeavour.  Now I'm not prepared to tell our children 

and our children's children that our generation was so 

preoccupied with self that we sacrificed our family of Canada. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in family therapy the process of 

facilitating healthy change in a dysfunctional or an unhappy 

family begins with all family members being heard, and each 

position must be fully understood.  And that's whether we're 

talking about the concerns of the youngest or the oldest, the 

quietest or the loudest, the weakest or the strongest. 

 

And when improvement begins to take place in a family, it is 

common for family members to become frightened by the 

changes that are occurring, and in fact each person 

tries to cling to the old ways.  It's interesting that regardless of 

how miserable they feel, the status quo feels safer because it's 

familiar. 

 

For those families who persist in getting to the bottom of their 

problems, the rewards can be very great.  Individuals move 

from their entrenched positions in order to empower others in 

their family, and the result is stronger, healthier individuals and 

a stronger, healthier family unit.  Each brother and sister is still 

unique.  All have grown and hopefully will continue to do so 

because they've learned a new way to relate to one another.  All 

have grown and hopefully will continue to do so because they 

have a genuine new understanding and concern for one 

another.  And this does not preclude the possibility of needing 

further therapeutic intervention in the future. 

 

Well I believe that Canada is a family in crisis.  I do not view 

Quebec as one spouse who is no longer interested in staying 

married to the other spouse, namely the rest of Canada.  Rather 

I see each province as a sister or brother of varying strength 

and age and individual concerns and that the task at hand is to 

provide a framework whereby each sibling has an opportunity 

to express itself openly.  Most importantly, each sister and 

brother must be carefully listened to and truly heard.  I do not 

consider the constitutional exercises, like some, to be a waste 

of time.  Instead I see this as an amazing opportunity for our 

Canadian family to learn about itself, for it to become more 

enlightened and adjusted, more fair and conciliatory.  And the 

result of this amazing process is that by rising to the challenge, 

we may become a model for future nations who will face 

similar struggles. 

 

I would like to conclude by saying that I have appreciated the 

opportunity afforded me to speak today.  And I wish to lend my 

support to the Premier -- first, in his move to deal with section 

121; secondly, in protecting transfer payments; thirdly, in his 

desire for provincial input, particularly into federal decisions of 

international treaties; fourthly, I very much agree that the 

amending formula, section 42, is far too restrictive, and highly 

endorse the seven provinces' 85 per cent suggestion. 

 

I would also like to add to the words of the opposition that I 

wish to state my fervent belief in a referendum for 

Saskatchewan people.  We need to encourage people that they 

live in a participatory democracy.  And by allowing them to 

take part in a referendum, they would understand that they truly 

do. 

 

I think that I might be able to find further words to express why 

we should keep Canada together.  Perhaps I could find a lot of 

ideas about perhaps how we could even achieve that success.  

But I know that I would never be able to find the words to 

explain and to justify how one enviable nation stopped caring 

about one another.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 32 -- An Act to amend The Public Trustee Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Public 

Trustee Amendment Act, 1992. 

 

This Act is being amended in three ways.  First, the amount 

that the public trustee may pay or authorize to be paid to a 

responsible adult on behalf of a child is increased from $2,000 

to $10,000.  Responsible adults will be required to use this 

money only in the best interests of the child.  As more funds 

are administered by responsible adults, the public trustee can 

reduce the number of trust accounts it administers and this will 

reduce the demand on limited resources in the public trustee's 

office. 

 

Under the current legislation, 30 days notice must be given to 

the public trustee before legal proceedings can be commenced 

or continued against a person who is named in a certificate of 

incompetence under the The Mentally Disordered Persons Act 

if a property guardian or personnel guardian has not been 

appointed.  The second amendment clarifies that the notice to 

the public trustee is not required once a certificate of 

incompetence lapses pursuant to The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act. 

 

The third amendment will continue the public trustee's consent 

for homestead transactions if the public trustee acts for an 

infant or has been appointed property guardian.  This 

amendment reflects proposed amendments which will delete 

the requirement for the land title system to enforce compliance 

with The Homesteads Act, 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these amendments permit parents and other 

responsible adults increased access to funds held by the public 

trustee, subject to an increased legal onus to use the money 

only in the best interests of the child. 

 

They also clarify that the public trustee's consent is required for 

homestead transactions, subject to proposed amendments to 

The Homesteads Act and notice to the public trustee is not 

required once a certificate of incompetence lapses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Public Trustee Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I've listened to 

the minister's comments with interest.  We have a few 

questions with regard to this Bill and would like to take some 

more time to review it, so we would now move to adjourn 

debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 33 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Land Titles 

Amendment Act, 1992.  This amendment will permit land titles 

registrars to process estate land transactions if a certificate of 

no infants is presented from either the local registrar of the 

Surrogate Court or the 

Public Trustee. 

 

A certificate stating that no infant has an interest in the estates 

is required before a state land can be administered by personal 

representatives.  Presently the registrar can only accept the 

certificate from the Public Trustee.  This amendment will assist 

executors and administrators of estates by permitting them to 

obtain a certificate from the Surrogate Court immediately after 

their appointment, rather than from the Public Trustee. 

 

The Public Trustee will issue certificates if infants cease to 

have an interest in an estate, for example, when an infant 

becomes an adult with full capacity to consent to transactions 

affecting estate lands. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Land Titles Act. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The opposition 

has reviewed this, and we would have no problem with letting 

this move into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 34 -- An Act to amend The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Mentally Disordered 

Persons Amendment Act, 1992, which I referred to in remarks 

respecting the previous Bill. 

 

These amendments provide that a certificate of incompetence 

lapses one year from its date of issue unless proceedings are 

underway to appoint a property guardian, a guardian has been 

appointed, or the Public Trustee is acting as property guardian. 

 

Certificates of incompetence held by the Public Trustee's office 

will lapse on Royal Assent being given to the Act, provided 

that a property guardian is not appointed.  Certificates of 

competence will not be required once a certificate of 

incompetence lapses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 

Mentally Disordered Persons Act. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Once again the 

opposition has reviewed the Bill and would have no problem 

letting it move into committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- On completion of these remarks I 

intend to move second reading of The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act.  But before I do that, I want to say that The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act which is contained in the 

Bill are necessary to provide for payment of vehicle 

registration fees and basic insurance premiums by instalments.  

The members opposite will 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 4, 1992 

know that this is not a new concept or a new phenomena, but 

only puts in legislation which had been done for some time and 

is very much of a housekeeping nature.  So I would expect that 

the opposition members would have little problem in 

supporting the Bill. 

 

I'm going to take a few minutes to provide for the members 

some of the background as to why this legislation is needed 

now.  SGI has been offering a two-payment plan for private 

vehicles and farm truck registration fees and basis insurance 

since July 1, 1991.  The program has proved to be popular, 

with over 20 per cent of the fees and premiums for eligible 

vehicles now being paid, Mr. Speaker, by two instalments. 

 

Unfortunately the previous administration told SGI to go ahead 

and offer the two-payment plan without bothering to make the 

required amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance 

Act.  We now have a situation where the two-payment plan has 

been operating for nearly a year and is well received by vehicle 

owners but has operated without the proper legislative 

authority.  This Bill will correct that problem by giving SGI the 

authority it needs to offer instalment payment options to 

Saskatchewan vehicle owners. 

 

The two-payment plan for licensing private and farm vehicles 

is an option that has been chosen by many of Saskatchewan's 

vehicle owners.  About 15,000 vehicles' licence are being paid 

for in this way every month.  It is important service provided 

by SGI which is part of an ongoing effort by our Crown 

corporations and in fact this insurance company to make the 

process of licensing vehicles as convenient as possible.  It must 

be legitimized now by legislation, and I would ask all members 

to support the Bill. 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

the opposition will not be preventing this Bill from moving 

forward in the House but we do have some concerns with it.  

The concept of a split premium payment is a good idea, Mr. 

Speaker, as some people do not have the funds available at one 

particular moment in time to pay for their total vehicle licence. 

 

One of the things that I would like to ask the minister to take 

into consideration when he brings the Bill into committee is, is 

there a grace period after the premium ceases, after the 

premium has run out?  If the premium runs out on a Sunday 

could he consider a grace period allowing that person to renew 

their licence on the following first work day without suffering a 

penalty? 

 

I also have a question, Mr. Speaker, on some of the reasons 

why section 81(q) . . . 81(s) is in place.  I was wondering, and 

hopefully we'll get into this, Mr. Speaker, when we go into 

committee, as to what the categories of persons are who may 

apply for such an instalment plan. 

 

In 81(v), Mr. Speaker, we come across the word -- it seems to 

be quite prevalent in many of the Bills being presented to this 

House -- and that is the word deemed.  And one of the 

questions I will be asking the minister in 

committee is why it's necessary or why he would have in the 

Bill that a person could have deemed to have earned a portion 

or all of his premium on his vehicle licence.  It seems a little 

strange to me, Mr. Speaker, that either a person has earned the 

return on his premium or he has not.  And so why would it be 

necessary to deem that he has? 

 

I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether or not the minister in 

many of these Bills is simply setting a trail for the use of the 

word "deemed" so that the member from Rosetown-Elrose may 

use it when he presents his GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) legislation to say that there is a precedent set, it 

having used this word so many times already in the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will use my comments and my questions in the 

Committee of the Whole when this Bill is presented there.  

Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 1 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 1 -- An Act to 

amend The Clean Air Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a few 

words I would like to say on this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, this Act is 

to amend The Clean Air Act -- as a whole, make slight 

improvements in some of the regulations.  Most of the 

questions that I will have on this Bill will be asked in the 

Committee of the Whole, and I'm sure that there they will be 

taken into consideration. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, under clause 24(2)(i), the addition of a 

sliding scale of fees is not clearly defined.  The purpose of 

implementing sliding scales for permits or renewals of permits 

is a little vague.  I assume that the minister means by a sliding 

scale that it has to do with the size of an operation and the 

amount of pollution created by it, meaning more pollution a 

company emits into the air, the higher the fee it will pay in its 

permit. 

 

If this is the reason for a sliding scale, it makes perfect sense.  

If however, the sliding scale is for any other purpose I have to 

question why it is needed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I previously stated, I see no reason why I 

should ask any additional questions at this time.  My questions 

will be asked in Committee of the Whole.  I believe the Bill 

should be allowed to proceed at this time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the 



June 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

proposed motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 2 -- An 

Act to amend the Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I only have a 

few comments that I wish to make on this Bill. 

 

We're dealing with the important matter today of the 

ozone-depletion substance control.  This side of the House is 

planning to co-operate in the passage of this Bill; however we 

do have a couple of questions.  Dealing with control orders, 

item (3), under section 10.2 states: 

 

 The Minister may, by a further order, replace, revoke, amend 

or vary a previous control order. 

 

What appears to be the case, Mr. Speaker, is that the minister 

will have a carte blanche over control orders in question.  And 

I know that the NDP government in the '70s enjoyed similar 

control, yet I don't believe this should be the case today. 

 

The control orders and provisions have to be more clearly 

defined and a minister should not have the power to do 

whatever he or she pleases in one case and change his or her 

position in another -- whatever suits their purpose. 

 

In order to be fair, Mr. Speaker, these control orders should be 

the same for everyone involved. 

 

Another concern, Mr. Speaker, has to do with the government 

setting limitations on prosecutions.  Take an extreme example.  

Say an unscrupulous person has been . . . or continues to allow 

ozone-depleting substances into the environment.  The person 

sends these substances into the atmosphere knowing full well 

he is breaking the rules.  Should knowledge of this matter not 

come to light until two years after the person in question has 

broken the control rules, he will not be able to be prosecuted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not believe anyone would doubt the person 

breaking the rules should pay for what he is doing.  Therefore I 

ask that further consideration be given to the statute of 

limitations.  I feel the time limit should be extended to cover a 

longer period of time, perhaps five years. 

 

As you can see, Mr. Speaker, this Bill has some fine tuning that 

should be taking place before it goes into effect.  The Bill, we 

will allow now to proceed, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Carson that Bill No. 3 -- An Act to 

amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act be 

now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to 

adjourn debate on this Bill. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 


