




















































Hansard: May 12, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 329 

 May 12, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my honour to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly, 

40 students from one of the very fine schools in my home 

constituency of Saskatoon River Heights, students from 

Lawson Heights School, accompanied by their teachers Diane 

Selby and Don Bates, and chaperons Mrs. Rak, Mrs. Allchurch 

and Mr. Hiibner. 

 

I look forward to meeting them on the stairs after question 

period and in room 218 for refreshments later.  I would ask all 

the members of the Assembly to join me in giving them a 

warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Merci M. le Président . M. le Président, je veux 

présenter a toi et mes chers collègues de la Chambre dix-neuf 

étudiants de la huitième et neuvième année de l'Ecole 

Providence de Vonda.  Ils sont accompagnés ici par leur 

enseignante, Mme Marie LeBlanc-Warick, aussi des parents 

qui sont venus avec la classe, Jeanie Lalonde, Madeleine Denis 

et Gloria Jeanneau.  Je veux demander a tous les deputés de les 

accueillir chaleureusement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present to you and through you to the 

members of the Assembly, 19 students from the Vonda school, 

Ecole Providence.  They're in the eighth and ninth class.  

They're with their teacher, Marie LeBlanc-Warick; chaperons, 

Jeanie Lalonde, Madeleine Denis and Gloria Jeanneau.  I 

would ask all members to give them a warm reception.  They're 

seated in the west gallery, to the west here.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. McPherson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Legislative Assembly, three constituents from the Shaunavon 

constituency that are here to visit and talk with the agriculture 

caucus committee today.  It's Warren and Barry Brown and 

Ken Cosgrove, and I would ask that the members welcome 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to 

you and through you to the Assembly today, 27 grade 8 

students from the Carnduff Elementary School from Carnduff, 

Saskatchewan.  They are seated in the Speaker's gallery today 

and I will be joining with them later for refreshments.  And 

they have with them their teachers, Art Keating and Mr. 

Nicholls.  They have their chaperons with them, Mrs. Vanstone 

and Mrs. Wegman, and I would invite all of you to please help 

me to welcome these students to our Assembly. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  You 

represent Saskatoon Nutana now.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

introduce to all members of the legislature, a constituent of 

mine.  John Hyshka is visiting Regina today.  He is the 

economic development officer for the Saskatoon Regional 

Rural Development Corporation.  John has some tremendous 

ideas for economic development in this province, particularly 

in the area of food processing.  I'm glad to see John joining us 

today and I would ask all members of the legislature to 

welcome him here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to join 

with my colleague from Kinistino in welcoming the students 

and teachers from the Ecole Providence in Vonda.  As you 

know, Vonda was once in the Humboldt constituency.  And I 

just would like to say to them, welcome, and I hope they had a 

good trip down, a good visit, and a safe trip home. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Funding for Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct my question to the Minister 

of Health.  And I might just suggest to the minister that she 

does not get too comfortable in her seat because she may be 

spending some time on her feet this afternoon. 

 

Madam Minister, you are living proof that the loudest 

complainers for the public are sometimes the least anxious for 

its welfare.  Now I have in front of me volumes of yours and 

your Premier's promises and pledges to the public that an NDP 

(New Democratic Party) government would protect them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health I say I have here a news 

clipping from March 11, 1989, from the Leader-Post, which 

I'm sure that you remember well.  The headline reads:  "Death 

blamed on waiting list."  And the story has a nice picture of the 

minister who at the time claimed that reduced funding in health 

care was actually killing people.  Madam Minister, you 

remember this claim: "Death blamed on waiting list."  Madam 

Minister, the question is very simple.  Do you still believe that 

reductions in health care funding lead to the death of patients? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  For 10 years 

the member opposite and the PC (Progressive Conservative) 

government was in power, and for 10 years they did absolutely 

nothing with respect to health care reform  

_- absolutely nothing.  All they kept doing was maintaining the 

status quo when the rest of the country was moving towards 

co-ordinating and integrating services and streamlining health 

care services. 
 

What this government has undertaken in the last few months 

with respect to health care is far more progressive 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

and far more geared towards producing a higher quality of 

health care in Saskatchewan than what we've seen in the last 10 

years. 

 

We will be moving the health care system towards a more 

community-based system.  And had those members opposite 

listened to us . . . The fact of the matter is, if you move people 

out of hospitals and into the community, you provide not only a 

higher quality of health care but at reduced cost to the health 

care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was giving the 

minister an opportunity to get it off her chest so that she could 

do all the blaming -- blame the doctors, blame the feds, blame 

the Tories, blame the media, put blame on everyone else except 

accepting the responsibility, Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, you said on October 2, 1989 that the NDP, 

and I quote: . . . will fight the erosion of the principles of 

medicare.  I feel rather certain we'll be having a change in 

government next time around and then the public isn't going to 

have to worry about these problems. 

 

Under an NDP government, Madam Minister, you said the 

public won't have to be worried about these problems -- your 

solemn pledge to the people of this province.  Can you tell this 

Assembly, Madam Minister, how a tripling of the drug plan 

deductible and an increase of the co-payment from 25 to 35 per 

cent will ease the anxiety level of the Saskatchewan families 

and seniors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 

virtually bankrupt this province -- virtually bankrupt it.  They 

have just continued to spend and spend and spend over the 

years, Mr. Speaker, and not do anything in terms of reform or 

in any sort of attempt to improve the quality of health care and 

preserve the health care system for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Instead, they chose to bury their head in the sand and spend our 

children's future.  That's what they did.  They chose to spend 

the future of our seniors with respect to health care by virtually 

bankrupting this province.  They are the ones that have put the 

taxes on the people of this province.  They are the ones who 

have levied these fees on people because of their irresponsible 

mismanagement of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And as I have said 

before, you can always tell when you're hitting a chord with the 

members opposite -- the louder they clap to hide their false 

bravado. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about choices.  And you 

bet, Madam Minister, I say you had choices and you are 

showing now the people of Saskatchewan the ultimate choice 

that you are making, which is a betrayal of the promises you 

made during the election time. 

Madam Minister, when you were in opposition you brought 

forward many cases of people you thought were going to be 

devastated by the former administration's efficiency measures.  

In fact a few short years ago you said, and I quote:  You have 

destroyed the prescription drug plan, forcing Saskatchewan 

people, particularly seniors, to make a choice -- you talk about 

choices -- to make a choice between groceries and prescription 

drugs. 

 

Madam Minister, you have removed coverage for the majority 

of people.  If these people had that choice that you're talking 

about with a hundred and twenty-five deductible and 25 per 

cent co-payment, what choice, Madam Minister, I ask you, 

what choice do those people now have with a $380 deductible 

and a 35 per cent co-payment?  What choice do those people 

have, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, let's talk about the choices 

they had.  They had choices to come forward with a balanced 

budget, but instead they chose to blow money on GigaText. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- And they chose to pay George Hill some 

300 or $400,000 a year.  Those were the choices those 

members made.  Our choice, Mr. Speaker, is to try and put this 

province on a good fiscal ground so that we can preserve 

medicare and preserve the future of our children. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and a new question 

to the minister who has the audacity to talk about George Hill 

when we have a Jack Messer in your group -- oral contract; no 

one knows what the hon. member is getting; no one has any 

idea; an oral contract that cannot be tabled.  And you talk about 

George Hill, Madam Minister. 

 

But, Madam Minister, when you were in opposition, you 

claimed that adding a deductible to the drug plan gutted the 

plan and denied care to Saskatchewan families.  That's what 

you said, Madam Minister.  On budget night, in the rotunda, 

Madam Minister, you said to reporters, and I quote:  The drug 

plan is still one of the best in Canada.  That's what you said 

after budget: The drug plan is still one of the best in Canada. 

 

So on one occasion, Madam Minister, you claim the drug plan 

was a horrible excuse for health care, and on another occasion 

you claimed an even further weakened plan is among the best. 

 

My question is simply this, Madam Minister: on what occasion 

were you telling the truth? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, when a government is 

pouring money into hand-outs to out-of-province corporations 

and friends of the Tory Party, decreasing drug payments is 

irresponsible and it's a bad choice. 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When a government is looking at its 

credit rating dropping to BBB because of the irresponsible 

behaviour of the former administration, it has no choice but to 

make some of these program cuts -- no choice at all. 

 

Now, and let me talk about . . . The member opposite had 

talked in terms of betrayal with respect to the population.  Let 

me talk about what I discussed with every constituent who 

raised any of these questions with me on the doorstep in Regina 

Hillsdale. 

 

We talked about the deficit, the horrendous situation that you 

put the people of the province of Saskatchewan in, and how we 

were going to get a handle on that.  And we talked about our 

commitment to implement and improve programs as we could 

fiscally afford it, and our commitment to try and get this budget 

under control.  That was our commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, not the kind of betrayal that you've engaged in 

in paying off your friends and cutting programs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The applause increases, Mr. Speaker, as we 

go along, and I have no doubt as to why that would be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I gave the minister an ample opportunity at the 

beginning of this question period to get over her rhetoric so that 

we could sit down or stand here in our place and have a 

reasonable discussion about this issue.  And the rhetoric 

continues.  And I have yet, Mr. Speaker, to get an answer to 

any of the questions that I've been asking.  Political rhetoric.  

No acceptance of the responsibility. 

 

But, Madam Minister, it would be nice if you could just take on 

the ministerial role and grow out of the opposition mentality 

that you folks over there are still operating under.  You are in 

control now.  It is your responsibility to come up with solutions 

and answers that are in keeping with the promises that you 

made during election time. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, sources within your own department 

inform us that the decision to create some kind of new dental 

plan was announced to them, without details, two days prior to 

budget.  That's what sources in your own department are telling 

me.  I am told that there is chaos over this so called initiative, 

and that all the department has been able to get out of you is 

that this new dental plan will include distributing tooth-brushes 

to the schools. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you, in anticipation of your denials, to 

prove those denials, will you table in this Assembly the actual 

plans for the implementation of the new school-based dental 

program that you asked your officials, in two days time, to 

come up with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we are putting together a 

working committee of a number of health care 

professionals with whom we will be consulting in the months 

to come with respect to developing a dental plan in the 

province of Saskatchewan that will be more preventive and will 

provide services to rural Saskatchewan, unlike the former 

government which took them away. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, there is the confirmation.  There 

is no plan.  There's quite clear there are no plans are on table.  

This announcement, Mr. Speaker, I maintain and I submit to 

the people of Saskatchewan, was simply a quickie you had in 

the hallway to try to show that you had something to offer 

other than the devastation of the health care system. 

 

And your leader, Madam Minister, talks about scratching plans 

on the back of napkins.  Madam Minister, the public do not 

know what you are doing with the dental plan.  Some media 

have reported that you are reinstating the school-based dental 

plan.  That's what the media has said, and they're not quite sure 

either.  With your government's desire to hide as much of this 

as possible, it's not surprising that there's confusion out there.  

There's total confusion out in Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday we caught the Finance minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd ask the member to put his 

question, please. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, could you perhaps enlighten 

this Assembly, the members, and the people of Saskatchewan 

and the media for that matter.  Do you plan, Madam Minister, 

to reinstate the school-based dental program, or are you simply 

going to hand out tooth-brushes and dental floss under your 

new program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we will be consulting with 

health care professionals in the dental field to determine what 

the new plan will look like.  Our hope is to bring more services 

to rural Saskatchewan than what presently exist in rural 

Saskatchewan, which is when they fired 440 dental therapists.  

They pulled most of them out of rural Saskatchewan, and we 

are hoping to return some of those services. 

 

Now there are a lot of these dental therapists who have left the 

province and are no longer qualified, so we aren't in a position 

to put 440 dental therapists back out in the rural Saskatchewan 

because of the way they devastated the former program.  We 

will have to put together the best preventive dental health 

program we can in rural Saskatchewan, and we will be doing 

that in consultation with the health care professions.  And of 

course it will also have to be done in a way that the province 

can afford, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What's the plan? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously we're not going 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

to get an answer to that question either because there is no plan.  

It's a quickie, a scheme dreamed up by Madam Minister in the 

hallway to placate some of her supporters, from her long 

promises, long-standing promises that you were going to 

reinstate the school-based dental plan. 
 

For a while there I thought the 440 people that you were 

talking about, the dental therapists, were going to get their jobs 

back.  And then you blew it right at the end by saying, we're 

not in a position to do that after all. 

 

You talk about consulting, Madam Minister.  You seem to 

believe that the existence of a deficit gives you an excuse to do 

whatever you want whenever you want -- blame everything on 

the deficit.  Well here are the facts, Mr. Minister.  You never 

consulted with chiropractors; you never consulted with 

optometrists; you never even consulted with your own 

department, as far as the dental plan is concerned. 

 

Because you claim you're an open and consultative 

government, Madam Minister, so open that you refuse to table 

anything that does not suit your political agenda, will you, 

Madam Minister, will you table a list of the organizations 

and/or persons that you claimed just now in your previous 

answer that you have consulted.  Will you table a list of the 

organizations and the individuals that you have consulted with 

prior, prior to your decisions to gut the Saskatchewan health 

care system?  Will you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the dental 

plan, what we said to dental therapists and other health care 

professionals is that we would look at returning to a 

school-based plan.  I have always said that it will not 

necessarily look like the old school-based plan we had, nor 

would it be the same as the present plan.  If you look at the 

letters that were written to dental therapists, you could see in 

there that the commitment is to come up with something new 

with respect to the dental plan.  And that's what we're going to 

do as we consult in the months to come with dental 

professions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well we finally . . . Mr. Speaker, a new 

question to the minister.  We finally have an admission now 

that there was never any thought given to really re-establishing 

the school-based dental plan.  The dental therapists have no 

hope.  That's what you have just told them today, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, as far as the Department of Health is 

concerned and the rest of it, this budget is a betrayal address.  

There are seven pages of political blame throwing and partisan 

attack -- seven pages.  And I invite any members of the public 

to read that horrendous document that the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer had to pay for. 

 

Madam Minister, your devastating health changes that you and 

your Premier brought about are contained in a few short lines 

in that document.  Can the minister tell us why there is no 

reference, no mention in the budget address, about the increase 

in special care homes, senior 

 citizens' homes, nursing homes?  Why there's no mention 

about increases in ambulance fees and the changes to the dental 

plan.  In fact, these significant changes are only mentioned in 

one of several news releases -- news releases issued after the 

budget address.  Why is that, Madam Minister?  Did the 

partisan attack take preference, or is there another reason? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to quote a statement 

of the member opposite in the Star-Phoenix of June 24, 1987. 

And here's what the member from Rosthern said: The 

alternative is to just let the deficit grow.  And that would not 

take courage.  It would just put your head in the sand and say I 

don't have the money and I have a deficit now and I will just 

continue to borrow and it won't matter. 

 

Mr. Member, when are you going to get your head out of the 

sand? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  I know . . . elected in 1986, '87, '88, and '89 it was 

always my priority to support the people of this province.  That 

was the priority that our government has.  We went to the wall 

for the farmers, unlike your Minister of Agriculture that is 

throwing the farming sector out to the wolves. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, getting back directly . . . and the minister 

almost got me side-tracked away from the important issue, 

which of course was her ambition here.  But I will be constant 

in the direction, Madam Minister, that I am going, and that is 

the utter betrayal to the people of Saskatchewan from you as a 

Minister of Health that constantly said, spend more, spend 

more, spend more.  That was your commitment to the people of 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister, and we're going to hold you to 

that. 

 

And now what we find is a total, utter betrayal . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order!  Does the member have 

a question?  I'd ask him to put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- You talk about the health care system that 

were not announced in the budget, parts of it.  And If I could 

just make my voice heard above that of the Premier, maybe . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the members please come 

to order.  And I ask the member from Rosthern, now he's spent 

over a minute on this question already and we still have not 

heard the question.  I asked him to directly put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm sorry if I can't make myself heard over the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I will try to get to the question directly without a preamble.  

Madam Minister, I'm going to ask you now:  would you agree 

to table in this Assembly all, all of the changes to the health 

care system that reduces services or 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

imposes costs to patients? 

 

You are doing a lot to the budget, but you're doing more 

through press releases.  Will you table, so that all of the people 

in Saskatchewan know precisely where they stand, as you hack 

away at our health care system in Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is 

going to have adequate opportunity in Estimates to question us 

on every single detail with respect to health care.  And at that 

time I will tell the legislature about our health care reform that's 

going to save us millions of dollars in this province and still 

provide high quality health care for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

A new direction.  And even though the members opposite have 

virtually bankrupted this province, we're going to save the 

medicare system and advance with a new direction in health 

care that's going to improve the quality of health care for the 

people of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

the minister.  And I would ask the Premier to try to control 

himself so that I will be . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I think the job of controlling 

the members in the House is up to the Speaker.  And I ask the 

member to direct his question to the minister. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And certainly you do a very good job of that, 

Mr. Speaker.  I commend you on that. 

 

Madam Minister, what you're telling me with the chiropractors 

and optometrists is bad enough.  But, Madam Minister, I have 

to ask you a question that does not deal with back pain nor with 

potential eye problems.  Understand very clearly that this 

question is for many people who are staying alive today. 

 

Under the previous administration, Madam Minister, diabetics 

were exempted from the drug plan and charged $1 for each vial 

of insulin in recognition of the life-saving nature of the 

medicine. 

 

Madam Minister, will you confirm that you have removed the 

special provisions covering insulin for diabetics and that under 

your new, improved drug plan diabetics must pay $23 for each 

and every vial of insulin.  Will you openly confirm that for the 

people of Saskatchewan, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, diabetics have been brought 

under the drug plan in the same way that many other 

individuals who suffer from chronic illness are paying for 

drugs under the drug plan. 

 

Now with respect to the member opposite's general comments, 

I want to say this.  If the members opposite 

could only accept responsibility for what they have done to the 

people of this province and the children of this province and 

the seniors of this province.  What they have done with their 

wrong-headed mismanagement, wrong-headed priorities, and 

mismanagement of this province over the last 10 years, is 

absolutely reprehensible and disgusting. 

 

They will never, ever be forgiven for it by the people of this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They have forced this province into the 

situation where it is virtually bankrupt and where many of our 

former programs have to be remodelled and changed in order 

to maintain the quality -- something that they refused to do for 

10 years because they didn't have the creativity or the 

wherewithal or the courage to do it.  Instead . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I go back to my original 

premise.  This is a budget of fine print where one must look at 

the fine print of this budget and beyond in order to get the 

answers and what the impacts are really going to be.  And that 

means, Madam Minister, that the cost of a bottle of life-saving 

insulin skyrockets from $1 per bottle to $23 a bottle.  Including 

the test strips, syringes, and alcohol swabs that diabetics 

require, they are now looking at a monthly bill of between 150 

and $200. 

 

Madam Minister, why have you so callously singled out 

diabetics for whom drugs are not an option but a matter of life 

and death? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Diabetics, Mr. Member, will have the 

same coverage as everyone else.  And something this plan 

offers is this, is that after a six-month period when you reach 

the $375 deductible, your co-payment drops substantially.  So 

for those families who are very high drug users, they are 

actually in a more favourable position under this particular 

drug plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 -- An Act to amend The Clean Air Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move an Act to amend 

The Clean Air Act to be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 2 -- An Act to amend The Ozone-depleting 

Substances Control Act 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move an Act to amend 

The Ozone-depleting Substances Control Act be moved and 

read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move an Act to amend 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act be 

introduced and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

motion for returns (not debatable) no. 16, I hereby table the 

following answers or response. 

 

The Speaker: -- Tabled, no. 16. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 

motion for returns (not debatable) no. 17, I ask that it be 

converted to motions for return (debatable). 

 

The Speaker: -- Motion for return debate. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's again 

a pleasure to stand in this House to speak on the budget as it's 

been presented.  And after listening to question period today, 

Mr. Speaker, I can see why, as I get into my speech, you will 

find out that many people across this province feel betrayed 

and angered by the budget address that was presented by the 

Finance minister of this province just a few days ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, people feel betrayed; they are angry.  And it 

doesn't matter where you go, Mr. Speaker, they're talking about 

it.  They're angry, Mr. Speaker, not only about the budget 

address, not only about the promises that were broken through 

the budget address as it's been presented, they're also angry 

about the fact of the patronage and the feeling and the sense of 

betrayal that we've seen by the members opposite. 
 

There's a sense of betrayal in Saskatchewan today, perpetrated 

by the NDP and the government.  Each and every one of the 

NDP government's election promises, Mr. Speaker, we've seen 

have been broken.  And again 

 today in question period as we were trying to get answers to 

questions, Mr. Speaker, it seems that this opposition is going to 

be forced to look even with a finer toothed comb between the 

lines to find out what the government . . . where it's really 

going. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at promises . . . And one thing I 

want to just point out for a minute regarding the patronage 

issue.  We've brought it up before and I'm sure it's an issue 

that's going to come up time and time again.  The government 

would argue, and even the Minister of Community Services 

when confronted by the fact that she had appointed a number of 

people from her campaign committee to government jobs said, 

well, it was done before. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I indicated over a week ago, the question is not 

whether it was done by former governments, be they NDP, be 

they Conservative, be they Liberal -- the question, Mr. Speaker, 

is what was promised?  What do the people believe? 

 

The people believed and honestly believed, and as the Minister 

of Justice and I had a little debate in this House regarding the 

patronage issue, the people of Saskatchewan honestly believed 

and gave the government of the day a 53 percentage mandate at 

the polls, because they believed the NDP were going to 

eliminate patronage. 

 

But what have we seen, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, the 

Minister of Health stands up today and talks about a former 

appointee to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation.  Well they 

have their own member, Mr. Messer.  In fact another member, 

Ms. Bryant.  What about Mr. Ching?  What about many of 

these people that have been appointed? 

 

Do you think the people of Saskatchewan believe the NDP?  

Do you believe that they are going to believe the NDP in 

anything they say, even when we get into Estimates?  I look 

forward to getting into Estimates with many of the members, 

and I think, Mr. Speaker, it will be an interesting time as we get 

looking at the health budget and the educational budget and 

many of the other aspects of the spending of this government. 

 

But talking about patronage.  Mr. Speaker, we just looked at a 

recent article, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: "If it walks like a duck, 

looks like a duck and sounds like a duck, it's not likely to be an 

iguana."  This kind of simple logic seems lost on 

Saskatchewan's NDP government when it comes to 

appointments.  The line seem to have become something like, 

if it looks like patronage, sounds like patronage, and has all 

other appearance of patronage, it's not patronage.  No, it's just 

mere coincidence. 

 

Mr. Speaker, according to Justice Minister Bob Mitchell, "if a 

competent person who is appointed just happens to be an NDP 

supporter, 'we can't help that.'"  This pious pronouncement, Mr. 

Speaker, will not fly with the people of this province. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan believed there was better.  They 

believed Mr. Romanow . . . or the Premier of this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  They believed the Premier prior to 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

the October election when he said we would eliminate many of 

these former proceedings that had taken place over the years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we indeed as an opposition are going to take 

careful note.  We listened very carefully as the Minister of 

Justice responded to the questions last week.  We also heard 

the Minister of Justice give the assurance to this House that the 

500 positions that have been eliminated through the budget in 

the public sector that they will not be back-filled by NDP 

partisans.  Mr. Speaker, this opposition will continue to 

continually keep our eyes out for any back-filling of any 

position because the government said they wouldn't do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that in the throne speech the 

government talked about creating 580 new positions, new 

positions on boards and commissions throughout the province.  

And yet in the budget they turn around and eliminate 500 jobs.  

I don't know how that adds up.  It appears to me, Mr. Speaker, 

there are 80 more jobs than what they eliminated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a number of the examples I've given are old.  We 

have seen a number, a rash of appointments in this province.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to monitor this 

government.  In one breath they brag about the number of 

appointments they've made, and the next breath they brag about 

the number of jobs they've cut.  The point of the matter, Mr. 

Speaker, is the people of this province are annoyed because the 

NDP broke their promises.  They believed the NDP would 

really live up to the promises they made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the major areas of contention that people 

in this province are concerned about is the promise of no new 

taxes.  Mr. Speaker, members opposite said, and I quote: 

enough is enough.  And, Mr. Speaker, who made that 

comment?  I believe it was the Minister of Health, going back 

to Hansard of June 7, 1991, who said enough is enough, we 

don't need more money. 

 

And I'm sure that anyone who reads the the Leader-Post saw 

the full-page ad sponsored by the Saskatchewan Association of 

Taxpayers.   And allow me to refresh the members opposite of 

a number of other comments they made about taxation, about 

spending in this province.  The Premier said, and I quote:  I say 

to the people of this province, I say the people of this province 

are fed up with taxes and we're going to change that.  In fact, 

another article says:  not one more dollar.  On his way to 

becoming premier, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, Roy Romanow 

made an excellent point:  $5 billion is enough.  Mr. Speaker, 

I'm quoting from the . . . candidate Romanow told us in last 

fall's election campaign, not one dollar more be needed to run 

the Government of Saskatchewan, he said. 

 

Now that he's the Premier, I believe the Premier should stick to 

his guns.  He should still believe $5 billion is enough.  The 

current level of provincial revenue is enough, he said, because 

it is.  Mr. Speaker, however we just have to look back and we 

find out in the budget where the government is going.  And we 

look back at what they said.  And the further we look back, Mr. 

Speaker, we find more and more comments that totally go 

against what has been happening in the province of late. 

The current Finance minister said, and I quote, on March 25, 

'91: the problem is on the expenditure side.  We have a 

structural deficit.  Revenues cannot fix the deficit.  It has to be 

dealt with at the expenditure side in order to get things under 

control.  That means cutting spending. 

 

What did the budget do?  The budget increased spending, 

increased taxation.  The Minister of Economic Diversification 

said, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: we've indicated many, many 

sources where we would see the government saving the kind of 

money that would make these massive taxes unnecessary.  

That's June 12, 1991. 

 

(1445) 

 

Mr. Speaker, it sounds like the same old argument: waste and 

mismanagement.  They're going to find all these areas.  But, 

Mr. Speaker, did they indeed find the waste and 

mismanagement they were looking for?  Did the Gass 

Commission point out any waste and mismanagement?  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, the Gass Commission said the books 

were open. 

 

The Justice minister said and I quote, regarding taxation: the 

problem isn't government revenues.  I repeat again.  

Government revenues -- this is coming from the current Justice 

minister -- have increased by 70 per cent in the last nine years, 

and the government that can't operate within those kind of 

numbers is a government that doesn't deserve to be a 

government.  That was the Minister of Justice when he was an 

opposition member back in April 24, 1991. 

 

Yet what do we see today, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker.  Has the 

minister lived up to his words?  The Associate Minister of 

Finance said, and I quote: the NDP won't raise personal taxes 

for four years.  May 21, '91.  Interesting.  They wouldn't raise 

taxes for four years.  We haven't gone a year since the budget . 

. . or since the election, Mr. Speaker, and what do we have -- an 

increase in taxation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all hear and we all know of the debate that 

centred around the harmonization of the education and health 

tax with the GST (goods and services tax).  We all know of the 

debate that took place last spring when the E&H (education 

and health tax) was expanded to be harmonized with some of 

the GST, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now what did members opposite say when they were on this 

side of the House, Mr. Speaker?  They kept telling the people 

of Saskatchewan, no more PST (provincial sales tax).  No PST.  

Vote NDP and you will not have any PST.  And what 

happened, Mr. Speaker?  What happened on October 21?  Yes 

they eliminated the expanded sales tax on hamburger.  They 

eliminated the expanded sales tax on children's clothing, but 

did they eliminate the total expanded sales tax?  No they didn't, 

Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, they gave up $180 million in 

revenue which would have come into the province through 

harmonization of the PST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they gave up a form of taxation that would have 

been fair.  They gave up a form of taxation that would have 

treated business and businesses and farmers fairly, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as the average consumer in this 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

province. 

 

And then we turn around in their budget speech, Mr. Speaker, 

and I quote a headline from May 8: "NDP found a way to make 

up for the PST." It says here: 

 

 The provincial sales tax might be history, but the $181 

million it was going to bring in was picked up through other 

measures in Thursday's provincial budget. 

 

 . . . the 10-per-cent deficit surtax announced in the budget is 

expected to bring in $120 million over a full year and the 

increase in the E&H tax, to eight per cent (Mr. Speaker) from 

seven per cent, is expected to raise $65.1 million. 

 

 The total is $185 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me that the harmonized tax 

that was spoken of by the former government was more than 

fair.  Every time the NDP turned around they promised not to 

increase taxes.  In fact the moment the election results were in 

they indeed, as I indicated earlier, eliminated the expanded 

portion of the E&H, only to do what we've seen today -- 

expand the E&H tax to 8 per cent. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP and the government talk 

about not increasing taxes, do they think that the people of this 

province really believe that taxes haven't been increased?  Do 

they think that the increase in utility rates is not a tax increase?  

What do you think people are going to do every time they pick 

up their bill?  What is the difference between a harmonized 

GST or an increase in SaskTel rates?  What is the difference 

between the harmonized GST and PST or education and health 

tax and the SaskPower bill?  What is the difference? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as they pay more for their SaskEnergy bill, do 

you think they're going to think that they weren't taxed even 

more?  As they pay more for insurance on their vehicles, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe the people of this province are going to 

become more annoyed every day as they look at the increases 

in the services that they are going to be paying for. 

 

And they're also going to be paying more in personal income 

tax.  They're going to be paying a 10 per cent deficit surtax -- a 

tax on a tax, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, let me quote 

another article: "And now -- a tax on a tax on a tax." 

 

 The Saskatchewan budget documents did not come edged in 

black, although they might well have been since they give 

taxpayers plenty of reason to mourn. 

 

I believe this editorialist or journalist is certainly feeling what 

many taxpayers are feeling, and indicating in his article what 

many taxpayers are thinking today.  In fact maybe many 

members of this Legislative Assembly have the same thoughts 

going through their minds, Mr. Speaker, with regards to this 

budget.  It says: 

 

 The budget will suck an additional $312 million 

from taxpayers' pockets and other sources.  It is an economic 

pill that Finance Minister Ed Tchorzewski admits may cost 

the province a couple of thousand new jobs -- the downside 

of shifting income that might otherwise stimulate the 

economy. 

 

Well if we're going to lose the jobs, how are we stimulating the 

economy? 

 

 The education and health (E&H) tax will rise to eight per 

cent from seven; the gas tax is up three cents per litre; 

cigarettes will cost an additional 77 cents per pack; 

prescription drugs will cost more; charges will be 

implemented for eye examinations; and chiropractic fees will 

increase. 

 

And then it says: 

 

 An extra 10-per-cent tax is being piled on top of the total of 

other income taxes payable to the province.  It has been 

named (get this) a "deficit surtax" to make it more acceptable 

. . . 

 

It says, listen, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 It has been named a deficit surtax to make it more acceptable 

to shell-shocked taxpayers who can then hope it will go 

directly to reducing the provincial debt. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, your opposition will certainly be watching 

to see if indeed this 10 per cent surtax goes towards reducing 

the deficit, as the Minister of Finance indicates.  We'll be 

watching. 

 

 The government also promised yesterday to provide us with 

more public accountability, including a mid-term report on 

our financial progress.  (And the editorial says) It is hoped 

the government won't use that occasion to make mid-term 

"corrections" adding to our tax burden. 

 

I believe that editorial is very indicative of the feelings of many 

people in this province.  Mr. Speaker, every time you go and 

buy an article and have to put up 8 per cent instead of 7 per 

cent, people will be annoyed.  Every time you have to fill up 

your fuel tank, people are going to be annoyed.  Every time 

you take out a cheque and begin writing out a cheque to pay a 

utility bill or to purchase goods, each and every time you make 

a purchase you'll be thinking about the betrayal this 

government has left you with. 

 

People feel betrayed because, Mr. Speaker . . . there are many 

adjectives to describe the feelings of people today, but I will 

just say that they are angry, they are betrayed, and they are 

unhappy.  They are unhappy with what they've heard because 

of what they had expected from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we as members of the opposition, when on the 

side of government over the last four years continually talked 

about the fact that we must sooner or later pay the bills, we 

tried to bring in a plan to address the deficit -- a plan that 

would have been fair and provided 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

the fair finances and funding to education and health and social 

services and a plan that supported agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members of the government, then opposition 

members, continually accused the government of the day of not 

having a plan, of not being compassionate and not being 

considerate.  Well I ask the members today, have they been 

compassionate?  Have they been considerate?  Maybe we 

should have been working together a number of years ago, Mr. 

Speaker, to address this deficit. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe members opposite will find that even as 

they go home to their constituencies and talk to their 

constituents that there will be many people annoyed at what is 

taking place.  They will be even angrier as they pay user fees 

for health care.  When they go to the optometrists, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe you will find they will be angry.  When they go to the 

chiropractor, there again they will become even more annoyed. 

 

And then as was brought up in question period today, when 

they finally reach the deductible on prescription drugs and still 

have a co-payment of 35 per cent, they will indeed be angry.  

Mr. Speaker, as was indicated earlier, to have the drug plan rise 

to $280 deductible and go from 25 per cent to 35 per cent has 

put an added load on many people in this province who cannot 

afford it -- many people, Mr. Speaker, who do not have the 

ways and the means, many people on low, fixed incomes, many 

people who have health problems beyond their control.  Mr. 

Speaker, I ask the members opposite if that was compassion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, men and women across this province are going to 

be angry about paying the additional taxes.  And they're going 

to be angry, not necessarily so because of the additional tax 

increase but because they believe that there wouldn't be any tax 

increases.  They honestly believed that there would be no more 

taxes, no new taxes.  The fact that there are, Mr. Speaker, is 

what annoys and what hurts people the most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the members opposite have 

been very hypocritical, while when in opposition continually 

asking for more funding on health, education and agriculture, 

and then now in government turning the other way and 

spending less and taking more from people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me just remind you just a little bit of what 

members opposite did prior to 1981.  Where did they put their 

priorities?  Where was the spending put, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. 

Speaker, did they spend it in care home beds?  Did they build 

hospitals throughout Saskatchewan?  No. 

 

Where did they spend it?  Buying up potash mines, building 

grandiose liquor stores throughout Saskatchewan.  I wonder if 

that really helped Saskatchewan taxpayers in their health 

budget.  Mr. Speaker, during the late '70s they even had a 

moratorium on construction of health care facilities.  People 

throughout Saskatchewan . . . And that was one of the things 

that really was brought to my attention when I first entered 

politics was the fact that men and women 

across this province wanted to have their parents, give them the 

opportunity of being able to, live close to their community 

which they'd grown up in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government showed compassion, 

showed understanding by adding over 2,400 nursing home beds 

in this province over the past nine years, adding hospital beds 

and services to rural and urban Saskatchewan, working 

together, Mr. Speaker, with private care homes and private 

hospitals such as the Santa Maria Home here in Regina and St. 

Paul's in Saskatoon.  Mr. Speaker, that's what working together 

can do for you, and many people in Saskatchewan know what 

it's like to work together to co-operate in order to build this 

province. 

 

What does this budget have for health, Mr. Speaker?  Nothing 

but cut-backs, except -- I will give the government credit in my 

area, Mr. Speaker -- increasing home care services.  Mr. 

Speaker, this budget does actually increase home care services 

by nearly 20 per cent.  And I believe my colleagues will also 

admit that while in government that was one of the priorities 

that we had, was to increase services in home care so that 

people could have the privilege of being able to remain in their 

homes as long as possible, even till as long as their life on this 

earth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I commend the government for taking a moment 

to look at health services and to look at home care funding and 

increasing the funding in that way.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 

that's a worthwhile program and it's a positive comment on the 

part of the minister that he did take the time to at least increase 

in an area where people can benefit the most. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will also give the government credit for 

increasing the child tax reduction for low income families.  Mr. 

Speaker, there again that was reaching out to people who really 

were in greater need; and for increasing the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan which is designed to assist low income people.  

Mr. Speaker, there are three items that have a positive 

influence on this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the budget also talked of an increase of 21 

per cent for child care centres, and maybe that was needed and 

maybe it was necessary.  But, Mr. Speaker, one question I 

would ask is: what about the mothers who choose to stay at 

home?  What about offering parents or mothers who choose to 

stay at home and those families a tax . . . a child tax credit? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's easy to complain and that's why I suggest that 

there are points in this budget that have some positive aspects.  

That's why I brought them to your attention.  But I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, even as we heard today in this House, it's always easy 

to look at the other person, to blame the other individual, blame 

the other person, blame somebody else. 

 

(1500) 

 

I believe it's time that the government started to act like a 

government, not an opposition.  I believe the people of this 

province would indeed like to hear the government 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

not always complaining and blaming somebody else but laying 

out an idea, laying out a plan whereby this province can grow.  

I believe it's time this government quit complaining and 

pointing fingers, quit looking for new people to . . . or new 

victims to blame and start looking at fixing things. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the . . . as we listened to the 

presentation of the budget speech the other day, we continually 

heard the Minister of Finance putting blame on the former 

government, and if he didn't blame the former government, 

looking at third parties, and most of all, Mr. Speaker, looking at 

the federal government. 

 

He says, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 In 1992-93, federal off-loading in agriculture programs alone 

will cost Saskatchewan taxpayers over 200 million . . . This 

dangerous trend started because the former government 

caved in to Ottawa's pressure to cost-share programs that 

were clearly the federal government's responsibility. 

 

 In total, federal off-loading in areas like agriculture, health 

and education means the loss of more than 500 million . . . 

this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have there again an indication of this 

government's continued desire to continue to put blame 

somewhere else beside where it belongs -- at their feet. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point this out.  How can the 

government of the day blame one party and then ask someone 

else to pay the bills?  And I read from an article that appeared 

in a number of local newspapers around this province and 

probably in the main papers as well.  It says: 

 

 Roy Romanow is trying to have it both ways. 

 

 On one hand he attacks the federal government for arbitrarily 

cutting its transfer payments to the province. And, on the 

other his government tells individuals that depend on 

provincial government funding to brace themselves for cuts 

contained in this week's budget. 

 

 On one hand the premier attacks the federal government for 

not coming up with additional support for farmers. And on 

the other his government announces arbitrary, and very likely 

illegal, changes to the gross Revenue Insurance Plan for 

farmers.  For many farmers it means higher premiums. 

 

 On one hand the Premier criticises the Mulroney government 

for not doing more to stimulate the economy, such as through 

tax cuts and spending increases. And on the other he plans 

tax increases for this province and says there was no money 

to use for economic stimulation. 

 

 (The article goes on to say:) This kind of double-standard 

approach is certainly nothing new to politics.  It is all part of 

the effort to deflect 

attention and criticism to others rather than to absorb it 

yourself. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that article is very indicative of the fact 

that the people of this province want this government to begin 

to act like a government, to accept responsibility for their own 

decisions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another article says: 

 

 Ottawa won't shoulder (the) blame. 

 

 (The article goes on to say:) It's not Ottawa's fault that 

Saskatchewan has budget problems . . .  

 

 . . . federal transfers to Saskatchewan provide about 27 per 

cent of the provinces revenue.  That is about 1.3 billion in 

1992-93, an expected increase of 2.5 per cent (hear that, Mr. 

Speaker, an increase of 2.5 per cent) over '91-92. 

 

 On a per-capita basis, (Mr. Speaker, the federal contribution 

through transfers) works out to $1,376 a person, almost seven 

per cent more than the national average and 40 per cent more 

than the amount paid to Alberta . . .  

 

Mr. Speaker, figures also show that in 1991: 

 

 although Saskatchewan's agriculture industry accounted for 

23 per cent of national agricultural income, the federal 

government spent 32 per cent of its total agri-food budget on 

this province's farm and food sector. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, this government has to accept 

responsibility for its own decisions. It just can't look at blaming 

someone else.  And to blame the federal government, when we 

look at the support that has come to this province over the 

years through transfer payments and how they've grown since 

1984 since the Conservative government was elected to 

Ottawa, I believe the minister is being very unfair in putting 

blame at the feet of the federal government in light of the fact 

that his government depends on 27 per cent federal funding to 

operate their provincial budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in Saskatchewan knows what is 

necessary for survival in times such as these.  An economic 

agenda for wealth creation is one of those necessary items, Mr. 

Speaker.  We don't need fingers pointed at Ottawa and the 

opposition benches.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, that argument has 

been beaten to death.  We need a clear-cut plan.  We and the 

people of the province need to know what this government is 

going to do to create jobs to stimulate the economy.  Mr. 

Speaker, where is that plan? 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the budget, what did the government do?  The 

government eliminated 500 civil servant jobs.  And I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people in this province will say 

well, government was too big anyway.  And probably that's 

going to be an argument that will be ongoing, that government 

is too large.  No one will deny that fact that government has 

become a big burden upon each one of us as taxpayers. 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

But what about the men and women who held down those 

jobs?  Where do they go for new jobs, new opportunities?  Did 

the government create a plan to stimulate the economy and 

create jobs so that these individuals who were released from 

their civil service jobs would find jobs outside of government, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

I ask the member from Regina Elphinstone, what about the 

names of the 700 companies that were mentioned in the throne 

speech as being part of their economic activity.  Who are they, 

Mr. Speaker?  Are they still coming to the province or have 

they already put the brakes on and decided to go elsewhere? 

 

Mr. Speaker, 700 companies. When I look at the throne speech 

and the talk of 700 companies coming to this province or 

looking at this province, Mr. Speaker, it reminds me of the 

number of companies, and I'm beginning to wonder if they 

weren't just the same companies, that had already been talking 

to the former government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what is the government going to do with the 

community bond program? -- a program, Mr. Speaker, which 

was used by many communities to stimulate economic activity.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we certainly can look at the community 

bond program, and yes, Mr. Speaker, some of the businesses 

that communities used the community bond program to attract 

to their community didn't survive the economic climate. 

 

But there were many small communities that today are 

benefitting because of this programs -- communities like 

Lemberg, communities like Swift Current.  Mr. Speaker, I 

believe the community bond program is an excellent program.  

And yes, Mr. Speaker, if there are some changes, we trust that 

the government will make positive changes to enhance the 

program. 

 

But for the government to argue that, as in the situation in 

Melville, Mr. Speaker, that they couldn't pay out, pay back the 

people who had invested in the community bonds, Mr. 

Speaker, there again they are being very hypocritical as the 

contract gave them the option of paying out immediately rather 

than a five-year pay back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the community bond program, another 

program that was being talked about by the former government 

-- and here again I'll give the government a little bit of credit -- 

the fact that they are announcing that Saskatchewan savings 

bonds will be introduced.  Mr. Speaker, this was a topic that 

had been on discussion for many . . . or a number of years by 

the former government as to how we would implement and 

bring in a Saskatchewan savings bond.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, 

that is a positive way in which the people of Saskatchewan can 

work together to develop and enhance their problem. 

 

But I wonder, Mr. Speaker, in light of how the community 

bond has been handled . . . program has been handled by this 

government, whether people will be interested in investing 

money in this province through the Saskatchewan savings 

bond.  I guess, Mr. Speaker, time will tell. 

Mr. Speaker, first of all this government is going to have to 

reach the trust of individuals around this province.  They're 

going to have to gain the trust of individuals before they take a 

serious look at the Saskatchewan savings bond program and get 

involved in it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, regarding the trust of people, take a look at 

programs that were discontinued by this government.  And one 

program, Mr. Speaker, that many people in this province are 

angered about is the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe when we look at the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, and I know a number of people in my area who 

became involved . . . who got involved and decided to become 

part of that plan.  Mr. Speaker, many of the people who got 

involved in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan were women. 

 

An article in the Star-Phoenix, May 11, says women are losers 

in this budget.  And I believe very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that 

certainly they are. 

 

 The demise of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the loss of 

16 jobs is certainly a serious blow to Kindersley, where the 

administration of the plan was based. 

 

 (Mr. Speaker) The pension program meant more than 

economic activity for one Saskatchewan community.  It 

meant retirement security for many people -- mainly older 

women -- who have very low or no incomes.  Now that 

security (Mr. Speaker) has been jeopardized (the article says). 

 

And the government would say the plan has been dropped 

because they can't afford it.  They suggest there has been an 

unfunded liability that they can't maintain. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know of the unfunded liabilities in the 

public pension plans prior to 1981.  And the number of 

members across the way, including the Premier, can look 

forward to extremely generous pension plans when they retire.  

What about the women across this province?  Eighty-five per 

cent of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan participants, Mr. 

Speaker, were women.  They were housewives, Mr. Speaker; 

small-business women -- women who ran small businesses; 

waitresses.  Mr. Speaker, it didn't matter where you went, 

women across this province finally had something that they 

could put their money into and plan for their future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the article goes on to say: 

 

 The pension scheme was started in 1986 with the goal of 

benefiting farmers, homemakers, part-time workers and small 

business operators who didn't have access to a company 

pension plan and who had only small amounts of money to 

invest. 

 

 The plan appealed mainly to women, many of them older 

homemakers and part-time workers who had no other pension 

provisions.  It was an important recognition of the social 

contribution of women in the home and on the farm. 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

 Now the government says the province can't afford it.  

Neither can it afford pay equity in the public service.  Deficit 

control is a priority. 

 

Is that what this government was saying while in opposition?  

When they were seeking government, when they were on the 

campaign, knocking on the doors during the campaign, is that 

what they were telling people?  Were they telling them that 

they were going to reduce the deficit on the backs of the 

common, ordinary person in this province? 

 

The article says: 

 

 Deficit reduction days are dark days for women.  It means the 

possibility of being fairly compensated for their work, in the 

home and in the workplace, drifts even further into the future. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the demise of this program shows a lack 

of commitment from this government which stood up on the 

basis of women's issues, which said it stood up for women.  

Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health spoke at length, I 

believe it was last Thursday, on national women's day, and 

spoke up and supported women, and then we turn around in the 

budget, demise or throw away a program that was very 

beneficial to women. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about the people who worked in the pension 

office?  What about the pension office workers?  How do you 

think they responded, Mr. Speaker?  Do you think they 

responded with glee?  Do you believe they were happy when 

they went to work on Thursday last?  They went to work, Mr. 

Speaker, in the morning, Thursday last, as if they were entering 

another day at the office, another day of serving the people of 

this province.  And an article says: 

 

 By the time afternoon rolled around those 16 employees had 

found out that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was history -- 

and so were they. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how do you think they reacted?  With shock, the 

article says.  They reacted with shock.  They couldn't believe it.  

They couldn't believe that they could have a job one minute, 

and then a moment later they were without a job.  They 

couldn't believe that a government who stands up and speaks 

about being compassionate and understanding would do away 

with a program and a pension plan that was beneficial to 

women right across this province.  From the youngest to the 

oldest person in this province, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

was a benefit. 

 

 Community leaders said the layoffs will hurt Kindersley, the 

struggling oil patch and agriculture centre of about 4,900 the 

office was relocated in last year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes, community leaders have a reason to be 

angry.  Not only were employees stunned by the 

announcement, they were angry and they're disappointed.  

They've only been there for a year and a half.  Mr. Speaker, not 

only were they angry and disappointed and shocked, but they 

certainly feel betrayed. 

Mr. Speaker, and I can understand why the mayor of 

Kindersley and why the people of Kindersley would be 

annoyed as well when you have a payroll of almost $600,000 

coming into your community.  As the mayor said, "she couldn't 

understand why the government didn't revamp the program, if 

it had problems." 

 

Mr. Speaker, certainly the question arises, and one wonders if 

politics didn't play a major role in the demise of this program.  

One wonders if the NDP had won the Kindersley riding, if 

indeed they would have gutted the Saskatchewan pension 

program. 

 

(1515) 

 

Another article regarding the pension plan, Mr. Speaker: 

"Killing pension backward step." 

 

 Perhaps Finance Minister, Ed Tchorzewski can explain why 

it is that taxpayers should pay for the pensions of politicians, 

but make no contribution for those of homemakers. 

 

 Could it be that politicians are more deserving than women 

who stay home to raise their children, or work in low-paying 

jobs that don't have pension plans? 

 

 Is it that rearing children is less of a public service than being 

elected to public office?  Could it be that politicians are more 

important than stay-at-home mothers or women who don't 

earn enough to buy into a private pension plan? 

 

 Or is it because we've got better things to spend our money 

on, such as jobs for political cronies and soundproofed, 

renovated bathrooms for Crown corporation executives? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the article goes on.  Mr. Speaker, this 

editorialist also brings out the fact that many of the people 

enrolled in this plan were women.  It was a benefit for women 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, yes you have to ask yourself, did the minister do 

the right thing?  Why didn't the minister take the time to 

consult?  Why didn't the minister look for other people to talk 

to and ask for ideas, seek out ideas as to how, if the pension 

plan was a problem to this province, how it could have been 

made better so that women across this province and the 5,400 

participants in the program would have continued to have a 

pension plan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if my mother was here today she would be 

angry as well.  She was one of those who entered the program 

and felt for once in her life she finally was recognized for all 

the years of service she had given to her province and to her 

community, not only in raising a family but being involved in 

the home and school program and other aspects of community 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at the budget that was presented by the 

Minister of Finance and we see program cuts in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan as I've just talked about, the 

mortgage protection plan. And I don't know how many 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

people over the past number of years have come to me and said 

thank you, and told me how the mortgage protection plan 

helped me when interest rates were high when the government 

across the way didn't care, when they were government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that mortgage protection plan I don't believe 

really had to be axed.  The interest rates were down.  I'm sure 

people were looking at ways and means of saving interest 

rather than just depending on a mortgage protection plan. 

 

What happens tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, if interest rates go from 

7 and 8 and 9 per cent and jump again to 17 per cent?  Do we 

leave home-makers and young couples in a position that they 

can't afford to pay for their homes? 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about optometric services?  What about Law 

Reform Commission grants?  Crimes Compensation Board?  

The Indian heritage trust fund?  Saskatchewan Diversification 

Corporation, Mr. Speaker, where are we going now?  I've just 

asked what kind of economic activity are we going to see in 

this province?  We've done away with the Saskatchewan 

diversification corporation. 

 

What about economic diversification projects?  Mr. Speaker, 

what about counselling and assistance for farmers and the 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) program, farm 

purchase subsidy, grants to farm markets? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I hear members chirping about the fact that 

there was patronage involved.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's a good 

indication that many of these programs are cut simply for 

politics and for no other reason. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look back at the pension plan, members 

opposite must have thought it was a good plan.  After all, I 

believe many members sitting on that side of the House, you 

will find their names down as being on the yea side of voting in 

favour of that pension plan.  Obviously they believed it was a 

good plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel for my colleague from Kindersley who's 

been taking calls steadily.  And in fact, Mr. Speaker, on Friday 

as I was travelling home and trying to contact my office, the 

phone kept ringing busy, busy.  In fact when it did ring, there 

wasn't an answer.  And I got thinking to myself, I was almost 

becoming a little annoyed at my secretary for not being at the 

office.  You know what, Mr. Speaker?  When I finally got 

through to my secretary at about 3:30 or quarter to four, she 

mentioned that she was on the phone from the time she opened 

the doors, answering calls regarding the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan. 

 

You believe people in Kindersley are angry.  Well what about 

men and women right across this province, even people who 

weren't involved or directly involved.  They're angry that a plan 

such as this would be destroyed.  They're angry that 16 

positions would be taken away from the town of Kindersley, 

and they're angry at this government for refusing to create new 

jobs, new jobs for instance that would be created by a 

memorandum of understanding. 

Mr. Speaker, what has or what is this government doing to 

create jobs?  Possibly, Mr. Speaker, they'll be looking at setting 

up another committee as we heard today.  There will be a 

committee set up in health.  I believe the Premier of this 

province wants to set up a constitutional committee.  It seems 

to me, Mr. Speaker, since this House reconvened and since the 

throne speech, this government has committed itself to one 

committee after another to investigate what the other 

committee has done.  Is that what we call economic activity or 

wealth creation? 

 

The Premier's action committee.  I wonder how much these 

committees cost or will cost the taxpayers of this province.  Mr. 

Speaker, one wonders if indeed we're going to need an NDP 

membership to even have any input into these committees. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you talk about consultation, we ask 

ourselves how much did the Minister of Finance consult the 

people of this province.  I wonder if the city of Regina is very 

happy with the Minister of Finance for his budget.  Mr. 

Speaker, I wonder if the city of Regina . . . we drive up and 

down some of these city streets and they definitely need some 

work on them.  I wonder how many of them are going to see 

any work done on them, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that at least when these committees are 

formed and these committees become a burden to the taxpayers 

of this province that at least these committees will travel 

through the province and talk to people and listen to people.  

Mr. Speaker, if they take the time to travel around to different 

communities in this province, at least they'll spend a little bit of 

wealth in other areas of the province, rather than the two major 

centres. 

 

Why doesn't this government quit creating committees.  Why 

does this government, it seems, have to study everything to 

death?  Can't they make decisions on their own?  Instead of 

pointing at Provincial Health Council, Mr. Speaker, why 

doesn't this government hold public hearings on health care?  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are the ones 

who will foot the bill.  Why not go and talk to them and let's 

see what they have to say.  Mr. Speaker, we might be surprised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they will be annoyed at the cuts in optometric and 

chiropractic services.  They will be annoyed in the increase in 

prescription drug costs.  But you may find, Mr. Speaker, by 

talking to the people of this province, you may find that they 

may indeed not be totally opposed to paying a user fee as long 

as they have some input into it.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, you may 

find that many of the businesses and the services that are being 

provided, people may not totally oppose them if they have the 

input and the involvement into government decisions. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn't surprise me one little bit if the 

people would speak up on the delivery of health services.  They 

might just suggest that maybe, Mr. Speaker, we don't need a 

hospital in every community.  They may come up with 

suggestions certainly that would help us, Mr. Speaker, 

eliminate the deficit and enhance health care in this province. 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

I say to members opposite, you may be surprised what the 

people have to say if given the opportunity to speak if you'd 

just take the time to ask them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to the Finance minister, to the 

Health minister, to cabinet, that they take the time to indeed go 

and consult with people.  I would suggest that the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Minister of Rural Development take the 

time just to really go and talk to . . . not just the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool or a few people that they would call together to a 

meeting.  Just give farmers across this province, all farmers, an 

opportunity for input regarding agriculture in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at this budget we ask ourselves, 

what did this budget do for agriculture?  In fact I believe this 

budget didn't do anything for agriculture.  If this budget had 

done so much for agriculture, Mr. Speaker, or if indeed the 

government of the day would have made a commitment to 

agriculture, I don't think they would have seen farmers 

marching on this legislature or meeting at rallies wondering 

what to do with GRIP (gross revenue insurance program).  And 

today, Mr. Speaker, farmers in rural Saskatchewan still don't 

know what to do with GRIP.  They still haven't had the 

opportunity to really assess the program.  They still haven't had 

the opportunity of being able to speak to their representatives 

and let them know what they really think about the program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it appears that this government is more intent on 

bringing in retroactive legislation that would help them do what 

they want to do rather than listening to people of this province.  

I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture really is listening to 

farmers or if he's indeed listening to the city members in his 

cabinet advising him on GRIP rather than the rural members 

who are actually farmers and who actually represent farmers.  

Maybe they've been talking to too many members; they haven't 

taken the time to go back to their constituency to find what the 

rural community really thinks about the programs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the budget and you look at the 

lack of a commitment to agriculture, we not only see a lack of 

commitment to agriculture, Mr. Speaker, but we see 

agricultural programs gutted as well.  Certainly, as the 

Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders Association have indicated, the 

gutting of the FeedGAP program is going to hurt many feeders 

and many people across this province. It's going to hurt people 

in the cattle industry, people in the feedlot industry, many 

feedlots that were constructed and built over the last nine or ten 

years, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, gutting the FeedGAP 

program hurts people. 

 

And it doesn't just hurt the individuals who are in the feeding 

business, Mr. Speaker.  It hurts men and women right across 

the province.  It hurts rural communities.  It hurts labourers, 

Mr. Speaker, packing plants, employees in packing plants, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the FeedGAP program . . . the only reason for the 

FeedGAP program was the fact that in order to be competitive 

we had to give our producers the same opportunities that 

producers in other parts of Canada and the United States had, 

Mr. Speaker.  We must be 

competitive.  If we're not competitive, how can we compete? 

 

The cattle feeders say: 

 

 "the program not only supported the feeding industry in 

Saskatchewan, it helped other areas as well . . . FeedGAP 

served as an offset to the Western Grain Transportation Act.  

It stimulated the feeding industry, which in turn strengthened 

the demand to keep cattle in the province to be fed.  A 

removal of FeedGAP and the introduction of interest on the 

livestock cash advance program will cost a producer feeding 

a 600 pound calf to finish $30 per head." 

 

 "Reflected back to the cow/calf operator, the Saskatchewan 

feeder will have to adjust his feeder purchase price by a 

nickel a pound to compensate for the additional costs.  The 

$30 per head reduction in purchase price will make it almost 

impossible for Saskatchewan feeders to buy cattle." 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it just goes on and on.  Where one sector of 

the industry hurts, it just moves to the next sector of the 

industry: "Reflected forward, Saskatchewan Packers need a 

consistent supply of local cattle to remain competitive in their 

industry." 

 

As I indicated earlier, the packing industry is hurt by this 

FeedGAP program.  Mr. Speaker, we must have a consistent 

product to market so that the packers can continue to provide a 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 "The FeedGAP Program contributed $.70 to the net benefit 

calculation, while the interest free livestock cash advance 

contributed an additional $2.68.  If you consider the loss of 

these programs along with the loss of the residual effect of 

other programs no longer in existence, the bottom line will be 

a loss in competitive position of $4.09." 

 

Mr. Speaker, this letter says, "This will place Saskatchewan 

producers five percent behind producers in Alberta, B.C. and 

Ontario."  It also goes on to say: 

 

 "It is obvious that politicians need to be more aware of the 

economic impact of the red meat sector in Saskatchewan" 

commented (Mr.) Perkins.  "In a study commissioned by the 

University of Saskatchewan in 1988, it was determined that 

the red meat sector employs 26,393 people.  (Did you get 

that, Mr. Speaker; 26,393 people employed by the red meat 

sector.)  That represents 5.8 % of the provincial total.  This 

sector has a labour output ratio of 20.9 to 21.7 full-time jobs 

for every million dollars worth of goods and services 

produced." 

 

And it appears members opposite, even in the comments from 

their chairs, didn't like it. 

 

(1530) 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

"The red meat sector contributes $1,636 million towards the 

value of goods and services sold in the province, 

representing 5.5 % of the total value of provincial goods and 

services produced . . . Loss in competitive position, will 

result in the decline of the feeding industry in Saskatchewan, 

but it extends far beyond the feed loss." 

 

And the letter has more to say, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

certainly hog producers, cattle producers in the Moosomin 

constituency will feel the impact of the lack of support that this 

budget has given to them.  And not just the livestock sector, 

Mr. Speaker, the grain industry as well. 

 

Another article in a recent editorial says, "Grain and livestock 

producers hit." "I didn't see anything in the budget to help 

farmers," Brian Cooper, a farmer from the Melville area said as 

he listened to the budget.  "It's shocking," he said.  "Not only 

will he pay more in income tax and more for cigarettes, a 

change in the farm fuel tax system is going to cost him about 

$1,500 . . ." 

 

Mr. Speaker, even as farmers are out there putting their crop in 

the ground or trying to put their crop in the ground, they realize 

that every time that bulk truck pulls into the farmyard, they're 

going to be losing money, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, grain producers across this nation, across this 

country, across this province, have been facing difficulty for 

many, many years.  And what has this province done to help 

them?  Nothing.  In fact, another headline says, "Budget almost 

totally ignored the farmer." 

 

 For the past decade, the constant refrain from Opposition 

benches was that the Tories weren't doing enough for 

farmers. 

 

 Now that the NDP are in power, that has ended. 

 

 Instead of criticizing the lack of spending, the theme of the 

NDP budget is that Tory spending was out of control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, agriculture faces a critical situation in this 

province.  The former government made a commitment to 

agriculture because agriculture is the main economic sector in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another article -- and I could go on and on -- 

another article says: NDP abandons farmers in the '92 budget.  

There was so much more that can be added to the problems that 

have been created for people right across this province, Mr. 

Speaker, because of the budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many groups have been speaking out on the lack 

this budget had in support for them -- speaking out against 

decisions and changes implemented by the members opposite.  

And again I refer to the Saskatchewan taxpayers as being one 

of those groups, as well as Office of the Farmers Advocate 

incorporated running an ad regarding the GRIP changes; 

Synergy putting an advertisement regarding the energy deal 

that was broken by the NDP. 

These groups are also being joined by many other groups in 

speaking out against . . . on the betrayal this government has 

put on Saskatchewan people.  It's hard to believe that so many 

people would be so angry so quickly, so shortly after a 

provincial election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that as people dig into their 

pocket-books they won't be very pleased with this government 

or with the Minister of Finance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know there are many other things that I could 

say about this budget, but I know there are some of my 

colleagues and a number of others in this Assembly who would 

like to speak out.  And so I would like to close my remarks 

today by adding an amendment to the motion, an amendment 

moved by myself and seconded by the member from 

Kindersley: 

 

 That all the words after the word "Assembly" be deleted and 

the following substituted therefor: 

 

 Regrets that the provincial budget betrays Saskatchewan 

families by breaking clear promises not to increase taxes, not 

to impose health care charges, not to cut essential services, to 

expand funding for health, education, agriculture and 

families, and to force the government to live within a $4.5 

billion spending cap; and further regrets that the provincial 

budget defeats the goal of expanding Saskatchewan's 

economy and achieving true savings for the taxpayer by 

imposing long-term costs associated with the cancellation of 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan; singling out diabetes for 

attack, singling out chiropractic patients for attack, singling 

out optometric patients for attack; massively undermining the 

livestock and packing industries; failing to provide any 

whisper of a plan for economic development to 

diversification; failing to support rural or urban communities 

on any matter; and seeking to provide the excessively 

partisan government with an excuse to do anything to anyone 

in the name of deficit reduction while utterly failing to meet 

any of its responsibilities as the actual government of the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm very pleased to be 

able to speak to the amendment from my colleague, MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this budget affects my constituents in a very 

direct, very harmful and very dishonest way.  As you know, 

very early after the new cabinet was appointed, I questioned the 

government on the status of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  

And I was told, Mr. Speaker, that the pension plan was safe in 

Kindersley.  And, Mr. Speaker, it does not matter how the 

Premier tries to squirm around the statements made in the 

Assembly; they are on the record, and the intent was clear: the 

pension 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

plan would remain in Kindersley, and everyone believed that. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, they may have even used those exact 

words.  Sixteen people have been thrown out of a job in the 

community of Kindersley; 16 families are now at risk by this 

closure, $600,000 in direct loss of payroll which amounts to 

over a million and a half dollars of economic activity for the 

town of Kindersley, a town of less than 5,000 people. 

 

But what we have seen, Mr. Speaker, is an unspeakable act of 

hypocrisy.  The Premier tells us the reason he is killing the 

pension plan of thousands of Saskatchewan people . . . 85 per 

cent of the pension plan people involved in the pension plan 

were women.  He is killing their pension plan because he says 

there is an unfunded liability of $12 million this year, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as of March 31, 1991, the unfunded liability 

for the old MLA pension plan was $19.7 million -- $12 million 

unfunded pension for Saskatchewan Pension Plan members, 

housewives, farm families, single parents, minimum wage 

recipients, small-business people, and $19.7 million for the 

MLA pension plan, the old MLA pension plan. 

 

Tens of thousands of Saskatchewan women who are covered 

by that pension plan are shocked at that kind of logic.  The fact 

is the Premier is sitting himself on a million dollar pension -- 

over $1 million pension in fact, Mr. Speaker.  And Donald 

Gass told us this million dollar pension of the Premier is also 

an unfunded liability.  But the budget did not eliminate the 

Premier's pension plan.  Oh no, Mr. Speaker, you will find 

more taxpayers' money being set aside for the Leader of the 

NDP. 

 

A million dollars for one man compared to $12 million for -- 

what is it now? -- 50,000 Saskatchewan people with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  This is an absolute display of 

hypocrisy and mean-spirited action that is surprising in these 

difficult times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier claims that the pension plan was 

poorly targeted.  Those are his words exactly -- poorly targeted.  

But I say 85 per cent of the people covered by the plan are 

women.  But the NDP leader claims that these are all rich 

women.  The fact is, Mr. Speaker, that if you are indeed a 

wealthy person in this province, man or woman, it would not 

make a whole lot of sense to participate in the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  You would do much better to invest in an RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan). 

 

And guess who gets an RRSP at the taxpayers' expense, Mr. 

Speaker?  Jack Messer gets an RRSP -- oh yes.  The same 

people who are having their pensions taken away from them 

are the same people who are paying Jack Messer's RRSP 

contribution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you remember the rumours about some kind of 

trust fund being set up to hide extra salary for Jack Messer and 

other NDP appointees.  Well it turns out there is a fund, but 

they are being very cute about it.  The government pays into an 

RRSP and that becomes a political hack's insurance package 

against the possibility of getting caught and having to quit. 

So we have an NDP government here now running around 

pretending to cut salaries while starting up secret funds, at the 

same time taking away the pensions of the women of this 

province.  This is a government that truly just doesn't care.  

That pension plan was started for the very specific reason, Mr. 

Speaker, and the NDP Party and the Premier should be very 

well aware of those facts.  By far the greatest proportion of the 

elderly people are women in this province, people who had an 

opportunity to participate in the pension plan. 

 

We have watched our society decay under the morale liberal 

ways of the modern world, and one of the most dramatic 

increases has been that in the increase of divorces.  And while 

the NDP members say that women who had no income should 

be made dependent upon their husband's income, the fact is that 

a great many women in this province have been left with 

nothing in their old age.  That is a simple fact, Mr. Speaker, 

and the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was a major step towards 

ensuring that it did not happen any more.  It allowed for 

women -- married or single -- to accumulate a pension on their 

own, regardless of the status of their husband.  And that has 

been taken away from them by this government of deception, 

broken promises, and failed trust. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indeed a government of broken promises 

and failed trust.  The farm families around Humboldt are . . . 

and the NDP leader . . . are certainly wondering about what's 

going to happen around the area of Humboldt.  They said, after 

listening to the member, that they would . . . from Humboldt, 

they would be doing more for our farm families.  But what did 

they do in the Humboldt area?  They yanked out jobs from the 

community of Humboldt.  And where was the member for 

Humboldt when this was taking place, Mr. Speaker?  Where 

was he, I wonder. 

 

And the ugly fact of it is, Mr. Speaker, that those kinds of 

things are being . . . it is imposed on the farm families from 

across this province today.  Not only that, but with the 

introduction of tax on farm fuels, delivering a crushing blow to 

many farm families, but there is a whole collection of other 

measures, all designed to drive farmers from the land as 

quickly and as cleanly as possible. 

 

Going back, going back, Mr. Speaker, to marked fuels in this 

province.  Farmers are absolutely amazed that a government 

would want to go back, a regressive step like this, and go back 

to having marked fuels in this province.  People set up their 

farms today, Mr. Speaker, based on the fact that they're likely 

going to have to only have two fuels -- diesel fuel on their farm 

and gasoline on their farm.  Now they'll be faced with the 

reality of having to have another tank on their farm to put up 

additional fuel supplies -- marked fuel supplies. 

 

This government is in fact determined to drive farmers from 

the land, Mr. Speaker, and the budget, this budget, is simply 

clear proof of that.  They failed to get them all, they failed to 

get all the farmers, with the land bank and now they're back 

with the new tools and new schemes to try again.  We don't 

need a land bank in this province.  We don't want bank land in 

this province, Mr. Speaker.  We 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

want the land to remain in the hands of the farmers, where it 

should be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Last Friday it was completely amazing to see the 

Premier of this province stand in the Assembly and announce it 

was too complicated to provide information about foreclosures 

on farm families -- too complicated. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition asked the Leader of the NDP 

how many notices had gone out from the two farm debt 

agencies.  The Leader of the NDP, with all the government at 

his disposal, said he couldn't answer that question.  Instead he 

launched into a partisan attack, his only refuge from the truth. 

 

So the Leader of the Opposition told the Premier of the 

province that the information was so difficult for the Premier to 

alert himself to it.  It's a strong statement about where the 

interests of this Premier lay -- not with the farm families but 

with his buddies in Crown corporations. 

 

(1545) 

 

This Premier has also an expensive taste, Mr. Speaker, in the 

constitution.  Mr. Speaker, we have been told that there's an 

entire new branch of the Premier's office created especially for 

the recreation of the NDP leader. 

 

As background, you will know for a long time that there's been 

a branch of government called intergovernmental affairs office.  

That office dealt with constitutional matters as well as 

negotiations with other provinces, Mr. Speaker.  But they did 

not . . . but that did not have jobs for the NDP's favourite 

constitutional playmates, Mr. Speaker.  So now we have a 

brand-new agency called constitutional unit hidden in the 

basement of this very building, Mr. Speaker. 

 

While he axes the pension plan, he finds money for his friends 

in something called the constitutional unit.  And what is he 

saying to the farm families?  He's going to trade a 

constitutional agreement off for some help for farm families. 

 

Well I think every farm family in this province today, Mr. 

Speaker, are waiting with bated breath for the Premier to make 

this big trade, make this big trade of constitutional agreement 

for help for farm families.  We're all wondering when he's 

going to be able to pull off this enormous plan for farm 

families.  This Premier, I believe, should be ashamed of 

himself for even bringing up the issue of trading one thing for 

another as important as the constitution against help for 

agriculture. 

 

If he was doing his job in this province, he would instruct the 

Minister of Agriculture to reinstate the 1991 GRIP program, 

the program that gave the farmers of this province a basis in 

which to operate their farms, and not have the GRIP program 

as we see today completely gutted, the way the Minister of 

Agriculture in this province has done in the last few months. 

 

He's taxed farm fuel for the first time in decades in this 

province.  But where will the money be going, I wonder, 

to the Minister of Agriculture.  I wonder where that money will 

be going.  Would a little bit of it fall into Carole Bryant's 

hands, I wonder?  He says the campaign director of the NDP 

needed hundreds of dollars every month so the taxpayer can 

buy her a car.  It's not a Lexus apparently, although it was.  

Now it's just a little bit lower than a Lexus, a car that most 

taxpayers in this province can't even begin to afford. 

 

The leader of the NDP says she won't be able to . . . he 

wouldn't be able to attract people of Bryant's qualifications if 

he didn't offer expensive perks.  But what are her 

qualifications, Mr. Speaker?  She's a social worker -- a social 

worker to run one of Saskatchewan's largest and most 

important Crown corporations.  This Premier thinks SaskPower 

is a welfare organization; that's why you need to have a social 

worker running it.  I think that's a kind of a twisted logic, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It seems that it would be very hard to attract qualified social 

workers to the executive offices of SaskPower without offering 

big salaries and special benefits.  Heck, if you didn't pay these 

amounts, the social workers would all have to go to other 

companies to work for them, obviously other Crowns.  They 

must be all waiting for social workers to line up at the door to 

hire them.  It's ludicrous, Mr. Speaker, and the NDP leader 

knows it's ludicrous. 

 

It's even more ludicrous that he appointed the Minister of 

Justice as the minister to answer for patronage appointments.  I 

can tell you, many people were stunned when the person 

charged with maintaining the highest levels of honesty, the 

Minister of Justice, stood in this Assembly and, with a poker 

face, stated that there'd been not one, not one patronage action 

by this government. 

 

I think it's pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is look to 

the Jack Messers, the Carole Bryants, the Lorne Johnstons -- 

the list goes on and on of appointments by this government.  

They are all NDP patronage-type appointments.  And yet we 

have the Minister of Justice in this province standing and 

saying, not one patronage appointment from this government.  

What an act of total hypocrisy. 

 

It was an act of dishonesty that will mark the term of this 

minister and sully the reputation of the man who should have 

maintained a reputation above reproach.  It simply shows how 

far this government is prepared to go to deny reality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation of our farm families is a reality that 

this budget not only refuses to deal with, but worsens.  

Elimination of the FeedGAP, application of fuel tax, taking 

away of pensions of farm wives, huge increases in power, gas, 

phones, and the roll-back of the oil and gas lease payments, 

jacking up of stud fees at provincial government community 

pastures, and who knows what other little gems are all designed 

to reduce farm income. 

 

The corporate capital tax has been raised from 2 to 3 per cent, a 

50 per cent increase.  It shouldn't take all that much longer, Mr. 

Speaker, to drive the oil companies out of this province -- the 

goal that the NDP has always maintained is something that 

they're going to try and 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

accomplish.  Drive the economic activity from this province -- 

the type of thing that they did in the '70s with the oil companies 

and are starting to do over again.  The oil companies that 

produce all kinds of wealth for this province. 

 

My constituency of Kindersley has thousands of jobs that are 

directly related to the oil industry.  And what are they doing to 

that oil industry? -- but they're slapping a 50 per cent increase 

in taxes to them.  And all the while the NDP back-benchers can 

do is sing, merrily we roll along, as the choir leads us down the 

abyss to a total oblivion of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the vision in the budget?  Where is there 

any hope?  This budget has taken what was shaping up to be a 

promising recovery and snuffed it out because of the narrow 

minds of the members opposite.  How can the Leader of the 

NDP actually believe that there were no options at all to 

expanding our economy?  How can he ask us to believe that, 

when we know it is not the truth?  Even his own back-benchers 

have shown him ideas, many of which we probably disagree 

with, but at least they are thinking about building something 

rather than just tearing things down. 

 

Look, Mr. Speaker, at the idea of some of the NDP members of 

the NDP caucus have been promoting a bank of Saskatchewan.  

You know, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't have to be a totally socialist 

idea.  An old private enterprise soldier, the former member 

from Biggar, used to promote that very idea on a regular basis 

for similar reasons as NDP members like it. 

 

The disagreement is not whether it should or shouldn't be but 

who should own it.  Does it have to be owned exclusively by 

government?  I don't believe it has to be owned entirely by 

government.  The fact is hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 

Speaker, are escaping from this province every year in the form 

of interest payments -- hundreds of millions. It's foolish not to 

try and recapture some of that money for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers. 

 

And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, we're already banking in this 

province in a very big way.  We have at least two banks that 

lend out money -- Ag Credit and SEDCO (Saskatchewan 

Economic Development Corporation).  The Gass Commission 

and the Provincial Auditor had made some very valid 

observations regarding in particular SEDCO that would have 

fit well into developing a provincial bank.  They point out that 

many of the loans offered by these institutions are in fact 

subsidy programs and therefore should be recognized as such. 

 

The government could remove commercially viable loans from 

each portfolio and transfer them to a new bank, leaving the 

government those that exist for policy reasons as it is 

appropriate.  This would have an effect of not only increasing 

accountability but it would allow an orderly transition from a 

policy loan to a commercial loan and it would provide a more 

diversified portfolio for the new bank. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, there is some monetary magic that can 

be worked by the banking system that would allow the 

province to keep some of those interest dollars 

in this province rather than seeing them slip out of this 

province.  Well the point is we could establish a financial 

institution in this province and capture all of the interest 

payments for our own economy. 

 

The question is asked, how do we get a charter then from the 

federal government?  And the answer is, I don't think you have 

to have a charter.  The Alberta treasury branch operates exactly 

as banks do even though they don't have federal charter.  They 

are not chartered and they have not been subject to the federal 

banking regulations.  And this means the Alberta treasury 

branches are restricted only by their own policies and the 

markets they choose to compete in. 

 

As well we can fight in this House about the degree of private 

sector involvement and whether or not the majority of the 

members of the board of directors should be privately 

appointed or not, but in the end the important issue is retaining 

hundreds of millions of dollars in interest payments in the 

Saskatchewan economy.  Over time the government could 

retire all of its foreign debt and indeed a great majority of the 

debt owed to provinces like Ontario and Quebec financial 

institutions. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, even if there are flaws in the 

proposal of a Saskatchewan bank, it clearly shows that the 

government did have options.  It could have explored these 

options.  It chose not to.  And the budget in my judgement does 

not reflect a belief in options at all.  They said they would 

cancel things like the PST.  But what have we seen, Mr. 

Speaker?  We've seen an increase in it from 7 to 8 per cent. 

 

It gives no reason to be hopeful about the future, no reason to 

believe the NDP government can grapple with assuring the 

future.  It is a budget totally without any effort to make the 

economy grow -- no effort whatsoever.  Nothing in the budget 

that it will ask people to try and go out and earn and expand 

their businesses.  Nothing in the budget for them at all.  In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear that this budget will make the economy 

of Saskatchewan shrink. 

 

The minister refuses to table any studies that show the negative 

effects of this budget.  Let's look, for example, at the 

elimination of the FeedGAP program.  Mr. Speaker, this one 

action will destroy thousands of jobs over the next few years.  

We see the livestock feeding industry . . . we'll see the livestock 

industry shrink and perhaps even disappear.  This in turn will 

devastate the packing industry. 

 

So on one hand, Mr. Speaker, we have a government making 

SEDCO loans to packing plants and on the other hand we see 

the government assuring the demise of those same packing 

plants by destroying the basis of their raw material, the cattle 

and hog feeding industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister admits jobs will be lost, but he said 

he didn't bother to find out how many.  He did not research to 

determine how far his budget would drag us down because, Mr. 

Speaker, he did not want us to know the extent of this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the previous government conducted studies 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

that compared the effects of various tax measures.  Why 

wouldn't the new Finance minister table the studies that he 

conducted about his tax measures?  I am told that they show 

that increases in income tax would have a negative effect on 

government revenues over a five-year period because the 

associated reduction in employment and population will reduce 

the revenue base and the government will not make up in tax 

size what it loses in the number of taxpayers in this province.  

The member from Thunder Creek said it well.  What we need 

are more taxpayers, not more taxes. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what about the Buy Saskatchewan Agency, 

Mr. Speaker?  We have seen a small dedicated agency that 

created many jobs, many thousands of jobs by putting together 

Saskatchewan suppliers with Saskatchewan buyers.  The fact is 

that the economic analysis tells us one of the best things you 

can do for the economy is to engage a sensible export . . . or 

import replacement.  And the Buy Saskatchewan Agency did 

that very well, Mr. Speaker, in every area conceivable, from 

power poles to jewellery. 

 

And it was not only or evenly most a government-oriented 

agency.  It would find a need for a product from a private 

manufacturer and then it would link them up with a 

Saskatchewan government agency to produce this product right 

here in Saskatchewan.  It is another basic economic principle 

example that you try to make outputs out of the inputs of other 

industries.  If you do that you have an integrated economy, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But the NDP leader cannot tolerate anything to continue that 

was started by the former administration.  He killed the pension 

plan because it was created by Tories.  He killed the Buy 

Saskatchewan Agency because it was created by Tories.  He's 

well on his way to destroying a number of other things in this 

province, Mr. Speaker.  The government is engaged in a slash 

and burn policy unprecedented in our history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP do not seem to care who they hurt in 

their mad pursuit to soothe their own egos.  And lest you think 

I exaggerate the egos and the mean spiritness of the members 

opposite, let me relate to you a story that shows the depth of 

pettiness that the Leader of the NDP himself has stooped to.  

And I would like the NDP leader to answer that, if he has the 

courage to stand up and act today. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no one in this province today that does 

not know that the member from Estevan led the way to a 

building of a new agriculture college in Saskatoon.  Everyone 

knows that, and the NDP voted against the budget that 

provided $80 million to build that college.  This is a fact, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, as is the tradition in these things, when the 

building was completed the plaque was affixed to the building 

naming the premier who built the project.  Guess what the NDP 

Premier did, Mr. Speaker.  As soon as he was in office -- in fact 

I think he faxed, the order went out on November 2, 1991 -- as 

soon as he got himself in the door he ordered the plaque 

destroyed, naming the 

 member from Estevan, so that he would have his own name 

put on that building, the College of Agriculture in Saskatoon. 

 

Talk about utter pettiness.  That's the type of thing that you did, 

Mr. Premier.  Your name is on that building and not the 

member from Estevan, the member who rightly should be on 

that building.  He isn't on it because you said he shouldn't be on 

it.  That's true, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's obvious that the Premier doesn't like those 

kinds of accusations; the kinds of things that indeed are 

happening in this province today, Mr. Speaker.  All one has to 

do is drive up to the College of Agriculture and have a look for 

themselves to see whose name is on it.  Is it your name that's on 

it, Mr. Premier, or is it the former premier's name that's on the 

building? 

 

Those are the kinds of acts of pettiness that this Premier is 

becoming well-known for in this province today.  The plaque 

was destroyed so he could have his own name put on the 

building.  Absolute hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker.  It shows the 

lengths, Mr. Speaker, that these people will go to raise their 

own profile.  I don't know, Mr. Speaker, of things like this that 

happened in the province in the past, but now we see the 

government intent on destroying anything in this province that 

the previous administration put in place. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we've obviously hit a chord with the 

Premier.  He keeps speaking and speaking and speaking about 

this.  But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that it's his 

name that's on the College of Agriculture today up there.  

You're the one that ordered it be put on, sir . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the member from Kindersley to 

direct his comments through the Chair, and not at any 

particular individual in the House.  And I ask also the Premier 

not to interfere when the member from Kindersley is speaking.  

But I wish the member would direct his questions through the 

Chair. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your 

advice in that.  Well now that we've seen that type of thing 

happen in this province, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this 

province are beginning to get a clear picture of what kind of 

Premier we have today. 

 

This budget indeed was a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member from Maple Creek knows 

full well that that is not acceptable in this Assembly, and I ask 

him to please stop. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- This budget, Mr. Speaker, is a disgrace.  It's a 

hurtful budget.  It's a budget that does not care for people, but 

makes war on people.  It's a budget that allows the NDP to 

plunder the taxpayer, but gives the taxpayer of this province no 

refuge at all.  It's a budget without hope, without vision, 

without any economic agenda, and without respect for those 

who work in this province today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It's a budget, Mr. Speaker, that shames every NDP MLA in this 

province today.  And for those reasons, Mr. Speaker, the 

budget should not pass, and this government should 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

 face up to the truth of the amendment proposed by the member 

from Moosomin. 

 

I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to support the amendment from the 

member from Moosomin, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I feel a great 

deal of responsibility to be a member of this Legislative 

Assembly during these difficult times in our province.  There is 

no doubt that this is one of the most difficult and important 

budget debates that will ever take place in Saskatchewan, and I 

truly want my contribution to be a meaningful one. 

 

When deciding upon the tone and the content of this reply, 

even when to deliver it, I took the time to reflect on what is 

important to me politically and personally, and I want to share 

my conclusions with you today.  I hope that the members of the 

government will invest at least some of their time, not just in 

being here but in actually listening to what I have to say today. 

 

First, I did decide not to speak on Friday because I felt it 

necessary to digest what was in the budget carefully.  A budget 

is a complicated document and deserves, I believe, more than a 

cursory glance and a dismissal.  It commands thoughtful 

consideration because of many hours having been spent laying 

it out and the many politicians and bureaucrats having 

struggled to do the best job they can.  I want you to know that I 

have taken the time to try to better understand what this 

government has done and to discuss the specifics of this budget 

with many of the people affected by it. 

 

Last week there was much evidence of people being caught up 

in the rhetoric and the partisanship of politics in this Assembly.  

We have seen this evidenced in the last two days of this week 

as well.  I believe that the opportunity to evaluate the budget is 

far too important to be lost in that way. 

 

I hope then that all members will listen to what I have to say as 

I did when the Finance minister delivered the budget speech.  

In listening, perhaps the members of this Assembly may 

understand better the points of view of many Saskatchewan 

people.  Perhaps they may choose to follow a suggestion or two 

which may serve to better the lot of our people and to hasten 

our economic recovery. 

 

The ideas that I put forward are not just ideas from an opposing 

politician, because that is not the purpose in my being here.  I 

do not simply wish to oppose; I wish to contribute.  If, after I 

have spoken, any one of the members of this Assembly is 

intrigued by my proposals or wanting more information on a 

concept, I invite them in the best interests of all people to 

discuss them with me. 

 

On Friday in question period the Minister of Finance extended 

a challenge to me to put forward my plan for economic 

development.  Today I will explain why Liberals feel that a 

different approach should have been taken with this budget.  

And at the end of all of this, I ask all present to remember that I 

am here to represent a different philosophy.  I remind them also 

that at least 125,000 

people support that philosophy, and they have a right to voice 

their approach in this democracy.  And I hope that they will 

listen through me today to what the Saskatchewan people have 

to contribute. 

 

Expectations.  When a budget is as long overdue as this one, 

Mr. Speaker, everyone in the province has a time to develop 

expectations.  Though the government spent a great deal of 

time and went to considerable expense to prepare people for 

the bad news and to clearly pin the blame on the previous 

government, they did not spend much time consulting with the 

people who would be most affected by this budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was no shortage of time given, since the 

budget was fully two months late in coming down.  And with 

10 years in opposition, six months in government, with 55 

MLAs on the taxpayers' payroll, I believe that these individuals 

could have invested some of this time in consultation with the 

very groups who would be most affected.  Although the final 

decision always rests with government, it is unacceptable that 

so many groups affected were not consulted about the best way 

to achieve the desired savings and the ways of generating 

revenues. 

 

This government missed an excellent opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 

to demonstrate a true commitment to the open, honest, and 

consultative approach they claim to have.  Unequivocally, they 

failed to meet the expectations raised that they would be 

different from their predecessors in their treatment of people. 

 

What about the average Saskatchewan taxpayer, the working 

person.  People were expecting a tough budget, but there were 

many things they were not expecting.  They were not expecting 

major tax increases.  And why weren't they expecting major tax 

increases?  Because they were told.  They were told throughout 

the entire election campaign that the NDP would not impose 

more taxes. 

 

People were expecting the government to say it was going to 

manage with $4.5 billion.  They were not expecting the 

government to have a need to raise more than $4.5 billion in 

revenues because the Premier told them so, many times during 

the election, that $4.5 billion would simply have to be enough. 

 

So what were they expecting, Mr. Speaker?  They were 

expecting -- I know it and you know it -- they were expecting 

this government to come up with an alternative to dealing with 

the deficit without raising taxes. 

 

Now let's go back in time, something members opposite over 

there love to do.  Let's go back to October of 1991, the election 

campaign.  It's a refresher course on the deficit predictions.  

The hon. member for Riversdale, now the Premier, warned 

everyone, and I quote:  the deficit for 1992 could be as much as 

$1 billion.  So everyone knew it would be a great deal more 

than the Conservatives said it would be.  It turned out to be 

$852 million, as confirmed by the Gass Commission. 

 

The problem I'm having -- and maybe some of the NDP 

members can help me out here -- is that it seems that they 

really didn't have a plan to deal with the deficit, no matter 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

what the size was, whether it was $1 billion or even the $500 

million or $600 million that they must have known it would be 

back in October. 

 

When the Premier was telling the people the deficit could be $1 

billion, Mr. Speaker, he was trying to prepare us for the worst, 

but thinking that it would probably be about $600 million.  At 

the same time he was telling people, quote, trust us.  We can 

deal with this deficit, whatever it is.  We will wrestle it down to 

the ground and we won't raise your taxes. 

 

What I'd like to know is this.  I'd like to know just how the 

members of the government believed they were going to 

accomplish this feat at that point; what kind of a plan they had 

developed in order to deal with any deficit; what was the plan 

and what happened to it. 

 

Never mind the fact that the deficit was underestimated by 

$200 million.  What people deserved to know is how the NDP 

planned to deal with even a $600 million deficit without raising 

taxes.  But they simply saved a few million in waste, then they 

cut programs by $344 million, and guess what?  That was it. 

 

Was that all that they had in mind to deal with the deficit?  

Bottom line is this, Mr. Speaker, whether the deficit was 600 

million or $850 million, they addressed only 400 million of it 

through cuts and spending. 

 

The smartest alternative which people expected in this plan and 

which was the Liberal's plan, as we outlined in our document, 

would have been to lower taxes to attract investment, to bring 

in such activities as the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

deal to create quality jobs so more people would move here and 

more people would pay taxes.  It's called expanding your 

revenue base. 

 

But the government did not adopt this approach, Mr. Speaker.  

Where did the NDP go?  As usual, straight to the taxpayers.  

What kind of innovative strategy is this, I ask?  The new 

budget didn't come up $150 million short in dealing with the 

deficit.  It didn't come up $200 million short in dealing with the 

deficit.  It didn't come up $300 million short or $400 million 

short. 

 

After raising every tax in Saskatchewan and creating a new 

one, the no-new-taxes NDP still came up $517 million short of 

the target.  Where's the rest of this supposed to come from?  

Excited investors flocking to Saskatchewan?  The 700 

companies so anxious to relocate here?  Don't cut with a dull 

knife; use a laser to pin-point cuts.  Less pain, less bleeding, I 

say. 

 

After going through every government department, after 

destroying our Saskatchewan Pension Plan, our universal 

access to medicare services, after cutting 500 jobs, and after 

axeing the feed grain adjustment program, after closing the 

Department of Science and Technology, the government was 

only able to reduce government spending, Mr. Speaker, by 3 

per cent.  There was no carefully organized strategy, no 

fine-tooth comb -- just a purge of the civil service to make 

room for the NDP, and the abolition of Conservative programs 

and departments because they were Conservative. 

(1615) 

 

No attempts made to discuss with people of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan and others, what could we do to save the 

taxpayers' money while saving the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Closing trade offices with no alternative plan when we're 

struggling to find a global market niche doesn't make a whole 

lot of sense either. 

 

And the Department of Science and Technology is the last 

department we should be losing when we're trying to create 

centres of excellence in research and technology for energy and 

agriculture.  These are areas with potential wealth expansion, 

Mr. Speaker.  This economic strategy will ensure that the only 

thing for which we can claim to be a centre of excellence in 

this province after this budget, is taxation. 

 

But they didn't stop at cutting programs in a helter-skelter 

fashion, Mr. Speaker.  This NDP government proceeded to tax 

the sick by doubling or tripling deductibles for the drug plan 

and deinsuring optometric and chiropractic services. 

 

They off-loaded increased costs to the members of SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 

SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 

 

And when they were done with those attacks, the next place 

they headed was straight for the working people of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayer.  The carefully laid NDP plan to 

tackle the deficit was nothing more than a carefully concealed 

tax attack on the people of this province, concealed until their 

members were safely installed in their seats over there. 

 

Once they had their hands on the reins of power, Mr. Speaker, 

the NDP government couldn't come up with one creative idea 

to deal or fulfil the promises they made, so they went straight 

to the pockets of the people. 

 

Well the NDP have done this so often, it's almost becoming a 

trade mark across the country.  And even then, even after 

raising taxes on income, on corporations, on cigarettes, on 

gasoline, and on every item retailed under the E&H tax, they 

still couldn't get within $500 million of eliminating the 1992 

deficit. 

 

I don't think that this is at all what people expected that the 

NDP meant when they said, attack the deficit and no new taxes.  

And how dare, how dare they sit there with their army of 

MLAs and ask last Friday, what I would do, when the people 

are paying them collective salaries and benefits of more than 

$3 million, Mr. Speaker.  The people expect their NDP MLAs 

to have spent the last seven months producing a strategy and a 

budget that would reduce the deficit, fuel the economy, and 

create jobs to expand our tax base.  That is what the people 

expected from this government, but it is not what they got. 

 

The only new revenue that this lack-of-talent group has been 

able to produce is through video poker terminals at border 

hotels.  Wow!  I am not convinced that they have 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

an overall strategy for the gaming industry, sir. 

 

Speaking of poker, it appears that the members of the 

government and the Premier really do seem to think that they're 

engaged in a high stakes poker game.  The problem is this.  The 

NDP candidates came to the election poker table with a 

bankroll of promises, Mr. Speaker.  They joined the game with 

the Conservatives and the Liberals and they bluffed their way 

through, never once tipping their hand to the people during the 

election campaign.  The Premier kept his face, his poker face, 

through speech after speech during the campaign, making 

promises that he knew he couldn't keep. 

 

Now the Liberals were there with their chips on the table too, I 

might add.  But the people didn't realize that the Liberals really 

could win the game, that they did have, in fact, a very good 

strategy -- the best strategy and the best hand. 

 

And you see, unlike the New Democrats, the Liberals were 

honest with the people.  We did not promise that taxes would 

not have to go up.  We did not try to pretend that we wouldn't 

have to spend differently in health care, perhaps even have 

some of the costs passed along to citizens. We didn't mislead 

people.  We put it all out in the open, put our cards on the table 

for everyone to see.  Liberals were committed to producing a 

budget that used overall tax reform -- increases in some areas, 

decreases in others -- to encourage investment and stimulate 

the economy. 

 

But the election was truly poker of the highest stakes, Mr. 

Speaker.  Eventually, although we stayed in the game for a 

long time with one-tenth of the money spent by the other 

parties, we couldn't compete with their bankroll of promises. 

 

So the NDP won the pot.  They cleaned up with a full house -- 

55 seats, 55 of a kind.  But you know what?  We have finally 

seen the Premier's hand, and he had nothing.  And now 

knowing full well what cards they were dealt by the 

Conservatives, all they can do is complain about having to play 

them. 

 

All I can say is this:  they cannot bluff for ever, Mr. Speaker.  

Sooner or later they had to show their hand, and the people 

knew this government was bluffing.  So take heed.  The NDP 

won't fool the people a second time, no matter how much they 

try to buy the pot, no matter what they try to have up their 

sleeve. 

 

The simply fact is they created the expectation of a $1 billion 

deficit, they created the expectation that they could deal with 

the problem without raising taxes, and they created the 

expectation that they had a strategy that they could generate 

revenue in some other way. 

 

The NDP created an expectation that this would be a tough 

budget, but they failed to live up to the expectation that they 

were going to handle things in a much different way.  Ask 

labour, ask business, ask farmers, ask health care providers, ask 

the taxpayers -- none of them expected this government to have 

such a know-nothing strategy to expand the economy or to 

create jobs. 

The NDP government created the expectations, Mr. Speaker.  

That, I regret having to remind them, is how they got elected.  

And I had some high expectations of the members opposite as 

well.  I expected the NDP government would very clearly lay 

out a long-term plan for deficit reduction which would tell us 

exactly where we are today and show us where we will be one 

year from now, two years from now, three years from today, if 

we followed their plan, Mr. Speaker.  I hope we will see that 

projection from the government before this week ends. 

 

I expected to see careful and detailed analyses as to how these 

tax increases and decreases would impact on the economy.  

Surely these analyses were done, especially in view of the 

harsh criticism they levied on the Conservatives for not 

providing a cost/benefit analysis for Fair Share Saskatchewan. 

 

In quote, no one does business like that.  Or is that an 

unforgettable quote as well?  Surely the NDP would not be so 

careless as to impose new taxes without having measured their 

impact. 

 

I expected, everyone who supports the AECL memorandum of 

understanding, whether it be revised or not, expected to see 

concise details on the Energy Institute in the Speech from the 

Throne or at least in the budget speech. 

 

First this government misled the business community and 

SARM and SUMA into thinking that they would go ahead with 

the Billinton inquiry to bring the $50 million research project 

to Saskatchewan.  No sooner was this government elected than 

they flip-flopped to the party faithful.  And not one MLA on 

the government side uttered one objection.  Instead they 

quickly pulled a card from the NDP bag of election tricks and 

called it the Energy Institute. 

 

This was better, they said.  It was cheaper, they said.  It will 

create jobs, they said.  Now we have to pay someone to tell us 

what they meant when they said those things because they 

didn't seem to know. 

 

And the NDP hired Kilborn engineering on taxpayers' dollars 

to come up with the concept they supposedly were supposed to 

have.  And they're sending the bill for the engineering firm 

right back to us.  We can pull out our wallets one more time 

and see five bucks missing in everybody's pocket in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And the very least, since this concept was unveiled but never 

explained during the campaign, I think the NDP Party should 

pay for all the design of this concept and the design of the 

wellness model, neither of which seem to exist except in the 

minds of the Premier and his cabinet. 

 

In fact we heard more details about the budget before it was 

released than we've heard about the Energy Institute.  And the 

budget was supposed to be secret?  This fictitious Energy 

Institute that I hope we're going to hear about, since apparently 

it's come forward today, has already cost the province the 

AECL deal, unless something's going on in the back rooms that 

the people haven't been told about, as well as the entire 

Department of Science and Technology. 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

Therefore I think the government had better put all of the 

details -- the costs and the job creation and the economic 

development potential -- on the Table this week as well.  

They've kissed goodbye one good deal after another for the 

province, Mr. Speaker.  They owe it to the people to show them 

their alternatives before another day passes. 

 

While we're talking about nebulous concepts, let's talk about 

health care and your wellness model.  I expected to see a 

comprehensive plan on health care, complete with the proposed 

wellness model and the endorsements of it by all groups 

consulted in the process.  And believe me, everyone else in the 

province expected to see the details and the endorsements as 

well, Mr. Speaker.  Everyone assumed that extensive 

consultation and discussion had taken place, for the issue of 

premiums to have been discussed fully. 

 

Well we didn't see anything about the wellness model or 

extensive consultation.  What we saw were funding cuts to 

health care in some areas, increases in the drug plan rates, 

de-insuring of chiropractic and optometric services, while the 

professionals involved claim that they were never consulted at 

all. 

 

I think people deserve to see this wellness model now so that 

they know what the government is trying to do with or to our 

health care system.  When they told us $4.5 billion had to be 

enough, they indicated that the government could provide the 

services it promised, including improvements to the 

prescription drug plan and reinstatement of the dental plan. 

 

They haven't provided the extra services they promised or the 

improvements to the prescription drug plan.  What they have 

done, Mr. Speaker, is to take away services and increase costs 

to the users.  This is a not very clearly disguised user fee, Mr. 

Speaker.  This government has targeted the chronically ill and 

forced them to spend more on their drugs, their eye 

examinations, and their chiropractic treatments.  And when 

they talk of a wellness model, they will have a lot of explaining 

to do to convince people that this will actually keep people well 

and avoid having them end up in hospital or on more expensive 

drugs. 

 

If a chronically ill person fails to take medication because of 

the cost, then that person ends up in emergency or in hospital, 

Mr. Speaker.  If a middle-aged diabetic cannot get free access 

to an optometrist, we will have numerous expensive 

complications in the health of such an individual.  If people 

who rely on chiropractic treatments to relieve pain and 

suffering are now forced to pay for pain medications, there will 

be an increased demand on the hospital system as other insured 

services try to fill the gap that is left by de-insured chiropractic 

services. 

 

The members opposite will be particularly hard pressed to 

explain this to the optometric association and the chiropractic 

association and the Saskatchewan Medical Association, none 

of whom received more than a listen-up briefing days before 

the budget with no chance for input.  These are the people who 

could have helped the government to save money in our 

province.  They could have been asked to help save taxpayers' 

dollars in health care.  And they could have turned to these 

professionals for advice, but they turned them down. 

 

Although I applaud the move to increase funding to home care, 

I'm left wondering just how this fits into an overall strategy, 

Mr. Speaker, and when the people are going to finally be able 

to see the complete plan, how the pieces are supposed to fit 

together.  I suggest to the government that the patience of the 

patients is wearing thin, as is the patience of the professionals 

in health care. 

 

(1630) 

 

We want to see their health care plan complete with long-range 

protection and projections, and people deserve to see it now.  

The government had the perfect opportunity to discuss health 

care premiums in a rational way with hundreds upon hundreds 

of professional people who were willing to talk about all the 

options.  The approach they took was to bend to party pressure, 

freeze out concerned groups, and to keep the public guessing.  

This approach is not open, Mr. Speaker; it is not honest; and it 

will not keep them accountable. 

 

Another important expectation was not just opening the books, 

but keeping them open and keeping them understandable.  And 

we all applaud the Gass Commission for giving us some 

frightening but believable baseline numbers from which to 

work.  I congratulate this government for adopting the 

accounting methods proposed by Mr. Gass in his highly 

capable commission.  We're relieved to know that we have 

finally the news, the bad news, and that the waiting is over. 

 

At the same time, we expected the government to do two 

things.  First, to leave no stone unturned in finding areas to 

save money -- not just Tory-created waste and scandalous 

spending practices, but day-to-day expenditures that don't make 

sense; programs that have outlived their usefulness; physicians 

whose productivity are not commensurate with their cost.  

People wanted this done, and it could have and it should have 

been done first.  In fairness to people working for government, 

they should know the criteria and be part of the saving process, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the Liberal platform, we call these productivity and 

efficiency audits. And I shan't take the time today, but at some 

point in future I would like to share with the members opposite 

what a taxpayers' protection Act could provide for this 

province, as well as a deficit reduction Act and productivity 

and efficiency audits of government. 

 

Second, we wanted brought forward with the budget proposed 

legislation that would target all tax revenue from the deficit tax 

to go directly to the deficit.  People are tired of seeing their 

money collected for one purpose and spent on another.  The 

Liberals did call this the deficit reduction and taxpayers' 

protection Acts in our platform.  And I suggest that this 

directionless government bring forward these Acts 

immediately. 

 

So where is the hope?  In terms of my expectations, the Liberal 

expectations, the expectations of those who supported this 

government and non-supporters alike, there was no tangible 

element of hope in this budget.  The most traumatic thing about 

this budget in general is that 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

although the government did what they believed to be 

necessary in terms of the deficit, they have not offered anything 

on the other side of the equation. 

 

Everyone is willing to be part of a plan, to do their part to get 

things moving.  But they dashed our dreams when they 

increased taxes.  They jeopardized our ability to pay increased 

taxes.  They've given us no opportunity for economic growth 

and investment.  And they've not lived up to our expectation 

that they could decrease costs.  What they have left us with is 

no more hope. 

 

But just like a family, when one asks people to give something 

up, one must be able to show them what they're going to get for 

their sacrifice in the long run.  If the kids give up their 

allowance in the household, maybe there can be a special 

purchase in the long run.  If we cut out going to the movies and 

dining out now and then, maybe the money we save will allow 

us to save for a home of our own. 

 

People understand giving up one thing for another, Mr. 

Speaker.  What they don't understand is making more 

sacrifices, doing without any rewards for working hard, and 

having nothing to hope for.  After failing to produce a 

long-term deficit reduction plan the best the minister could tell 

a shell-shocked public on Thursday last was, quote: Maybe we 

can balance the budget in five years or maybe six. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, and respected colleagues, that's simply not 

good enough.  People need, they want, they deserve more 

concise information from an open and honest and accountable 

government. 

 

What is in this bad-news budget to convince people to hang in 

there?  The NDP party said no to the jobs that could have come 

with the AECL deal.  What will they do to replace them? -- the 

same jobs they will use to replace the jobs of uranium mines 

when they manage to close them down too.  Is that the next 

step that this government will want to implement? 

 

People need a beacon, some light at the end of the tunnel to 

follow, Mr. Speaker.  I think the government could have found 

the imagination to offer something substantive to keep people 

moving in the right direction. 

 

I'm not just taking up time here.  I want the members opposite 

to really understand that they have to go back and do some 

things to change this budget, to offer some encouragement to 

people.  Because if they don't, their numbers won't work, Mr. 

Speaker.  Estimates aren't worth anything in a budget if one 

starts with false assumptions. 

 

I want to give the Minister of Finance and members of 

government a few pointers here in creating an accurate revenue 

projection, and I think they should take some notes.  Do you 

have your pencil ready?  When they predict that certain things 

will happen, they have to consider all the variables, Mr. 

Speaker.  If they leave things out or if they operate on wishful 

thinking, as was the case of the Conservatives during the last 

10 years, the result is major problems for the government and 

especially for the taxpayers. 

Let me illustrate.  If one calculates the cigarette tax revenue 

based on the same level of consumption after the tax as before, 

one will actually be short of money on the revenue side.  Some 

people will quit, some people will cut back, and some people 

will go across the border where Canadian cigarettes are so 

much cheaper. 

 

If this government calculates income tax revenue assuming that 

everyone will make just as much profit as before, the new taxes 

this government imposed took $340 million out of consumers' 

pockets, thus the Estimates will be wrong.  If corporate tax 

revenue increases are based on all corporations keeping their 

operations here, those Estimates will fall short of the mark as 

well. 

 

And if they assume that sales tax revenue and income tax 

revenue will go up in direct correlation with the rate of 

increase, they'll be forgetting about the people who have less 

disposable income to spend, the people who no longer have 

jobs or income on which to pay tax, and the people who will 

just plain leave the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, if they calculate their main budget income source, 

which is federal transfer payments, based on the assumption 

that our decreased population since the last census will not 

affect the size of our transfer payment cheque, then we're in 

very big trouble, Mr. Speaker.  I see all of these false 

assumptions in this budget, and I state that the people of this 

province deserve the real numbers before it is too late. 

 

I would like the members opposite to offer our taxpayers the 

peace of mind of having an independent body like the Gass 

Commission take a look at their tax hikes and confirm that they 

will indeed generate the revenues that the Minister of Finance 

is predicting when all of those variables are considered.  Maybe 

I'm right, maybe he is right.  But the fact is that people do not 

and should not trust politicians to do this accounting. 

 

So let's show some of that open, accountable, honest 

government and have the till tape checked by an independent 

source, or let's ask the auditor at least, before we get the bad 

news.  This time let us begin and end the year with numbers 

that people can actually trust. 

 

I've been talking to many people since budget day because I 

don't simply want to give my opinion today.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I think it might be of some interest to the people on 

the opposite side if they actually heard what people were 

saying about their budget. 

 

I have a caucus of 125,000 people in Saskatchewan, and I 

manage to meet with a lot of them.  Every day when I open my 

mail I meet with a few dozen and I talk to 15 or 20 of them 

every day on the phone. 

 

Today many of them will be watching television and hearing 

these remarks.  They won't be surprised by what I have to say 

and they shouldn't be.  They won't be surprised because what I 

am saying to you, Mr. Speaker, is what they are saying to me.  

From all across this province people call and they say, Lynda, 

please tell the Premier we can't pay more taxes.  We are just 

barely 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

making it out here. 

 

They call my constituency office to say, I'm a student and I 

want you to tell the Premier that the government has invested 

far too much in my education not to offer me a reason to stay 

here. 

 

I talk to doctors and optometrists and chiropractors.  I talk to 

waitresses and hairdressers and cab drivers and gas station 

owners.  I talk to restaurateurs and with farmers and parents 

and seniors and stockbrokers and artists and musicians.  And I 

talk with people who teach in our schools and the people who 

go to our schools, and I listen. 

 

Last week people were nervous but hopeful; this week they are 

shocked and disappointed.  The folks at the hairdressers were 

pretty sure they wouldn't have to pay more taxes because the 

NDP told them they wouldn't have to.  They didn't sit down 

with the 1992 Estimates like we do and figure out all of the 

details on the deficit.  They just believed what they were told; 

they trusted. 

 

And some of them have voted NDP because the 55 MLAs 

sitting over there today show us that they did.  Now these 

people are trying to figure out what they will have to give up in 

order to cover the drop in business they expect this budget to 

bring about.  If there are a few less customers it will probably 

mean less money for everyone and perhaps one operator being 

squeezed out of a job -- one of their colleagues gone. 

 

The head of the restaurant association told me he had serious 

concerns about the potential for the minimum wage going up 

because he would have to lay off staff.  He will be pleased that 

there was no specific news on minimum wage but will continue 

to be concerned about the lack of money in his customers' 

pockets and the effect it is having on the sales in his industry. 

 

A friend of mine owns a bar and has concerns about the fact 

that there was no job creation in this budget.  He says his 

customers no longer spend what they used to on food and 

liquor, and so he'll be laying off staff to cut costs. 

 

He also has serious concerns about video poker, the terminals 

being installed, because he doesn't believe that there's an 

overall gaming strategy.  He says in his bar when a customer 

comes in and spends $20 on food and on beer, this owner could 

count on the profit to pay his bills, his GST, his liquor tax, his 

property tax, his income tax, and hopefully have something left 

over for himself and his family. 

 

Now if that customer has only $20 to spend, puts half of it into 

a video poker terminal on which the owner gets less profit than 

he would on other sales, that's great for the government, but 

where does it leave the small-business men in terms of his 

bottom line?  How does that help his ability to pay taxes, with 

or without a 1 per cent decrease in the rate?  I know what great 

business acumen the people across the way have, Mr. Speaker, 

so I hope they'll at least pay some attention. 

 

My optometrist and a few of his colleagues called to say that 

deinsuring people between 18 and 65 will actually 

cost the system more money in the long run.  He says that and I 

quote: many people with chronic eye conditions will now go to 

a general practitioner to get a referral to a specialist, an 

ophthalmologist, costs which are covered.  That is two visits to 

the system which are both covered when they could have been 

more cost-effectively treated by an optometrist. 

 

I have heard from many constituents who suffer from chronic 

physical and mental illness and who require medications for 

which the drug plan deductible has been increased.  They said 

to me, in quote: ask the Premier what he should do to pay for 

this, what we should do?  Our incomes are fixed, and we have 

no way to earn more.  How do we find an extra $150 a year for 

necessary drugs? 

 

I get the impression, Mr. Speaker, that some of these 

individuals in this House don't understand that I'm talking 

about real people, so let me read them something from a real 

person -- Theresa Lavis from Wakabayashi drive, a terminally 

ill single mother who is a student living on student loans.  She 

wants to know how the changes to the drug plan will affect her 

and her son who is a special-needs child. 

 

In the budget, she states, the government laid out plans on page 

9 to save $29 million from the prescription drug plan this year.  

The government said they would help "those most vulnerable 

to excessive hardship" but did not say how they would do this.  

And she's very, very worried.  She says, please, please find an 

answer out right now. 

 

This kind of behaviour disgusts me, sir.  Many threaten to stop 

taking medication, which is going to result in them ending up 

at emergency for treatment or even being admitted to hospital 

at far greater expense to the system.  People with special-needs 

children are calling to know, when are the details going to 

come out so they can plan their lives -- their real lives, sir. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government has an obligation to provide this 

information, not when it is strategically most opportune, not 

whenever they just happen to get around to it.  They have an 

obligation to get it out now.  And surely with 55 MLAs they 

could delegate some of these jobs to people being paid by the 

taxpayers to be productive in some area while they're there.  

These are crucial issues to real people in very difficult 

circumstances.  Show some compassion towards these families 

and their children. 

 

The constituency of Greystone is a relatively good 

cross-section, Mr. Speaker, of urban income earners.  The 

middle class taxpayers in my constituency are all saying the 

same thing.  We're tired of our relatives and friends leaving, 

calling us to ask how long we're going to put up with this.  

We're frustrated at seeing the equity being eroded from our 

homes.  We're fed up with watching our income and our 

purchasing power decrease every year.  We're all tired of a 

government saying it will do one thing and than doing 

something else. 

 

My constituency has a very dynamic business community that 

runs the length of 8th Street in Saskatoon. And all up and down 

that street, Mr. Speaker, small-business people 



354 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

are saying this:  this is going nowhere fast.  First the economy 

slows down, so we struggle.  Then the federal government 

brings in the GST.  Then the PST is brought in so people have 

less money to spend.  We go to the bank for a line of credit or a 

loan and they want everything we own simply because we live 

in the province of Saskatchewan.  No one has confidence in us, 

especially not the banks. 

 

And these business people say this:  we cut back on our costs, 

and the government raises property taxes and utilities.  We lay 

people off and work a few more hours in order to save money, 

and the government raises the sales tax, raises income tax, 

raises the cost of gas and utilities.  So we usually end up, and 

basically end up, working for nothing.  Now we have a 

business that has no goodwill, no net worth, no borrowing 

power, no profit.  Basically we're stuck in it because no one has 

the money or the desire to invest in it even if they could get the 

financing. 

 

And finally they say:  and then as a final insult, the government 

offers us what?  A 1 per cent decrease on the tax on our profits.  

Most of us have no profits.  We just work for wages, and now 

we have to pay an extra 10 per cent tax on that.  It makes you 

want to take your lumps, they tell me, cut your losses and move 

on while you still have something left over to be able to start up 

somewhere else. 

 

We know what the farmers must have felt like the last 10 years, 

these business people say, pretty hopeless about the future.  

Hopeless -- that is what I'm hearing after this budget, hearing 

from people who are usually optimistic people.  These are the 

risk takers, the professionals, the young people, the people 

upon whom we need to build a future.  Their attitude doesn't 

surprise me but it indeed worries me.  And this government has 

got to offer something quickly, that will start these people 

believing that they have a plan for getting the economy 

moving. 

 

As I said in my opening remarks, the Liberal party had some 

pretty workable approaches in the campaign.  We had a 

strategy to pursue value added processing in agriculture, to 

market agricultural technology, to attract research and 

development to Saskatchewan. 

 

I think this government should rethink many of its positions, 

particularly on AECL, and I believe that they should listen to 

SARM and to SUMA, to Synergy, and to the Saskatchewan 

chambers of commerce, to the Billinton blue chip panel. 

 

I have said many times that this government is not a creator of 

wealth.  Even the Premier has said so.  And I have listened to 

many of the NDP ministers talk about the great job the NDP 

has done in Saskatchewan. But since my opportunities to speak 

in this legislature are limited to two speeches per session and a 

question every third day, I want to give you and the people of 

Saskatchewan a short history before I conclude. 

 

If we look back in our history to the 1920s, we can clearly see 

that it was the Liberals who knew how to show leadership and 

vision to build our legislature, our universities, our highways, 

and communications systems.  The Liberals were always 

careful and frugal managers of the public purse, as record will 

show. 

Your government members seem to delight in taking credit for 

what a great job the CCF did, Mr. Speaker.  But I'd like to 

remind all of them that the Liberals endured the depression and 

the war years when the federal government . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And listen, you may finally learn something 

about history. 

 

When the federal government took all of the revenue raised in 

the province for the war effort, when the war ended and the 

provincial coffers began to fill as the result of a booming North 

American economy and millions of dollars in federal 

government loans being returned to the provinces, the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) stepped up with a 

promise that they never actually kept, but that got them elected 

for 20 years -- medicare. 

 

The NDP promised universal medicare for all services, Mr. 

Speaker.  But they imposed a hospitalization fee in order to pay 

for it -- not exactly free health care.  And the reality was that 

many services were not covered under the CCF medicare 

scheme.  The CCF continued to charge this fee until the late 

1950s when it was challenged by the federal government who 

refused to continue to pay their 50 per cent share of health care 

costs unless the CCF stopped collecting their fee. 

 

Then the Liberals took power, and through the education and 

health tax, continued to offer free medicare until the cost of 

health services began to exceed the targeted income.  It's called 

how you plan a budget, sir.  In order to protect the other 

programs which Liberals knew were crucial to the 

infrastructure that the Liberal government had built during the 

tough times, the Liberals brought in a fee for service to ensure 

that health care spending did not exceed health care revenues 

generated. 

 

Of course the NDP railed loudly in protest, and the next 

election the Liberal government of the day was defeated.  

Health care costs continued to balloon under the NDP, as did 

the costs of all government programs.  And despite the highest 

tax increases in history, in the 1970s the NDP were still unable 

to cover the cost of government when they were dipping into 

the Heritage Fund in the '70s to cover their spending overruns. 

 

Now it really disturbs me, Mr. Speaker, to hear about the tough 

shape the Liberals left the province in prior to the Blakeney 

government taking over.  Because after the difficult 

recessionary period the Thatcher government faced -- defeated 

on its plan to bring in a fee-for-service for health care costs -- 

turned over the province with no deficit, with no debt, and with 

a record nine straight years of balanced budgets, after 

recessionary times I might add. 

 

The NDP right-place, right-time government took power just as 

the economy was rebounding and there were record high grain 

prices, high oil prices, and a public ready to line up for 

expensive election hand-outs like the 7-7-7 program, and other 

assorted temptations after the tight-fisted Thatcher government 

had kept spending under control during tough times without 

raising taxes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the Premier that even he 

has told the people in this province what a frugal 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 355 

manager Ross Thatcher was in this province.  And I would like 

him to rise and refute that at some point. 

 

The NDP could have done much more with the resources of the 

1970s, but many of the same people we see running this 

province today lacked the imagination and the creativity to do 

so. 

 

One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that I'm doing this for is I have 

spent considerable number of hours listening to the NDP/CCF 

(New Democratic Party/Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) version of history in Saskatchewan.  I've decided to 

set the record straight, and I actually went to a historian.  No 

one said that they had to spend every dime that came into the 

government coffers in the 1970s.  Times were good, markets 

were buoyant.  The government could have kept the size of 

government down.  They created the largest multiple 

bureaucracy the province has ever seen. 

 

But the NDP increased the size of government more than it had 

ever been increased before.  They created our present 

bureaucracy with layers and levels that will be years before we 

can ever get it down to an affordable size. 

 

They created boards and agencies and Crown corporations 

filled with patronage appointments, borrowing in American 

funds at high interest rates, creating never before experienced 

government debt, and hiding it in the Crowns. 

 

The members of this government tried to paint the golden era 

of Saskatchewan as correlating the CCF/NDP terms in power.  

They really do try to rewrite history every time they rise, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I'm going to give them some facts that they 

really need to know to put in perspective what has happened to 

our province. 

 

In 1905 there were a hundred thousand people in our province.  

In 1910 our province had a population of 500,000, and it 

doubled to 1 million in 1929.  The migration planned by the 

Liberal authorities in Ottawa brought to Saskatchewan good, 

hard-working citizens to build in the construction of a new 

land.  Because of the agricultural possibilities most of the 

immigrants, with assistance from the government in Ottawa, 

received land and equipment and some stock to commence 

operations with very few personal incomes. 

 

And here is some interesting noteworthy information.  From 

the Liberal Scott government in 1905 to the Liberal Martin 

government in 1915 to the Liberal Dunning government in 

1922, the Liberal Gardiner government of 1926, Saskatchewan 

enjoyed great progress in providing new homes, education, 

health services, highways, railways, ferries, government 

services, and legal beginnings to make a province possible. 

 

Saskatchewan rose from nothing to being one of the most 

prosperous provinces in Canada.  And by 1929 Saskatchewan 

held the balance of power between Quebec and Ontario, and 

Liberal leaders were amongst the most powerful in the nation.  

All of this was achieved through an era of trouble and doubt.  

The wars caused great hardship for people. 

The NDP always raises health services as if it's its greatest 

achievement.  But in the early years of this province, Liberal 

administrations created health care, built two mental hospitals, 

three TB (tuberculosis) sanitoria, two major hospitals in 

Regina, two in Saskatoon.  And by 1915 the first municipality 

was assisted with provincial monies to provide doctor and 

hospital services.  By 1944 one-third of all Saskatchewan 

people were covered by these services. 

 

Liberal governments provided free care for TB, mental illness, 

and in the 1920s a grant of costs for medical care for expectant 

mothers.  In 1937 the Liberal administration offered free cancer 

treatments as well.  And Saskatchewan was credited, sir, with 

having some of the most progressive regimes in health care 

long before the CCF ever came to power. 

 

Prior to the election in 1944, the Liberal Patterson government 

passed the Saskatchewan Health Services Act, under which all 

health services could be provided to Saskatchewan.  And 

during the election of 1944, Premier Douglas, along with other 

leading CCF politicians, promised complete medical services at 

no charge.  The money was going to be raised through Crown 

corporation dividends and taxing the rich.  None of these 

promises were carried out by the CCF, by the way.  Look at the 

record. 

 

Financially Saskatchewan had a fine record during the years 

1905 to 1929, 1933 to 1944, 1964 to 1971 -- all Liberal 

governments.  And the '20s were one of the best periods for 

Saskatchewan.  The hopes for progress in manufacturing and 

financial success came with the construction of General Motors 

in Regina to assemble vehicles for the western market. 

 

A large agricultural market potential developed with meat 

packing, with dairies, and grain storage, providing a possible 

wealth producing industry which never grew to its potential 

due to the years of the CCF government. 

 

The population figures tell an amazing story of the failure of 

the CCF, Mr. Speaker.  In 1929, Saskatchewan had over 

900,000 people.  This placed us third -- ahead of Alberta, B.C. 

(British Columbia) and Manitoba.  In the year 1946, we still 

held this position despite the depression and the war that had 

reduced our population.  Today in 1992, we find our population 

at about 1 million.  Alberta has 2 million, B.C. well over 3 

million.  There's little doubt that the existence of a CCF 

government in the 1950s held our province back and placed us 

in an unfortunate position in which we find ourselves today. 

 

And the big story of co-operation to build a province was the 

story of Saskatchewan under Liberal governments.  In 1915 -- 

and this is something for the education of those people who 

think that they are the inventors of the co-op -- in 1915 when 

the first co-op branch of government was organized, 

Saskatchewan had 1,500, no less than 1,500, co-operatives 

active in our province.  Most of these were true co-operatives 

directed by local people and provided services of all kinds to 

our province.  Every major co-operative in Saskatchewan was 

started under a Liberal government: the Saskatchewan 

co-operative creameries, the Saskatchewan co-operative 

elevators, 



356 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the credit unions, co-operative oil 

refineries and United Grain Growers.  Co-operatives cannot 

exist in its true form under socialism as co-operatives are the 

purest form of capitalist business-ownership. 

 

(1700) 

 

One of the most successful stories of Liberalism in action was 

in the field of services to the public and the protection of the 

public dollar.  During its years in office, the Liberal Party 

managed to balance the budget during the good years and the 

bad years.  Conservatives and NDP governments cannot make 

this claim. 

 

I believe that the NDP are not being truthful . . . I want to just 

go back for one moment.  I really do want people present to 

understand, Mr. Speaker, that I am not implying that Liberal 

governments were perfect.  I would not imply that any 

governments have been perfect.  And I'm not at all implying 

that I condone everything that Liberal governments have done, 

which is more than I can say for the members opposite who 

don't seem to think that they can learn anything from anybody 

and that they've been perfect throughout time. 

 

But I believe that the NDP is not being truthful in some of its 

implications about the fiscal management ability of the 

Liberals, nor should they be so simplistic about their 

accounting of history, nor should it go unchallenged. 

 

As shameful as the behaviour of the previous government was 

-- and I did say on a talk show with one of their members that I 

do believe that this province deserves to have an apology from 

them so we can get on and go forward in this province -- as 

shameful as their behaviour has been, this government should 

be careful about not calling . . . the pot calling the kettle black. 

 

The NDP are the people who have had two chances in the last 

20 years to do things right.  Regardless of how good their 

fantasies are, they didn't do all they figured they did in the 

1970s.  And now back again with some of the same faces in 

charge, they may be about to screw things up a second time 

around. 

 

And I'm saying this, the Premier must listen to the people, 

apologize for the mistruths that he visited on Saskatchewan, 

step back for a moment and rethink his approach, and call off 

this tax attack on our people.  I urge him to consult with his 

Premier's Advisory Council tomorrow.  I urge him to call in all 

of the health care representatives today and show them the 

wellness model before it goes any further.  Employ some 

independent auditors to evaluate government departments.  

Create a lean bureaucracy that we can market across Canada as 

an example of efficiency and productivity. 

 

Create another Gass Commission and ask them to work with 

the auditor to tell the people if the revenue and expense 

projections are achievable.  Call Jake Epp and tell him the 

government has changed its mind about the AECL deal.  Show 

some desperately needed leadership from that side of the 

House. 

 

And while he's calling Ottawa, talk to Bill McKnight and 

tell him Saskatchewan wants a national agriculture summit, as 

suggested in the Liberal Party platform, to discuss problems of 

GRIP and NISA (net income stabilization account) and GATT 

(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) and the Crow and 

other programs before changing one more Saskatchewan 

program that's going to leave us out in the wind. 

 

Call the people in the investment community, sir, and ask what 

we could do to save the Saskatchewan Pension Plan without 

costing the province's taxpayers anything.  This is the talent 

and the imagination and the vision that this government lacked 

in the budget. 

 

And I say to the Premier: let the people help you, let the 

Liberal Party help you, and yes, even let the Conservatives help 

you, if they are willing.  If this government will not go back to 

the drawing board, Mr. Speaker, they have failed the people in 

this initial test. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I cannot support this budget, and ask the 

government to offer its commitment to return with a more 

positive, innovative fiscal plan for the province of 

Saskatchewan -- one which creates prosperity from stagnation 

and hope from despair. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

believe that there's been an agreement as between the 

government side and the official opposition that the House will 

adjourn shortly.  And I promise the members opposite that I 

will limit my remarks to five minutes, if that, before I beg leave 

to adjourn the debate, and then the House Leader can take over 

the management of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter this 

debate, and I want to do so at the very outset by making a few 

preliminary observations about the speech which we have just 

heard.  I'm not sure whether it's a speech or a lecture, and I 

must say to the hon. member from Greystone that it's nice to 

hear what a truly non-political speech in this Chamber sounds 

like. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I must confess to the hon. member 

from Greystone that she had me a bit confused about whether 

or not it was a political speech the last three-quarters of an hour 

about the history of the Liberal Party and all the great things 

the Liberal Party did and all the bad things that Tommy 

Douglas did and Woodrow Lloyd did and Al Blakeney did. 

 

But excuse me if I concluded that that was political.  I know 

that it really wasn't political.  I know that it was non-partisan 

and it was in the tone and in the tenor that you advocate, 

namely that there shouldn't be partisanship. 

 

But if I am confused a little bit by that, don't be surprised if the 

hundreds of people who are watching are not confused, and 

they really know what you're saying and what you're saying is 

all about -- raw, hard-core politics of the worst kind in this 

legislature, of the worst kind. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 12, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 357 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I might also say to the Leader of the 

Liberal Party that apart from many historical -- how should I 

put it -- errors, slight inaccuracies, one that almost made me 

fall off my chair was her reference to the 7-7-7 program as a 

program of the mid-1970s of the Blakeney government.  I want 

to tell the hon. member that the 7-7-7 program was advocated 

by the NDP in opposition during the campaign of 1986.  And 

as the hon. member may or may not know, historically we 

didn't win the election in 1986 and 7-7-7 was never 

implemented.  Instead we had the home program which the 

Conservatives implemented and which of course this budget 

now addresses, which I assume you will, when it comes to 

budget time, vote in support thereof. 

 

I only point that out because if one takes a look at the historical 

chronology, with the greatest of respect -- and I say this in the 

spirit of non-partisanship that the hon. member has said it -- the 

history lesson needs to be rechecked again, Madam Member, 

because I wouldn't want your credibility undermined by those 

numerous small little historical errors that you have. 

 

But I must say that it was interesting to see the defence of Ross 

Thatcher in this House.  I am one who was old enough to have 

actually served with Ross Thatcher and I thought he had many 

redeeming attributes as a politician.  I must confess, however, 

that I didn't believe that his ideological approach to health care 

and medicare were very redeeming.  And I thought that the era 

of Ross Thatcher had pretty well gone by now. 

 

But lo and behold, I guess as they say, the carpenter said to the 

walrus in that famous poem or vice versa: there ain't nothing 

new under the sun.  And here we have in 1992 a reincarnation 

of Ross Thatcher and the defence of the utilization fees of Ross 

Thatcher all in defence of medicare of course, in 1967 by the 

member from Greystone, of course just having finished 

three-quarters of an hour previous in her remarks saying that 

what we were proposing was all wrong. 

 

Forgive me, Mr. Speaker, if I interpret that as being a slightly 

political observation or a slightly political oversight of the 

factual circumstances.  I know that the member did not intend 

to be political in this context, but others will see this as a slight 

contradiction.  And I say to her that this defence of Ross 

Thatcher I think will be appreciated by a few Liberals and 

certainly by a few Saskatchewan people, but I think 

unfortunately it also shows exactly where the Liberal Party of 

1992 is at. 

 

We don't need any lectures from you -- with the greatest of 

respect, Madam Minister -- about the defence of medicare 

because it was Ross Thatcher and the Liberal Party that gave it 

its most severe, cruel blow -- the same Ross Thatcher and the 

same Liberal Party that you defend in this historical context. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I make one other 

observation before I take my place and beg leave to adjourn the 

debate.  And I don't say this exclusively about the member 

from Greystone because this is in effect the 

nature of the debate that not only she but the Leader of the 

Opposition and the Conservative Party find themselves in.  

This is the essence of their political debate.  And she stated it 

forcefully today over and over again. 

 

She says, you know, this budget is all wrong.  She says it's all 

wrong.  And the hon. member from Rosthern supports her from 

the Conservative caucus.  She says, you know, it's all wrong.  

Their argument boils down to this, Mr. Speaker.  You shouldn't 

have cut.  You shouldn't have raised taxes, and you shouldn't 

have run a deficit.  In fact she was critical of the $517 million 

deficit that we were forced to run up, given the massive cuts 

and the tax increases which were necessary as a result of the 

last 10 years. 

 

Now just stop, Mr. Speaker, and members of this Legislative 

Assembly.  To any objective observer, just stop to think of the 

logic and the political credibility of that line: no cuts, no tax 

increases, and no deficit . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- More cuts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Oh, more cuts.  The hon. member 

from Greystone says, more cuts.  But will you notice in her 

speech that there was not a word as to where those cuts should 

come from.  And I'd like the hon. member -- when we get into 

Estimates, and we will be putting these questions to the hon. 

member -- to tell the people of Saskatchewan precisely where 

she would cut more in Health. 

 

Would it be the Ross Thatcher deterrent fees that you so 

eloquently defended this afternoon everywhere across the 

piece?  Is that where you would do it?  What would you 

eliminate?  What areas of the health care service would you 

totally reduce and cut? 

 

Not only, not only is your position . . . Well now she's 

amending it -- no cuts, further cuts, no tax increases -- there's a 

little variation of that.  What her argument is, is not no tax 

increases.  Her argument is tax reductions.  So you have no 

cuts, tax reductions, and a balanced budget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the most intellectually dishonest, the most 

politically deceptive argument, and the most cruel hoax that 

can be perpetrated on anybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  If there is any term that is applicable for that -- 

it's been kicked around in the United States; it's applicable -- 

that is voodoo economics with a capital V and a capital E.  

Voodoo economics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say with the greatest of respect to the members 

opposite, this just simply isn't good enough.  It's not good 

enough for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  It's not 

good enough for this Chamber.  And that isn't the new politics, 

Madam Minister, Madam Member, that is the politics of the 

old, and the people of the province of Saskatchewan know it.  

And that's why you're sitting with only one member because 

they know that you and the members opposite who sit to your 

right practise and preach that politics.  That is not what we 

believe in. 

 

And you should join us, as you say you're willing to do it, by 

recognizing 



358 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 1992 

the source of the problem, recognizing the choices that we 

adopted here were the best -- given the circumstances that we 

faced -- if you truly want to rebuild the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a few more words that I wish to say in 

respect to this debate, but in the interests of the time and the 

other developments, I therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:15 p.m. 

 

 


