




















































Hansard: July 23, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1693 

 July 23, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Clerk Assistant: -- Mr. Lautermilch, chair of the Standing 

Committee on Estimates, presents the first report of the said 

committee which is hereby laid upon the Table. 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That the first report of the Standing Committee on Estimates 

be now concurred in. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to members of 

this Assembly several sets of guests in your gallery. We have 

with us Frank Switzer, president, Saskatchewan Natural 

History Society. Also from the society, Curt Schroeder, the 

executive director, and other directors of the society including 

Jim Elliot, Dr. Paul James and Dr. George Mitchell. 

 

We also have with us, Mr. Speaker, Tim Thiele, district 

manager for Ducks Unlimited, Canada; and Dennis Sherratt, 

executive director for western Canada for Wildlife Habitat 

Canada. And finally, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatchewan 

Wildlife Federation, Wally Envick, past president of the 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation from Shaunavon; Ed 

Kenette, provincial habitat chairman from Wawota; Ed Begin, 

executive director of the federation from Moose Jaw; and last 

but not least, Joyce Lorenz, regional chairperson for the 

federation from Punnichy. I ask that all members join us in 

welcoming these people here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you, and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, the executive director for the Saskatchewan 

Teachers' Federation, Fred Herron, who is seated in your 

gallery. Mr. Herron takes a continuing interest in the 

deliberations in this Assembly. And I'd like to ask you to join 

me in welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you. I would also to join with the 

minister in welcoming Fred Herron to the legislature today, and 

it was a pleasure to be able to have some discussion with him 

over dinner today. I'd ask the members to welcome him. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past five days 

it has been my pleasure to attend a mid-western legislative 

conference at Bismarck, North Dakota. The provinces of 

Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, and Saskatchewan participated 

along with approximately 25 states. I will touch briefly on 

some of the topics of our agenda. 

 

Number one, rural health care, which I had the pleasure, Mr. 

Speaker, on speaking on behalf of the Saskatchewan Canadian 

health care systems. 

 

Number two, mid-west Canada relations. This was very 

important and useful as a legislature; three, international trade 

discussing the role of the legislature and in a global economy; 

and four, ethics of the public service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, international trade in a global economy to me was 

the most important subject. We as Canadians and Americans 

must work together to try to solve our economic problems. 

Several governors, Democrats and Republicans, stated if we 

don't get serious about solving our problems, democracy is 

going to slip away from us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was definitely a pleasure to attend this session, 

and I thank the legislature for sending me there along with my 

colleagues from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and Regina 

Lakeview. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kujawa: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 

like to inform the Assembly of a very special event taking 

place in Regina right now. 

 

From the 18th to 25th of this month, Canada is hosting the 

inaugural Canadian Masters' Summer Sports Festival. Up to 

about 1,400 athletes from all across Canada are participating in 

28 different sporting events from water-skiing to weight-lifting. 

The event also includes a day fair, an arts festival, and a 

multicultural fair. 

 

The participants range from 18 to 80 years of age although 

most are between 30 and 65. Most of them are otherwise 

employed, have families, have children. And I think all of us 

very young people in this room are inspired by their efforts 

here today. I would like to welcome them all to the city of 

Regina and invite all of you to help in the promotion of this 

wonderful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as all 

members will know, today is the day when the trial period of 

the new rules in our legislature expires. And if we do not either 

adopt the new rules or extend the trial period, today's private 

members' statements may well be the last ones made in this 

legislature. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I will greatly miss these 

statements if we do not extend the trial period or adopt the 

rules. I believe they've been a useful statement for all we 



1694 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

private members in giving voice to topics that we might not 

otherwise have a chance to discuss. 

 

We've discussed a variety of topics. Members have reported on 

events in their own constituencies. We've paid tribute to 

outstanding individuals. We've highlighted government 

programs that affect our constituencies, and we've even 

enjoyed the odd satirical comment from my good friend and 

colleague from Moose Jaw Palliser. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I therefore sincerely ask the members opposite to 

consider today an extension of the trial period, if not a 

permanent adoption of the new rules. And I would ask them to 

please consider not how these new rules assist either you as a 

party or a caucus, but consider how these new rules have 

valuably assisted all of us as private members. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I will be 

asking leave of the House to introduce a motion that would 

extend the trial period for another 10 sitting days. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On the eve of the 

Barcelona Olympics, I want to acknowledge and congratulate 

several young Saskatchewan athletes who will represent 

Canada at the summer games. When one considers the number 

of athletes who participate we should be, and really are, Mr. 

Speaker, proud of those people who act as our sports 

ambassadors. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these young Olympians are, by event, race walker 

Tim Barret, kayaker Jason Rusu, fencer Allan Francis, and 

wrestler Jeff Thue. Sandra Greaves of Thunder Bay is a Swift 

Current native who will represent Canada in judo, while 

Georgette Reed, daughter of former Roughrider great, George 

Reed, will compete in the shotput event. 

 

Mr. Speaker, whether these athletes win medals or not is not 

important. What is important is that they are gaining valuable 

experience. They are meeting new people. They are 

discovering new cultures and striving to improve their abilities. 

 

I ask members of this Assembly to join with me in 

congratulating these young men and young women on their 

selection as Olympians and to join with me in wishing them the 

best of luck as they represent the best country in the world in 

which to live, Canada. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Bradley: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, 

I'd like to focus on the achievements of the Canadian Junior 

Hereford Association and a student from my constituency, 

Chad Nicholas. I would also like to indicate to members of this 

Assembly that the Department of Agriculture and Food kindly 

purchased a general sponsorship for the Canadian Junior 

Hereford show, Bonanza '92, to be held in Saskatoon July 22 to 

25. The Minister of Agriculture and his family will be 

attending the opening ceremonies of the cattle show on 

Saturday. 

The Canadian Junior Hereford Association has consistently 

demonstrated a commitment to development of the beef 

industry. They are known for their outstanding and 

well-organized shows that spotlight the versatile hereford 

breed. Chad Nicholas is one of the co-chairs of this year's 

event, along with Kerrie Anne Serhienko from Saskatoon and 

Carmen Millham from Esterhazy. I know how hard they have 

worked and also know how much they are looking forward to 

Bonanza '92. I wish them every success and I'm certain this 

year's show-case will be the talk of the industry. Good luck. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Recently I 

attended the mid-western legislative conference in Bismarck, 

North Dakota. I was joined by legislators from across the 

mid-western United States, Ontario, Alberta, Manitoba, as well 

as my two colleagues, the member from Arm River and the 

member from Regina Lakeview. Topics at the conference 

included renewing government, taking a stand on critical 

issues, renewing citizens' confidence, the ethics of public 

service, and the global economy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have returned from this conference with a 

renewed belief in the parliamentary system. Our Executive 

Council is directly responsible to the voters. If it fails to 

effectively carry out the duties of the government, it can be 

defeated in four or five years. While the parliamentary system 

has served us well, this doesn't preclude the need for reform but 

these reforms must ensure the efficient functioning of the 

legislative process. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must be careful when we approach the issue 

of democratic reform. We must guard against creating an 

ungovernable system. Changing the system will not necessarily 

enhance democracy. Attitudes, education, and participation are 

just as important to the efficient functioning of our democratic 

system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I want to express my dismay about a recent book 

sponsored by the Fraser Institute which is claiming that the 

degree of poverty is exaggerated and not a problem in Canada. 

 

It is common knowledge that the Fraser Institute is an elite, 

right-wing think-tank noted for its extreme positions on 

government policy. This book attempts to redefine what is grim 

daily reality for 1.6 million Canadian families. Even though I 

expect extreme and punitive views from this group, I find their 

denial of poverty in Canada, Mr. Speaker, to be offensive. 

Factual information from StatsCanada and the Canadian 

Council on Social Development proves that poverty is at its 

highest level since the 1930s. Perhaps the Fraser Institute will 

release a future book stating that the Great Depression never 

happened. 

 

The only purpose of this book is to rationalize the punitive 

social agenda of the Fraser Institute's friends, the Tories and the 

Reform Party, Mr. Speaker. The former PC 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1695 

(Progressive Conservative) Saskatchewan government also 

denied that poverty existed in the face of 11 food banks 

opening during their tenure. The right-wing Fraser Institute 

should be ashamed of itself for doing a major disservice to over 

6 million poor Canadians. Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Consultations on New Labour Legislation 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, for some 

time now you have been threatening to introduce legislation 

which gives you absolute power over the determination of trade 

divisions in the construction industry, an extension of the 

dictatorship you are already developing in this Assembly. In 

fact this Bill would allow you to force employers and 

employees to bargain under your rules -- rules which you will 

fix to favour the union leaders. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have asked you this question before, and you 

refused to answer it directly. Who -- outside of your 

hand-picked, union-only advisory committee -- have you 

consulted with to determine the effects of such a backwards 

Bill on the province's economy? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm dazzled by the 

characterization of dictator. I hadn't realized that I had been 

doing things which would take on that characterization. But 

however the member thinks about it is not of much concern to 

me. 

 

Let me say that the kind of legislation that he's talking about is 

in effect I believe in every jurisdiction in Canada, was in effect 

-- was in effect in this province at the specific request of the 

contractors of the construction industry employers from 1978 

until I believe 1983; was recommended to us by an advisory 

committee that I asked to give me advice on the subject, a 

unanimous report from six trade union representatives and six 

union contractors in the province. 

 

It is a piece of legislation that will apply only to union 

contractors. And frankly I can't imagine what the hon. member 

is objecting to. That certainly wasn't clear from his question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. Before the next question is asked and 

the next answer is given, I just want to remind members to 

please direct their questions through the Chair and the answers 

through the Chair. All right? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don't know if the 

minister is dazzled or dizzy, but, Mr. Minister, your 

government's idea of labour consultation is to lock yourselves 

up in a cabinet room and make phone calls to Barb Byers and 

George Rosenau. As Labour minister, one would think that you 

would be aware of an organization called the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association which 

represents over 700 union and non-union firms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: have you met with 

anyone from the SCA (Saskatchewan Construction 

Association), which is the only legitimate, industry-wide 

representative of Saskatchewan's non-residential contractors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes, as I 

would have thought that the member would know. The answer 

is yes, I have personally met with representatives from that 

organization, as has my representative who is doing the . . . 

who is handling the consulting on this matter. They have been 

met with at least twice that I personally know of. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Are those the ones the boards threw off last 

week, or the new ones? 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, you made commitments that there would 

be wide-ranging public consultation before any legislation 

would be drafted. In fact, the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

House Leader said in this Assembly, and I quote: 

 

 I want to tell you very clearly that at every opportunity we 

are going to be consulting with the industry and with the 

workers -- and the unionized workers, non-unionized workers 

-- to come up with a Bill that will be satisfactory . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: as yet you have not 

consulted widely with the industry; that is quite clear. Can you 

tell this Assembly whether you have already drafted the Bill in 

spite of your lack of consultation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, through you let me say to 

the hon. member that I have in fact met with members of the . . 

. the new people, as he would call them. They didn't look too 

new to me. They were my old friend, Jim Chase, who has been 

in that position with the Saskatchewan Construction Labour 

Relations Council for at least 20 years, and who, with me and 

others, drafted the legislation that was introduced in 1978. And 

we have met. 

 

And he, I believe, is currently in charge of that operation, 

together with their lawyer, Mr. Ted Zarzeczny, who was also 

involved in the drafting of the same legislation in 1978, and a 

representative of the department has also met with those 

gentlemen together with other representatives from the 

industry. 

 

You quote me quite correctly when you talk about consultation, 

and I have made it perfectly clear to everyone here that there 

will be that consultation. 

 

There will be that kind of consultation with respect to all labour 

legislation that will be under the consideration of this 

government. And that consultation will definitely 



1696 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

take place in this case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, a very direct question to the 

minister. Have you drafted a Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I have not drafted a Bill, but let me 

more specific, Mr. Speaker. The Department of Justice, 

working from the report of the advisory committee, has drafted 

a piece of legislation on the basis of that report. 

 

The report was sent out far and wide to everybody to comment 

on, and we are receiving comments on it. And that led to the 

meeting with the Saskatchewan Construction Association. The 

draft that has been prepared was prepared by Justice draftsmen 

on the basis of the original report and not on the basis of any 

instructions from the government. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we 

now know full well that you have gone ahead and drafted the 

Bill well before your promised wide-ranging industry 

consultations. In fact, Mr. Minister, we have discovered that 

despite your government's refusal to consult farmers and 

taxpayers before your retroactive GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) Bill is introduced, you find it quite suitable 

to give a draft labour Bill to your union friends before its 

introduction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this. This is a fraud 

of monumental proportions. Can you tell me why you have 

drafted a Bill before consulting with the industry and why you 

sent copies of that Bill to union leaders before the Bill has been 

introduced in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I wish that the hon. 

member would listen to the answers to my questions before he 

reads the other question that he brought into this House. I have 

made it perfectly plain that the draft that was prepared was 

prepared by draftsmen, by Justice draftspeople, working on the 

basis of the advisory committee's report. 

 

I just finished saying that that legislation was not drafted from 

any instructions given by the government. Now the member 

must have heard that. 

 

Now the other thing the member must have heard is my 

description of the consultations that already have taken place 

and my undertakings with respect to future consultations. 

 

So may I say again to the hon. member, listen to my answers 

before you read the next prepared question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And if the hon. 

member opposite would spend as much time at research and 

take a few notes to follow himself, he might not give such silly 

answers. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to table for this Assembly and the 

public a copy of The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act. Mr. Minister, this Bill was sent to us earlier today and 

contains all of the Draconian measures which give you the 

absolute power you want. You refused to allow any meaningful 

consultation with the Saskatchewan Construction Association 

before you crafted the Bill, so I will ask you the questions they 

want answered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: is it not true that this 

Bill will restrict employees and employers from freely 

competing for employment in businesses at all construction 

projects in the province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I hardly think it will 

have that effect. I would remind the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, 

that this legislation closely parallels the legislation that was 

developed in 1978 and remind him that that legislation was 

developed in close consultation with leading members of the 

construction industry, Mr. J.E. Chase specifically -- and he 

takes some pride in that exercise -- as well as Mr. Zarzeczny 

who was then, as he is now, the legal advisor to the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association on labour relations 

matters. 

 

The Bill has never been characterized in the terms that the hon. 

member seeks to characterize it today. Indeed I think it well 

known in this House, and it was so stated at the time, that the 

Bill was drawn in close consultation with those same people as 

well as representatives of the building trades unions. And the 

whole of the industry was proud of the Bill in 1978, very proud 

of it, and quite happy to work under it. 

 

Now what has changed between 1978 and 1992 where now it 

would be characterized in the terms that the hon. member has 

just used? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Fourteen years since 

that time -- that's a long time and a lot of changes. And I 

suggest to you that you are misleading us by saying that 1978 

was an acceptable position in this province. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: do you not agree 

that your Bill will force employers and employees against their 

free will into employer associations and unions in order to 

achieve new collective agreements which the unions have not 

been able to do under the present voluntary structure? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well I . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. There was absolutely no interference 

when the question was asked. I don't want any interference 

when the answer is given. There was no interference. Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I can't stand here 

and debate a Bill which does not reflect government policy, as 

I have explained to the member on a couple of 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1697 

occasions already. 

 

The member is quite wrong if he thinks that that Bill did not 

enjoy substantial support from the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association in 1978. In fact, in fact in 1978 that legislation was 

employer-driven. It was employer-driven. 

 

And I recall it specifically because I was a deputy minister of 

Labour at the time and it was a monumentally difficult task to 

bring the trade unions to agree to that particular structure of 

collective bargaining in the construction industry. And let me 

also remind the member . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. I think the minister has answered the 

question. Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, with 

all due respect this is your Bill. The wellness Bill that we 

uncovered was your government's Bill. You're the government. 

These Bills are your Bills, nobody else's. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: can you confirm that 

this Bill will raise construction costs and prices the taxpayers 

must foot, with the result that out-of-province contractors will 

again take significant portions of the work in Saskatchewan as 

they did prior to 1982 when the unions had a monopoly on the 

work in this province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well of course, Mr. Speaker, of course 

the answer is no it will not have any such effect. I remind the 

hon. member and the Leader of the Opposition that this kind of 

legislation providing for a structure for collective bargaining in 

the construction industry is in place, I believe, in every 

jurisdiction in Canada -- in every jurisdiction in Canada 

including the province of Alberta, for example. And does 

anyone suggest that the legislation in Alberta is driving up 

construction costs in the province of Alberta? It's just not so, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I haven't had a 

chance to research all of the legislation throughout this country, 

but I seriously doubt that this Draconian action could be 

simulated any place else except . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I've asked members in the 

opposition not to interfere when the minister is answering and I 

expect members on the government side not to interfere either. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: Mr. 

Minister, these are the points that the Saskatchewan 

Construction Association raise -- have you done any analysis 

on the effect of this legislation on the province's economy and 

job market? And have you done any analysis on your so-called 

unwritten policy of awarding contracts to union-only 

contractors? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Well, with respect to the first part of the 

member's questions, I'm not just sure how you would undertake 

that kind of research and how you would produce that kind of 

prediction, but as always -- as always -- we're prepared to 

listened to suggestions and to give them serious consideration. 

And I'll be quite pleased to do that. It's just a little hard to 

predict the effect that this would have in terms of . . . that the 

member gives. I think the answer is no effect at all. 

 

Because all we're doing, remember -- all we're doing is 

providing a structure for collective bargaining in the 

construction industry. Now I know without asking that the 

member supports a policy of workers everywhere in 

Saskatchewan having access to collective bargaining. I know 

he does that. I mean, everybody does that in a democracy 

because that is the workers' democratic right. 

 

Now that democratic right is just impossibly frustrated by the 

idea of the spin-off company, which I know the hon. member is 

also familiar with and quite familiar with the fact that other 

jurisdictions have taken steps to ensure that spin-off companies 

can't be created to destroy collective bargaining in their 

jurisdictions. And I know that he would want us to have the 

same provision applicable in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suggest, Minister, 

that you should not presume to know and understand what I 

think. I haven't been here long enough for you to get to know 

me that well. I also take exception to the fact that you might 

suggest that spin-off companies destroy the industry in any 

way. I believe they have their place. 

 

Mr. Minister, your answer in this Assembly, your answers have 

been much less than the open and honest government that you 

so proudly promised to the Saskatchewan voters. 

 

One final question. Mr. Speaker, my question is this: will you, 

Mr. Minister, commit to this Assembly that you will consult, 

and honour your previous pledge to honestly consult with the 

SCA -- that means honest consultations; that's give and take -- 

and other industry representatives on this Bill. This Bill is too 

important to go over too quickly . . . And make 

recommendations and changes before it is introduced. And, Mr. 

Minister, I remind you that now that we have your Bill on this 

table, we will know if you have listened to the industry or not. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member 

knows that the reason why he has a copy of that draft is 

because I caused it to be sent to the Saskatchewan Construction 

Association. 

 

And I think he knows that. So I think he knows that we are 

taking steps to honestly and openly and fully consult with -- if I 

can have the member's attention -- fully consult with 

representatives of the industry including representatives of the 

Saskatchewan Construction Association. And they have met 

with me in my office and 



1698 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

they have discussed this Bill and they have my undertaking, 

which they accept -- whether this member does or not, sir -- 

they accept my undertaking that there will be full consultation 

with respect to that Bill. And I have no fear of contradiction 

about that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Policy on Release of Draft Bills 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the Premier, although he may 

not have known it before, now knows that the ministers are 

being extremely inconsistent. Some of them, like the Minister 

of Labour, are releasing legislation to interest groups. But 

others, like the Minister of Agriculture, refuse to release the 

GRIP Bill to the industry to allow them to find out what's going 

on. 

 

Will the Premier not admit that this is, at the very least, 

inconsistent; at the worst, selective manipulation? Why won't 

you impose a standard policy for your ministers to follow? And 

why is it the government refuses to consult with agriculture 

groups on the GRIP Bill with as much detail as you have with 

the unions on the labour legislation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member 

for his question. And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I am 

advised by the Minister of Agriculture that the GRIP Bill, 

which still awaits tabling and has not been able to have been 

widely discussed because of the actions of the members 

opposite there . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I want to remind the members in 

opposition again that there was no interference when the 

member from Morse asked his question. I want the Premier to 

have the same attention as the member for Morse got. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I just 

simply, to close off the answer, say that I'm advised by the 

Minister of Agriculture that the Bill which is fashioned on the 

recommendations made by the advisory committee to the 

minister and which advisory committee is essentially the same 

that the former premier had when he was minister of 

Agriculture . . . and other farm groups were widely consulted 

before the Bill was drafted. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, the Bill that was 

given to us is an example of the opportunity that I believe that 

you should present to rural Saskatchewan on the same basis 

that it was presented to the unions and the contractors or 

whoever it was that got the Bill. We would like to have that 

same opportunity. 

 

You went out and consulted. But I'm asking you, would you 

prepare the same . . . a draft Bill to go out to the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan so that they can view what you are 

going to do to their GRIP '91 and '92? Would you prepare that 

and send that out for them? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I would remind you, sir, 

and the hon. member, that if the Bill had been tabled over a 

month ago, as was the intention of the government, there would 

have been not only wide circulation of this Bill, there would 

have been as the result of the wide circulation of the Bill 

undoubtedly representations and also submissions for change 

made by the members inside the House from both the official 

opposition . . . both the parties, political parties, the official 

opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party. There would 

have been representations made by farm organizations, all of 

which could have been interpreted in this circumstance. 

 

I say to the member opposite that they denied us the option in 

doing so, and by doing so, denied the farmers the chance to 

have a proper access to the Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 

Premier, whose government is obviously showing favouritism 

to the union and obviously overlooking the farm leaders in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Would you please provide the opportunity to put a stamp of 

draft on that Bill and allow the SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), the Western Canadian 

Wheat Growers, the farmers union, and all of those people, and 

the Sask Wheat Pool, to see the Bill before you introduce it in 

this Assembly so that they can know what you're really going 

to do to them? Would you do that for us, please? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I again thank the hon. 

member for the question and would say to the hon. member, as 

I have in my answers previously, that in essence this Bill is a 

reflection of what the farm leaders have recommended the Bill 

to be, the advisory committee. The drafting in effect is based 

on the recommendations of the farm leaders. 

 

I also have repeated, and I shall repeat again to the members of 

the official opposition, the Conservative Party, that if the Bill 

had been tabled over a month, a month and a half ago now, that 

we would have had not only widespread circulation but there 

would have been good consultation and perhaps even 

amendments brought about. But that was denied by you. 

 

But finally I would say to the hon. member opposite and to the 

Leader of the Official Opposition as follows: Mr. Member, we 

want to tell you that the days of the divisions which you are 

seeking to play between the working men and women of this 

province and the farming men and women of this province are 

long gone. They died on the evening of October 21, 1991. We 

are taking the view that all of us as citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan are in this boat together and we've got to work to 

solve our problems together. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1699 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Premier, you provide one standard for the 

unions. You let the unions provide information to the minister. 

He comes back and he says, this is a Bill that we're going to be 

perhaps introducing. 

 

Here we have it tabled in this Assembly today. And you, Mr. 

Premier, shouldn't you think of providing the same opportunity 

to farm leaders in the province of Saskatchewan? SARM wrote 

your Minister of Agriculture a letter in February  

_- two of them -- and physically stated the same in a meeting in 

the Agridome, that they did not want to have the GRIP 

legislation as that minister had presented it, presented in this 

Assembly. They wrote objections to it, Mr. Minister. 

 

Will you consult and have the minister go out and consult with 

the agriculture committee so that we can understand and the 

farmers can understand what you're putting into that Bill? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the hon. member 

from Morse constituency, I'm advised by the Minister of 

Agriculture that after the letter written by SARM -- as there 

were a number of letters written by various participants in the 

review process -- adjustments in the final report were made. 

And at the end of the day the final report of the advisory 

committee was signed by all of the representatives including 

the representative of SARM. Now that's the reality of the 

situation. 

 

We know that there are some concerns which perhaps SARM 

members might have and others might have, but there was full 

and wide consultation about the elements of the Bill. And there 

is no double standard. 

 

I would say to the hon. member opposite that what he does not 

do for the province of Saskatchewan -- any service -- is playing 

on the perceived divisions between the farming community and 

the labouring community. Your very essence of your questions 

implies that. 

 

And I say to the hon. member as sincerely as I can, I say to 

him: drop those divisions. We are working together to rebuild 

Saskatchewan together. That's what we're doing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Treaty Land Entitlements 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise today to report to 

this Assembly on the progress of negotiations with the federal 

government and Saskatchewan Indian bands towards the 

construction of a framework agreement on land entitlements. 

 

As you know, the previous agreement signed last September 

was rejected by the Indian bands of Saskatchewan. And we've 

been working diligently with the federal government to 

develop a new framework. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I must 

report that we've reached an impasse in those talks because of 

actions taken by the federal negotiators. 

 

We had reached a tentative agreement with the federal 

government just weeks ago. I had come to terms with my 

federal counterpart, Tom Siddon, on the terms of the 

agreement. We were moving forward in a positive manner. 

 

Now, however, the federal government wishes to renege on 

those agreements and, in a unilateral fashion, make changes 

which go much further than ever before in off-loading federal 

responsibilities for treaty entitlements to the provincial 

governments. 

 

Specifically, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is telling 

Saskatchewan that it must guarantee Canada $74 million; that 

Saskatchewan must trust the federal government to create new 

reserves in northern Saskatchewan; and that Saskatchewan 

must abandon the principle that it will contribute to this deal on 

the basis of savings realized from reduced provincial 

expenditures in the north. 

 

What is happening, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government 

wants to off-load much of the cost of treaty entitlements to the 

provinces and is hoping to strike a deal with Saskatchewan 

which it will be able to use as a precedent with other provinces. 

In fact, in a move which some might term blackmail, federal 

negotiators have told us by letter we either accept these new 

conditions or they will break off all talks. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for far too long, for far too long, provincial 

governments have sat back and allowed the federal government 

to off-load its responsibilities onto provincial treasuries and 

provincial taxpayers. We cannot allow this trend to continue. 

 

Here in Saskatchewan we have a government with the courage 

to say, enough to federal . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. I want to ask the Leader of the 

Opposition, please, give the minister the courtesy during a 

ministerial statement to at least make his statement. 

 

(1415) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I was saying, Mr. Speaker, that here in 

Saskatchewan we have a government with the courage to say: 

enough to federal off-loading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are not prepared to agree to the new terms put 

forward by the federal government. If they are going to persist 

in this matter, then we will, despite its flaws, be prepared to 

accept the terms of the agreement signed last September. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would first off like 

to thank the minister for sending his statement over during 

question period. I appreciate that, sir. 

 

Your statement before the House today is one that 



1700 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

certainly gives me a great deal of apprehension, as I'm sure it 

must the native community in our province. I met with Chief 

Crowe and some of his executive just a week and a half ago, I 

believe it was, and felt that everything was on track. 

 

I must say, Mr. Minister, that we want you to be diligent on 

behalf of Saskatchewan taxpayers, but I think what you have 

before you, and you must always remember, is that this is a 

historical agreement. 

 

The negotiations that put this agreement together took many 

years, and a lot of give and take on behalf of our native 

community to set a precedent that I think all Canadians could 

be proud of. And we support them entirely in their efforts on 

this. 

 

And I can only say to you sir, that I look forward to meeting 

with Chief Crowe on behalf of the official opposition and 

discussing this with him and also with yourself. The principles 

of the agreement signed last September were valid and just. 

And they are just for this province and they are just for the 

native community. And I think that's what we should work for. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife 

Habitat Protection Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat Protection Act be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act respecting Certain Services with 

respect to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill 

respecting Certain Services with respect to Co-operatives, 

Credit Unions and Names of Homes be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a 

Bill to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to repeal 

The Bulk Sales Act be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second 

time at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Superannuation 

(Supplementary Provisions) Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Non-controversial Bills. 

 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 

first reading of a Bill to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill 

ordered to be referred to the Standing Committee on 

Non-controversial Bills. 

 

BEFORE ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would 

ask unanimous leave of the House to introduce a motion that 

would extend the trial period for our new rules for a period of 

10 further sitting days. 

 

Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 61 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 61 -- An Act to 

amend The Residential Tenancies Act be now read a second 

time. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 63 -- An Act to 

amend The Ombudsman Act be now read a second time. 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 65 -- An Act to 

amend The Homesteads Act, 1989 be now  



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1701 

read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 67 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Ms. Simard that Bill No. 67 -- An Act to 

amend The Queen's Bench Act, repeal The Surrogate Court Act 

and make Consequential Amendments to Certain Other Acts 

resulting from the Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and 

the Court of Queen's Bench be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 62 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 62 -- An Act 

to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister responsible for SGI 

(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Chairman. I have with me Mr. Dave Hick who is the assistant 

VP (vice-president) of underwriting and licence services in 

motor vehicle division, and Dan Kuss who is our legislation 

advisor. They're with us today to advise and help us along in 

the committee. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a 

couple of questions for the minister and his people. I wonder if 

he would explain exactly what the purpose of this Bill is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'll do that for the member. I just 

have a brief outline in point form. 

 

First of all, a summary of the Bill in point form, the 

amendments legalize a present practice. The public will see not 

a lot of difference because basically it's putting in place 

legislation that resulted as changes your government made 

before the election. The amendments require regulation, and 

the regulation will set fees to pay for the increase costs if there 

are any. 

 

First of all, the background. The amendments to The 

Automobile Accident Insurance Act are necessary to provide 

for the payment of vehicles, registration fees, and basic 

insurance premiums on instalment. And the 

member will know that this plan has been in place for some 

time and this will basically put in legislation what we have 

been doing since we were elected and was being done before 

that time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, the instalment part of the 

payments for your licences, etc., is that done on two 

instalments per year, or can you have more than that? 

 

(1430) 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- It's two at this time, although we're 

looking at options that may make it possible for individual 

vehicle owners to do it more than twice year. But at the present 

time, you're right, it's twice a year. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If a person who is paying for his licence 

through the instalment plan misses a payment, what happens? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The payment schedule, as you 

mention, is once every six months, and if you miss paying for 

your licence, it's the same as if you missed it once a year. 

 

You have two deadlines now. If you miss it, you are then 

without coverage. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If you missed the payment and then pay 

it a day later or some period of time later, is there a penalty to 

pay for that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will want to know that 

the previous government had implemented a $20 fee. We 

withdrew that extra $20 about a month ago because it was 

causing some problem for those people who were in fact 

having to pay it. 

 

So there is no penalty if you're late a day. But I mean, the 

penalty of course is that if you don't have insurance coverage 

and the vehicle is involved, you have a major penalty. So while 

I say there's no direct penalty for being late, obviously you've 

got a problem because you lack insurance during that period 

until your payment is made. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- If you have an accident then you do 

indeed have a severe penalty to pay, but in most cases someone 

who missed a payment would not necessarily be involved in an 

accident during that period of time. 

 

But the $20 fee would be a penalty for them. I mean, you say 

you took it off, the $20 penalty fee, about a month ago. What 

about those people who prior to that may have missed their 

payments -- have you considered anything retroactive for them 

since we're into some retroactivity? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- This is not unlike the PST 

(provincial sales tax) that the previous government had applied 

on the taxpayers of the province. When we cancelled it, we 

didn't pay back the taxes that you had collected, and this is very 

similar to that. We have deleted the penalty, but we don't intend 

to pay back the penalties that your Act or regulations had put in 

place. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm glad that you 

have taken this fee off because I had received some 



1702 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

complaints about that fact where a person involved with the 

instalment payments, his payment came due on Sunday. 

Obviously he can't go to an SGI office to pay it, and he was 

forced to pay a penalty when he went on Monday. So I'm glad 

to see that it has been taken off. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have no further questions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, I have been asked about this in 

a different sense. In agriculture across the province, there are a 

lot of people who would prefer to license their vehicle on a 

six-month basis and then withdraw it. Is there a penalty for the 

individual who withdraws or turns his licence back in after six 

months? And wouldn't it be consistent if you allowed him that 

same opportunity to, without penalty, take his licence back? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The officials indicate to me, for the 

member from Morse, that at the present time, if you were to 

buy your licence for a year, you could after six months take 

your licence back in and go through the process of getting a 

refund. 

 

We are at the present time looking at a six-month licence or a 

seasonal licence, but there are some problems with this in a 

sense that the rate for a six-month licence would be a bit 

higher, I think, because of the extra cost and extra implications, 

than it would be just taking a year and dividing it in half, so to 

speak. 

 

But we are looking at that because we also have had obviously 

a number of questions about it. We're going to be looking at it. 

I'm not sure where that will take us. I know the previous 

government had looked at it, and this is something that has 

been under review for some time. But I agree with the member 

that there are those who . . . for example grain trucks that are 

used at harvest time and some summer vehicles, I suppose, on 

some farms, the use of a small Jeep-type vehicle used in the 

summer-time, not in the winter-time. So I understand the issue. 

Hopefully we'll be able to resolve that. But I don't want to be 

more definitive than that at this point. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, my question comes 

from the fact that if you defer paying, after six months you will 

accomplish the same thing. And I wonder if there's a problem 

that will arise when that individual says, I'm not going to pay 

the additional six months. What's going to happen? Is he going 

to have that payment tagged on for the next time he tries to get 

a licence for that vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The way it's set up right now, as I 

understand it, that let's say you're in the program, you buy a 

licence and you go on to the plan where you pay it twice a year 

or every six months, and then you decide to bring your licence 

back in after the first six months. There would be no penalty 

because the penalty for that individual, as I mentioned earlier, 

has been cancelled. 

 

But then the next year you came to license you would not be 

eligible to go back into the plan of purchasing it once every six 

months. So there's no penalty. I guess the penalty would be in 

the fact that you wouldn't be allowed back into the plan the 

subsequent year. That's under the present regulations. 

Mr. Martens: -- Let's say the individual would just transfer 

ownership. Is the penalty on the part of the vehicle or the part 

of the person who purchases the licence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well what would happen in the 

case, the individual selling the vehicle would obviously, if the 

year wasn't complete, take their licence back in and get that 

portion being refunded for their licence. The new person 

buying would buy a new licence. So it would either be for 

under the program for six months or for a full year. 

 

So if you get my point, the previous owner, so to speak, would 

get his licence, take it back in and get a refund, if there was a 

refund applying to it. The new owner would simply, under the 

plan of buying a partial-year licence, pay for six months or they 

would pay for a year. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'll rephrase my question. If the individual 

would decide to take his vehicle and have a six-month payment 

schedule, and at the conclusion of that would say, okay . . . 

Where does the penalty occur? Is it occur against the vehicle or 

does it occur against the individual in relation to that? So that 

at some point in time that penalty will not be recoverable if it's 

sold to or transferred to another individual. Then where does 

the penalty come in for the next time he purchases his licence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- As I understand it, there's a little bit 

of confusion here. But let me use the example of an individual, 

let's say, my daughter had a vehicle and was in the six-month 

plan, and after six months sold the vehicle and then someone 

else bought that vehicle. They would be eligible to buy under 

the split program for six months. My daughter or your son 

could then go and buy a new vehicle and be part of the plan as 

well. So in that sense there's no penalty. 

 

Now I'm not sure that I'm answering your question, but I think 

I am, in the sense that there is no penalty. If you were to use up 

the first six months, sell the vehicle, go buy another one, and 

want to insure it and use the program, you could in fact do that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I guess, Mr. Minister, the problem comes in 

when you transfer that licence. When you've got to give that 

licence back, then there will be a penalty placed on the 

individual for . . . he doesn't have any money coming back 

because he's used up his six months. He doesn't have any 

money coming back because he didn't pay that. And he gives 

that licence plate back, is there a penalty in relation to giving 

that up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No, there is no penalty, and they 

would also be eligible to go into the program again on a new 

vehicle. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1703 

like to thank the member's officials for coming in today and 

providing us with the answers. Thank you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I'd like to thank the officials as well 

and the opposition members. This is an area where we want to 

keep you informed so the questions were well put. 

 

(1445) 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 

and to make consequential amendments to certain other 

Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The officials 

with me this afternoon are Bruce Wilson, who's sitting to my 

left, and Bruce is the executive director for the petroleum and 

natural gas division; and Mr. Les Beck -- he's the manager of . . 

. executive director, I'm sorry, of geology and mines division; 

and Mr. Hal Sanders who is manager of revenue and 

operations. 

 

I would like to make a statement before we get into the 

questions. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I wish to respond to 

several issues and criticisms raised during second reading on 

the debate on Bill 10 -- an Act to amend the Crown Minerals 

Act. 

 

The opposition has attempted to characterize this Bill as a 

devious and sinister mechanism for destroying the oil, gas, and 

mining industries in the province. They have read every 

provision of the Act in the worst possible light. 

 

Why have they done this? The simple answer is, they're being 

irresponsible. They're using their tired and exaggerated 

political rhetoric in an attempt to create fear and suspicion 

about our government's policies regarding the gas, oil, and 

mining industries. 

 

Many of the amendments proposed in Bill 10 are required to 

clarify and clean up clauses that were in the original Bill of 

1985 -- a Bill that was prepared by the government of the 

members opposite. 

 

Perhaps navely, I had expected a more reasoned debate on this 

Bill from the members opposite. They predicted all sorts of dire 

consequences for the resource sector prior to the introduction 

of the budget on May 7. Having failed to predict the end of the 

world on May 7, they're now trying to look for other doomsday 

clues in our legislative agenda. 

 

I would suggest, Mr. Chairman, that the very negative attitude 

displayed by the members opposite is one of the reasons why 

their form of government was rejected by the voters in the 

province last October. 
 

We have been criticized, Mr. Chairman, for not having 

adequately consulted with the industry in this Bill. While 

industry was not provided with the specific wording of the 

proposed amendments prior to the first reading of this Bill in 

the House on May 14, we did inform industry in general terms 

of the major policy items to be included in the legislation. 

 

My department held meetings with the major oil and gas and 

mining associations in early April. Although the meetings were 

characterized as pre-budget consultations, we did provide an 

overview of the major amendments to The Crown Minerals 

Act. 

 

Since first reading we have distributed copies of the Bill to the 

industry associations. And we have also held meetings with 

most of them to explain the legislative provisions in greater 

detail. Much has been said to date about the intent of various 

provisions of this Bill. Mr. Chairman, at this time I would like 

to clarify the true meaning and intent of various provisions 

contained in this Bill. 

 

Concerns have been raised about the power of the minister to 

cancel Crown dispositions for environmental protection 

purposes. The members opposite have suggested that power 

could be used indiscriminately. Clearly our intent is to use that 

power very carefully and very judiciously. We expect the 

power to be used very rarely and only when it can be proven 

that there is no obvious way of developing the Crown-owned 

oil, gas, or mineral rights without causing irreparable 

environmental harm or damage. I can assure you, we would not 

consider cancelling a disposition if there was any reasonable 

potential for safe and responsible development of the minerals 

in the future. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I remind the members opposite that a thorough 

environmental review process such as the one contemplated 

under The Environmental Assessment Act would have to be 

undertaken prior to any cancellation directive being given. Any 

recommendations to cancel a disposition would have to be 

reviewed by cabinet and agreed upon after careful scrutiny. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Chairman, the requirements to compensate 

owners for the cancellation of their mineral rights is one of the 

practical checks and balances built into the legislative 

provision. Why would the province want to frivolously cancel 

a disposition if there were significant financial costs to the 

government associated with it? 

 

I would also like to point out the fact that similar provisions to 

cancel Crown dispositions exist in Alberta's legislation. 

Arguably their provisions provides much less comfort to 

disposition holders as the minister alone is responsible for 

making the determination to cancel a disposition. There is no 

requirement for a review process and no opportunity for other 

cabinet ministers to consider the action. 

 

While I believe our intent is clear, I am recommending a House 

amendment which would require consent by the disposition 

holder prior to any disposition cancellation for environmental 

reasons. This will address a concern expressed by the mining 

industry pertaining to the security of tenure. The amendment 

will also offer the 



1704 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

Crown further protection against the possible legal action of 

any cancellation . . . will be the consent of the disposition 

holder. 

 

The power to terminate oil and gas rights below the base of the 

deepest productive zone in a Crown petroleum and natural gas 

lease has also been questioned by members opposite, Mr. 

Chairman. The intent of the provision is obvious, Mr. 

Chairman. A basic tenet of all land-tenure systems is, use it or 

lose it. That is precisely what we are proposing with respect to 

the deeper oil and gas rights. 

 

If deeper oil and gas rights have not been proven productive 

after the later of five years from the introduction of this 

provision or the expiry of the primary term of the lease, those 

rights will revert to the Crown. It will allow those interested in 

deep exploration to have greater access to those rights, and at 

the same time, the Crown will benefit from increased bonus bid 

revenues. 

 

Mr. Chairman, similar deep rights reversion policies were 

introduced in Alberta some 15 years ago. Generally speaking, it 

has proven successful for both government and industry. I 

would also like to point out, many of the administrative details 

will be left to regulations. We intend to consult fully with the 

industry in the development of these regulations. One of the 

regulation-making powers being proposed under the Bill would 

allow a minimum price or fair market price to be established 

for the purpose of calculating royalties payable. 

 

Again, Mr. Chairman, I wish to assure the Assembly this is a 

power which would be used very judiciously. We intend to use 

the minimum price provision primarily to address those 

situations where natural-gas producers choose to sell their gas 

at deeply discounted prices. While producers may sell their gas 

at any price they consider reasonable, we as a government are 

not prepared to see the Crown's share sold at fire-sale prices. 

 

The concept of a minimum price for natural gas is not new or 

foreign. Alberta has maintained a minimum gas price provision 

for royalty purposes for several years. That minimum price is 

defined as 80 per cent of the Alberta average market price. The 

same 80 per cent rule was adopted in British Columbia more 

recently. With the enabling legislation, we also intend to 

introduce regulations establishing a minimum gas price for 

royalty purposes of 80 per cent of our average market price. 

 

Some may say that the minimum-price provisions could be 

used to extract higher royalty revenues. Obviously if that was 

the government's intention, it would simply impose higher 

royalty rates. 

 

Another spectre raised by the members opposite, Mr. 

Chairman, is the power to amend royalty regulations 

retroactively up to two years. Again the suggestion is made that 

our government somehow has some devious plan in mind to 

retroactively increase all royalties and literally put the entire 

resource sector out of business in this province. 

 

Why would we or any other government contemplate such a 

ridiculous action? As most people are aware, the 

Act has contained a one-year retroactive regulation-making 

power for some time. Has this power been abused? I would 

suggest it has not. The reason why the two-year retroactive 

provision has been proposed, Mr. Chairman, relates to the 

complexity of certain royalty determinations and the timing for 

a submission of those royalty returns. 

 

The royalties for certain minerals are determined by means of 

an annual return or calculation. These calendar years return are 

to be submitted by the end of March of the following royalty 

year. Analysis of the returns may indicate that certain complex 

royalty provisions have been interpreted in such a way that an 

unintended royalty break or burden could result. Similarly, 

market conditions or methods of carrying on business could 

change dramatically resulting in unintended hardship to 

industry. 

 

In either case, the ability to amend the royalty provisions 

retroactively up to two years could prevent an unintended 

benefit or hardship from occurring. A similar two-year 

retroactive provision has been contained in The Mineral 

Taxation Act for an extended period of time. That provision 

was considered necessary because of the complex nature of 

mineral taxation and to allow time for industry consultations 

prior to introducing changes to regulations. 

 

Clearly, the intent of the two-year retroactive provision was not 

to retroactively apply royalty increases but rather to provide a 

mechanism to correct deficiencies in the regulations, ensuring 

their application is consistent with their intent. 

 

However, considering the concerns that have been registered 

with the government in regard to this particular provision, I am 

recommending a House amendment that would simply retain 

the current provisions, allowing for a one-year of retroactivity 

in the making of regulations. 

 

We were also accused of changing the rules retroactively back 

to 1974. While the Bill does include provisions which are 

retroactive to 1974, they are not designed to change the rules. 

Our purpose in amending those provisions back to 1974 is not 

to change the rules but rather to make the language in the Act 

consistent with the original intent and practice accepted over 

the past 18 years. 

 

Again, based on discussions with industry, I am recommending 

certain House amendments be adopted to address concerns 

related to various issues surrounding Crown acquired lands. 

 

Perhaps the most surprising criticism of the Bill relates to the 

artificial reduction of royalty provisions contained in this Bill. 

The comment is made that it gives the minister too much 

power. Is it unreasonable for the minister to intervene in some 

fashion if it can be shown that someone is deliberately and 

blatantly trying to artificially reduce or avoid the payment of 

royalties? Those who honestly and responsibly undertake their 

royalty obligations have nothing to fear by this provision. 

 

I would also point out, Mr. Chairman, that this provision 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1705 

contains standard language used in most royalty and taxation 

legislation. It is contained in The Freehold Oil and Gas 

Production Tax Act, an Act that the former government 

introduced in 1983. It is also contained in The Corporation 

Capital Tax Act. I can give other examples used in royalty 

taxation legislation in British Columbia, Alberta, and 

Manitoba. Not surprisingly, it can also be found in the federal 

Income Tax Act. 

 

(1500) 

 

I trust these remarks will put to rest any doubts or concerns 

regarding the intent of this Bill or our willingness to consult 

with the industry. Obviously the oil, gas, and mining industries 

are very important to the Saskatchewan economy. That is why 

I'm recommending certain House amendments at this time. 

 

Our government is committed to working co-operatively with 

industry to ensure that all parties can benefit from the 

continued development of our valuable non-renewable 

resources. That is a message I have delivered countless times in 

meetings and discussions with industry representatives since 

last October. Our Premier and other members of cabinet have 

echoed a similar vision for resource development in this 

province. The May 7 budget is proof of our commitment to that 

vision and approach. 

 

Mr. Chairman, if the members opposite disapprove of 

protecting the environment, if they disapprove of expediting 

the Indian land claims process, developing deeper oil and gas 

reserves to benefit the industry and the people of 

Saskatchewan, if they disapprove of collecting rents, royalties, 

and taxes for the benefit of the owners of our natural resources 

-- that is the people of Saskatchewan -- if they disapprove of 

limiting the Crown's liability, and finally, if they disapprove of 

preventing tax and royalty avoidance, then Bill 10 may be a 

bad piece of legislation. On the contrary, if they approve of 

those methods, then it is good legislation. 

 

Members on this side of the House agree that these measures 

are necessary, and members of the opposition I hope will take a 

hard look at this and agree that these measures are necessary in 

order to continue to have oil and gas and mining development 

in this province. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

certainly am pleased to hear some of the remarks you made just 

now. I would have to ask you, sir, in your opening remarks you 

laid it on an little heavy I would say. 

 

Now if there was nothing wrong with the initial draft and we 

were being political when we brought the concerns that we 

were hearing from the industry, then why did we make these 

changes? And before you misinterpret what I'm saying, sir, I'm 

glad you made them. I am glad that you did listen to what was 

being said because you did, in all fairness to you and your staff, 

addressed three of the major problems we had with the Bill. 

 

So I would like to ask you a few questions. I believe, sir, that 

because of the changes you have made, we should be 

able to proceed through this quite expeditiously. 

 

I have a few questions. I would like to ask you what the 

consultation process was, particularly before you drafted the 

Bill. Who did you consult with, what companies -- by name, 

please -- and could you do that . . . those people you consulted 

with before you presented the Bill to the House? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, prior to the time that the 

Bill was introduced in the House we had consultations, not on 

the basis of delivering the Bill to them -- we didn't have the Bill 

drafted -- but we had consultations with the Canadian 

Petroleum Association; IPAC, the Independent Petroleum 

Association of Canada; and SEPAC (Small Explorers and 

Producers Association of Canada), the small explorers 

petroleum association. I always have trouble with that one. 

Those are the three organizations we consulted with. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 

information. I believe you gave me . . . Could you, Mr. 

Minister, give me the level that you consulted with? The level 

in each of those companies. The president or vice-chairman or 

that sort of thing. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure that the 

president was present at all these, but in most cases it was their 

executive director and some of their board members. I cannot 

verify that the present president was present at all of these. I 

failed to give you one other one. We also consulted with the 

Saskatchewan Mining Association. But I'm not sure that the 

president was present at all of them, but the executive directors 

were and board members. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, that's 

quite fair. If you do feel that at a later date that you could get 

that information to me, I'd appreciate it although I suggest that 

it's not all that serious. I just would like to confirm the level 

that you had . . . consultations that you had. 

 

Could you now then, sir, give me a list of those people that you 

consulted with after the Bill was presented and by your 

estimation that we were a little unfair to you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I might want to make sure 

the member opposite understands that we did not consult by 

letter. We consulted at a meeting with these people. So I have 

no letter to table that we had consultations with them. We were 

at a meeting. 

 

Since the Bill was introduced, you asked who we have 

consulted with, and I can give you the list here. On May 25, we 

consulted with IPAC; that's the Saskatchewan committee of 

IPAC. On May 27, with the Saskatchewan Mining Association, 

where I was present and Justice officials were present to 

explain different aspects of the Bill. 

 

On June 3, we had a meeting with CPA (Canadian Petroleum 

Association), SEPAC, and again Energy and Mines officials 

and the Justice Department. Also at the same day, on June 3, 

we met again with the SMA, the Saskatchewan Mining 

Association. On June 10, I had a 



1706 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

meeting with IPAC and departmental officials to discuss 

various issues relating to Bill 10. On June 16, the CPA 

Saskatchewan committee met with department officials to 

discuss Bill 10. On June 24, Home Oil and Scurry-Rainbow -- 

as they were called at one time -- representatives met with 

Energy and Mines and Justice officials again to discuss Bill 10. 

And on July 8, which is the most recent one we've had, 

Cameco oil and gas met with Energy and Mines and Justice 

officials to discuss elements of Bill 10. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate your 

help. Mr. Minister, I want to say a few things relating back to 

your opening statements. Mr. Minister, maybe we can hope 

that you learned something. 

 

When we in this House ask you some questions about your Bill 

. . . and I want to be fair with you on this, because you heard in 

question period where we suggested that there were some draft 

Bills going out and there's some draft Bills that we can't get to 

see and there's no consultation in some cases. I believe, sir, 

because you have consulted with these people, you have saw fit 

to bring in some changes. And we commend you for that. 

 

So I'm going back to what you said at the start. I hope that you 

learned, sir. You and I have been around a few years, and I 

think that as we go through life we find that communication 

helps a lot. And as I said in my opening remarks, you have -- 

you and your staff -- have relieved three, at least three, of the 

major concerns we had there. So I commend you for that. 

 

I'm pleased that you found that you could go back and consult 

with people and come back after listening to them because they 

. . . the point that was brought up to you, sir, was also brought 

up to us. There was some frustration and there was some 

uneasiness out there and I make no apology for bringing it to 

your attention here in the House. I think that's my job. 

 

And I can say to you with respect that some of that 

confrontation might not have happened had you done your 

consultation firstly. You wouldn't have the problems that we 

felt that you had run into. And it becomes . . . it's just having 

the respect for the people that you're dealing with. 

 

You mention also that the oil industry's a very major industry 

in Saskatchewan, and I happen to know that. I made my living 

for 30 years in that area and I know it is a very important, and 

that's why I felt that they should be brought into the 

consultative process. Those people are . . . they know their 

business and surely they would try to be helpful because, as 

you said, sir, why would you try to chase the business out of 

the province? Why would they want you to? 

 

If we had done that, in all probability you wouldn't have been 

dealing with the House amendments that you brought in. That 

would have probably been all done and you and I wouldn't 

have had any confrontation, as you put it. Because the feedback 

we were getting was that they were not totally in agreement 

with the Bill as you presented it. 

And I want to say one more thing, in fairness to you. The 

two-year retroactivity gave some concern, and I think you 

know now why. But after looking at the Bill and talking to 

folks and trying to understand why your government would do 

that, I will give you this. Because of the size of the industry and 

because of the complexity of the industry, maybe one year is 

not any more than enough for your people to get a hold of a 

situation where maybe one company or some small company is 

not being straightforward. And I agree with you that those 

things have to be caught. 

 

And I am particularly pleased that you kept the one year in 

because there was some anxiety out there. If you remember, sir, 

I quoted to you out of the Leader-Post, I believe it was, an 

article that was written by Gordon Brock, and he was talking 

about a John MacDonald who said he was not very happy 

because he hadn't been consulted. 

 

So having said that, sir, I would like to just have you clarify a 

couple of places in the Bill for me. If you go to 23.02 on page 7 

down to (5), could you outline to me in, can I say in layman's 

language, what does that actually mean? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could have 

the member give us that section again, please? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It's on page 7 and 

it's under the heading of production year, section 23.01. It goes 

from subsection (2) down to (5)(b). 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe I have the 

answer here for the hon. member. I thank him for the fact that 

he and I can still learn something in this world even despite our 

advanced years and senior status that we have in this 

legislature. So I'm sure I have learned something and I trust 

that the hon. member also learns some things when I give my 

answers here. 

 

The section you're referring to goes back to the Bill 42; 1974 I 

believe was the year of the Bill. And I don't want to go into the 

details of the Bill but there were stipulations in that Bill which 

asked the Crown or forced the Crown to make payments to the 

disposition holders that lost their freehold mineral rights. That's 

sort of the essence of the Bill. And there was a formula 

established in the Act that was to be followed. 

 

In 1990 an amendment was made to this Bill which limited the 

Crown to $50,000 to each disposition holder. That was passed 

in 1990. You probably recall that $50,000 was the limit that 

any single disposition holder could receive from the Crown. 

What was not done in 1990 and that we're doing in this section 

is that there was no limit set on the amount of money that a 

third party could ask from the disposition holder. There was no 

limit set on that. 

 

What this section does is sets a limit of $10,000 that the 

original disposition holder 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1707 

has to pay to a third party. That's the essence of it. So that it 

prevents a third party from extracting more from the original 

disposition holder than he can get from the Crown. 

 

I trust that that's the explanation you're looking for. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Humboldt on his feet? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- With leave, Mr. Chairman, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Upshall: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to introduce 

to the Assembly Francis and Rita Kunz from Humboldt. 

Francis is competing in the Canadian Masters' Summer Sport 

Festival in the weight-lifting category. I'd like all members to 

wish him good luck this evening and to welcome them to the 

Assembly. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 10 (continued) 
 

Clause 1 (continued) 
 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 

thank you for that answer because in my request I asked you to 

explain it in simple terms because I thought I had it in my mind 

but I wanted clarification. 
 

What I get from you, sir, is that the $50,000 is the total liability 

to the government, and the second $10,000 liability would 

come out of the $50,000 that the first incumbent had. I thank 

you for that, sir. 
 

I think my colleague has a question so I'll wait for . . . 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I get up at 

this time because I want to deal with the same section as my 

colleague was asking about. On section 23.01(4) it talks of 

encumbrance holder. I wonder if you'd mind identifying who 

those encumbrance holders are, if it's not an extensive list. I 

don't know if it is or not. 
 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't give an extensive 

list for the very simple reason that the department doesn't even 

know the extensive list. But let me give you a couple of names 

and then I'll explain how these people become third party to 

this . . . become encumbrance holders. One of the encumbrance 

holders that we're aware of is Canco Oil and Gas. It's one of 

them. Harvard International is another one that we are aware 

of. But in fact the encumbrance holder is anybody whose name 

appeared on the title in 1974 when those freehold lands were 

expropriated. 
 

So we can't give you a list. In fact we're not even aware of a lot 

of them. And I'm not sure even that a lot of the encumbrance 

holders are aware that their name appears on some of these 

titles. But there's probably a fairly extensive list if we were 

going to go through all those titles that were expropriated in 

1974. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Would it be possible for the minister to 

give us a list of those encumbrance holders who were affected 

by the 1990 legislation then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, they are the same people. 

And again I don't have the list and I'm not sure that we can 

even dig up the list without having to go back to the original 

titles that existed in 1974, and then search all those titles and 

get those names. I've given you the two that we're aware. There 

may be some others that we can think of as time goes on, and if 

we do I'll give them to you. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- I wonder if the minister would then give 

us a list of those companies that were affected by the 1990 

legislation -- companies, not the encumbrance holders. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I have a list here -- it's not 

too long so I'll read it to you -- of people who had their land 

expropriated in 1974. These would be the freehold holders. 

 

There's Sask Oil & Gas, Canadian National Railway, 

PanCanadian -- am I going too fast? -- Muskateer Energy, 

National Trust, Vanguard Petroleum, Sceptre Resources, 

Dome. 

 

There's a company called Minerals Limited; Amax petroleum, 

Scurry-Rainbow, Petro-Canada, Canada Northwest Land, 

North American Royalty, Montreal Trust, Stanley H. Singer, 

Inc., and Garfield & Associates. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 

I'd like to begin by stating that I am very pleased that changes 

were made to clause 6. All of my questions pertain to clause 

14. I see that in that clause this will add a completely new 

section to The Crown Minerals Act. Given that this clause is 

aimed to prevent an abuse which is termed artificial reduction 

of royalty, can you tell this House how often this abuse is being 

committed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to thank the 

member for her question. We have no one that we have on our 

list right now that has abused that. This clause is intended to be 

a preventative clause. With the simple fact that the clause is 

there would prevent anybody from even contemplating the idea 

of having an artificial royalty reduction. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess that's 

the reason why I'm asking the question. My next question . . . 

I'm going to pose my next question and then I'm going to show 

you why it is I needed to ask the first one. Do the number of 

abuses justify introducing such an arbitrary section which is 

going to allow you to set royalty rates if, in your opinion, this 

abuse is being undertaken? And if you have no evidence, Mr. 

Minister, that this has ever happened, why would you bring this 

in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, one of the reasons why we 

have this is that, this section here, is it was recommended by 

the Justice department that we put it in to protect ourselves in 

the event that someone may want to abuse the royalty structure 

or artificially set royalties. It's not intended to . . . Like I said, 

we haven't prosecuted 



1708 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

anybody. We have no evidence of anybody doing this. But 

Justice suggested that this be in there for our protection. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would you tell 

us what guidelines will shape your opinion in deciding whether 

an abuse is being committed? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have a list of 

guidelines, obviously, for how we plan to use that. But it is 

intended to cover us for anyone who may enter into a 

buy-and-sell transaction of various petroleum products or gas 

products or mineral products for the purpose of reducing the 

price for royalty reasons, not for his own purpose. He may 

choose to buy and sell so that the benefits accrue to the 

individual, but may do this in such a way that the price that was 

indicated to the department is less than what the standard price 

for that product may be. 

 

As I said before, it is a protective clause here to keep someone 

from playing games basically with the royalty structure. And if 

they do, we can deal with them very quickly without having to 

go through the courts. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I 

guess one of the things that I'm wondering about here is 

whether you had thought of placing your guidelines within the 

Bill itself, because what I'm hearing you say, is that first of all, 

no one has done anything like this. And I very much agree. I 

concur that it's important and in fact I stated it to the Minister 

of Agriculture yesterday in the Committee of the Whole that 

it's important to be anticipatory rather than simply reactionary, 

so this is not something with which I have grave concern. 

 

I do have concern, however, if first of all, you don't have any 

evidence to justify doing this, and secondly, if your argument is 

such that you're choosing to do this to prevent it, that you don't 

have any guidelines that you're going to use in order to help 

you determine when something has happened, when it hasn't 

happened, and that this will not be outlined anywhere. 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the question, 

maybe I wasn't very clear on the outset -- I used a buy and sell 

arrangement. Any kind of transaction that would be perceived 

as being a sham transaction could be considered under this 

section. 

 

We would not even consider invoking this section without 

consultation with the Justice department to make sure that we 

had a case before we would invoke any of these. I don't quite 

understand the member's concern about guidelines. I have some 

concern that if I put the guidelines down, that means that I've 

put maybe too narrow parameters on it, or I may have put too 

broad parameters on it. 

 

What we're simply saying is that if there is a transaction that 

takes place out in the industry that is considered to be unfair, or 

less than fair, or less than honest, then we would consult with 

Justice and then we would invoke this section after we had 

consulted with Justice. 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister. How can you 

assure us in this House that no innocent parties are going to be 

affected by your attempts to prevent artificial royalty 

write-downs, when there are no guidelines embodied within 

this clause that restrict how you or your successors are able to 

formulate opinion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to that question, 

I suppose that the assurance I can give you is that we as a 

government, and I as a minister, are not immune from legal 

action if we take action that is completely contrary to what the 

intent of the Act is. And I suppose the only assurance that I can 

give you is that if we do something wrong the courts will deal 

with us in an appropriate manner. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I think we'll move on to another part of 

this. Section 27.1(2) -- can you tell this House what guidelines 

you'll use in conjunction . . . actually in connection with this 

proposed section when there are no guidelines that state how 

you're allowed to estimate the, and I quote: ". . . amount of 

royalty that would have been payable had the . . . (abuse) . . . 

not occurred."? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, if there was considered to 

be a sham transaction, what we would do in order to estimate 

the proper royalty, we would simply go back to that period of 

time when the transaction occurred, take a look at the oil and 

gas prices, if we're using oil and gas -- it could be minerals; it 

could be anything -- we would take a look at the current prices 

of the day and of similar quality, similar kind of things that 

were going on, and we would use that as our fair market price 

for the royalty purposes. We would simply take a look at what 

was transpiring during the same time period that the sham 

transaction was taking place. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you. Mr. Minister, I have but one 

more question, and I'm wondering if you would outline 

guidelines in such a way that you'd be willing to include some 

of them in . . . like alongside the clauses. I think it's important 

that everyone knows the rules and that they know how to play 

this fairly before the game starts. And I think that the 

arbitrariness is something that can cause some real problems. 

So I am wondering if you would be willing to contemplate 

adding them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member 

for that concern and that question, and I can understand the 

concern and I appreciate the fact that you've raised that here. 

And I and people in our department would be certainly willing 

to take a look at that and consider putting some guidelines in 

here. We obviously haven't given too much thought to the 

specific guidelines and certainly didn't intend to write them into 

the Act. But we will give your suggestions consideration. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the 

minister's statement he stated that the opposition was pointing 

out the worst-case scenarios in relation to his Bill. And he 

seemed surprised or put out that we would do such a thing. 

 

Mr. Minister, I think it's our duty to point out those kind of 

possibilities. As the minister, you're going to sugar-coat 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1709 

your Bill to give the best possible light to it. And it's our duty 

to scrape below that sugar-coating to find out whether the 

centre is actually sound or whether it's rotten. And that's why 

we look at the worst possible scenarios to see what the major 

impact is going to be in relationship to any Bill that's presented 

here. 

 

You've talked about going to 80 per cent of the market price in 

deciding your royalty structures. In some instances you may be 

harming certain companies by using 80 per cent of the market 

price to decide a royalty. 

 

In a lot of cases, particularly in the gas industry, the price is set 

over a very long-term contract. I know of some instances, and 

not that many years ago, when those contracts changed, that the 

companies were getting 9 cents for a thousand cubic feet of 

gas. That's a very low price. And yet when those contracts ran 

out after about 30 years, those prices jumped up to 2 and $3. 

 

So if you were to charge at an 80 per cent level, and that was 

the market value at that time -- 2 to $3 -- so say $1.60 is based 

on your royalty structure, you're going to be charging a royalty 

on a lot more than what the company's getting for their gas. 

 

Have you considered any type of grandfathering in this 

legislation for contracts that are already in place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member's 

question, the 9 cents per mcf (million cubic feet) is probably an 

example of something that you said you had not done, and 

that's giving the worst-case scenario again in this case. I realize 

that the prices fluctuate and that they will always fluctuate. 

 

What the Act says, what the Act does, it gives authority to set a 

minimum price. The way the minimum price will be 

determined will come in the regulations. It's not going to be in 

the Act. 

 

But how the minimum price is going to be determined is going 

to be in regulations. All we're doing here is providing the 

authority to do that. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well that's my concern, Minister. We're 

giving you the authority to set a minimum price and you may 

set that minimum price at $1.60 a thousand cubic feet. Whereas 

in the case of a long-term contract -- and the one I mentioned, 

that was actually the price that those producers were receiving 

for that gas in the gas conservation area in south-eastern 

Saskatchewan -- that contract ran out about six or seven years 

ago, maybe a little longer, but they had had that contract in 

place for 30 years at 9 cents. 

 

So there may be some contracts out there, while they may not 

be 9 cents, they may be 20 cents. So are you giving any 

consideration to those kind of long-term contracts when you set 

that minimum price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to draw 

to the member's attention that the 9 cent mcf gas that he's 

referring to in south-east Saskatchewan doesn't have a royalty 

attached to it so it wouldn't even come under this particular 

Bill. There's no royalty to that gas. I 

believe it comes from the associated gas that you're talking 

about. That wouldn't even come under this particular 

jurisdiction because it is a different form of gas than we're 

thinking of. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well there must be other producers 

around the province though who have gas contracts who may 

not be in the south-east but still gas coming from . . . What I 

was referring to was the gas conservation area. But there are 

gas wells in the area where they have had some long-term 

contracts. And if the contract is for a much lower price than 

what you're going to set your minimum at, they're going to be 

harmed. Are you giving some consideration for the fact that 

they do have a long-term contract in place at a low price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is that, as I said earlier, these details will be looked 

after in the regulations. And before we write the regulations we 

will be consulting with the industry on these regulations and 

we'll be passing out these regulations to them prior to passing 

them into law. And if there are extreme cases as you suggest, 

and there may be some extreme cases like that, we will cover 

those in the regulations. It would be virtually impossible to 

cover all these different scenarios in the Act. So they'll be 

covered under the regulations. 

 

And I can assure the hon. member that we will not go after 

somebody who's getting 9 cents an mcf for his gas and deem 

the price at $1.60 or $1.20 or whatever it happens to be. I think 

the assurance that I've given you is that we're looking at 80 per 

cent of the average. And if there are a lot of producers selling 

gas very cheaply, that'll obviously bring the average down. 

 

So we're not interested here in penalizing someone who is on a 

long-term contract and obviously could not afford to pay 

royalties that were 10 times as high as what he was getting for 

his gas. So the regulations will look after this. And we will be 

consulting with the industry. And if we have cases like that, 

we'll certainly deal with them. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That's 

what I was after, was some sort of assurance that you would 

indeed look at those kind of situations. 

 

You talked earlier about things . . . the power being given to 

the minister in Alberta to make certain decisions. The industry 

feels more comfortable, Mr. Minister, in allowing that minister 

some of those powers than the industry feels with allowing 

yourself and your government. Because up until this point, 

your government -- not the government for the last nine 

months, but the previous embodiment of the NDP government 

-- they did not trust, and they're still leery of that. 

 

And it's incumbent on you, I suggest, to build that trust up by 

giving those kinds of considerations for the gas industry that I 

was just talking about. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to respond to 

that. I thank the member for the confidence he's placed in the 

present government and the present 



1710 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

minister. And I can assure you that our relationships with the 

industry to date have been excellent, at least from our 

perspective. And I think if the members would consult with the 

industry and talk to the industry people, I think you will find 

that we have been fair with them, that we have been true to our 

word, and we will continue to do exactly that with the people in 

the industry. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can assure you, 

Mr. Minister, that we do that on a very regular basis. 

 

I've got a few questions arising out of comments that you made 

a little bit earlier, and they're to do with the minimum price 

requirements. Alberta, as you mentioned, had a minimum price 

and it kept them out of the core market in Ontario for a long 

time, which Saskatchewan producers were able to capture in a 

large measure. Alberta is now considering, I understand, 

removing some of those requirements to go back into that core 

market in a fairly strong way. Are you going to stand in the 

way of Saskatchewan producers competing with Alberta if they 

do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you for the 

question. As it refers to the core market, particularly going into 

Ontario -- and I'm sure that's the market you were alluding to or 

referring to -- as the member well knows that the gas market is 

completely deregulated. And if Saskatchewan producers chose 

to go head to head with Alberta producers to ship gas into the 

Ontario core market, there's really nothing we can do to stop 

them from lowering their price. 

 

And if everybody lowers their price, then obviously the 80 per 

cent minimum will go down with it. So that's the reason for the 

80 per cent, so that we can't have an artificially high minimum 

in comparison to what the actual price of the gas is that flows 

into the core market and other markets. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well I can appreciate, Mr. Minister, the 80 

per cent figure. But there may be situations develop because 

the gas industry tends to move into new markets fairly 

significantly when it goes, that might affect that. And I guess 

what I want to know from you is that if there is a significant 

policy change in the province of Alberta -- and there's good 

indications there might be -- that you're going to watch very, 

very carefully what happens and that there be no move made 

until there is a significant trend developed before you would go 

to a minimum price. 

 

(1545) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member 

opposite as I'm sure that he did when he was in this position, 

that you watch the Alberta industry very, very carefully 

because the Alberta industry pretty much establishes the 

pattern for what happens in Canada, particularly in the areas of 

gas sales, gas distribution. 

 

There's no question, Mr. Chairman, that if the Alberta 

producers chose to run Saskatchewan producers into the 

ground that they could do that because they have volumes of 

gas that we just cannot compete with. And if they chose to 

artificially or deliberately lower their prices to put extreme 

pressure on us, on Saskatchewan, they 

certainly could. 

 

We will be monitoring this very closely, and I assure the 

member opposite that we are not going to set artificially high 

minimum prices for natural gas to deliberately put undue 

pressure on the industry. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- There's only one other statement I want you 

to clarify, Mr. Minister, and it was a little earlier in response to 

one of my colleague's questions about not having to bother 

with the courts, that you could act very quickly. And I know 

from being in that chair that sometimes it's very frustrating 

having a judge trying to understand subterranean geophysics to 

deal with certain questions that arise in the oil and gas 

business. 

 

But I do caution you, Mr. Minister, that your government 

seems to take this approach in a number of areas that ministers 

will act expeditiously without regard to courts. And 

unfortunately the Minister of Agriculture and others have 

shown a way that I hope that Energy and Mines certainly won't 

copy and use as an example. And I would ask you once again 

your view on that statement you made about expeditiously 

moving ahead without having to bother with the courts. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm a little confused as to 

what statement the member is referring to, but let me give you 

this assurance, the opposition members, let me give you this 

assurance that I and my government has no intentions of 

deliberately bypassing the courts, has no intentions of 

deliberately breaking the law. We're going to abide by 

whatever the courts decide. If it's in my case or in anybody 

else's case, we have no intentions of bypassing that. And I'm 

sorry but I'm not sure exactly what statement you're referring 

to. If you could maybe clarify that in my mind, I could answer 

it more directly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I believe, Mr. Minister, it might have been 

clause 27. I'm not sure. It was the member from Wilkie. And 

you just said, well the minister could act fairly expeditiously 

without having to go through the court process. 

 

And I know there is a certain amount of frustration, but I think 

everyone has to . . . Since your party was last in power, we've 

had this thing called the Charter of Rights and Freedoms come 

along that sort of says it's a little different ball game in Canada 

than it used to be. And we all have to have our due process 

now. 

 

And I think one of the things that always troubles people in the 

oil and gas industry is that the use of executive power, as has 

been used in this province in the past to sort of override the 

legal process, is troublesome. 

 

And I just noticed in your statement in dealing with that one 

clause, you said the minister could act expeditiously without 

having to sort of wait for the court process. And I know the 

frustration. I've been there. But the law is the law. And I think 

we all have to respect it. And before you act expeditiously, I 

would hope that everyone would have their day in court. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I simply say to the 

hon. member that we will not act expeditiously just 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1711 

for the sake of expediency. And we have no intentions of 

bypassing the court or giving anybody their day in court, be it 

either through the Charter of Rights or be it for any other 

reason. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 

a couple of questions. First of all, I am quite pleased to hear 

your answer to the member from Greystone on 27.1. And it's 

reassuring to have your commitment on record, sir, that you 

will use your power with discretion, at least as long as you're 

the minister of that portfolio. I appreciate that, sir. 

 

One other thing I would like for you to do for me, if you will, is 

-- I'll take you to section 10, on page 8, from (a) to (b). Will 

you tell me exactly what that means in layman's language, sir? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

the question. This goes back again to Bill 42 as you probably 

already know. When the Crown acquired these properties . . . 

and I'm just going to give you some examples here, and I'll use 

fictitious names so that we maybe can understand it. 

 

Assuming that CN had the original lease in 1974, assuming 

that's the people that had their land expropriated in 1974, and 

some company -- you can put any name you want for this 

company -- had a lease on that land, now as long as there's 

production there, the Crown would pay CN its share, and CN 

would pay the leaseholder his share. 

 

But if that lease expires at some time or if there's no longer any 

production there, what this section simply says: when the lease 

expires or nobody is producing on that land any more, then 

there is no obligation for payment any more on either the part 

of the Crown or on the part of the original freehold owner who 

had his rights expropriated. It simply says, when the lease 

expires, no more payments; it's over, finished. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. I 

wanted to be sure that I understood that section. I want to go 

back, sir, to the minimum-price subject. And I appreciate what 

you said when you said you would handle that and use that 

power with care and discretion. 

 

I wonder, sir, have you ever thought of an independent board? 

And I say that because the consultations and the conversations 

we have with the industry, they would like to have something 

like that. They would like to have some input because of the 

very dangers that the other two of my colleagues have 

mentioned to you. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, I would ask you if you would 

consider an independent board, in conjunction with your own 

department, to help set a minimum price that would be fair. 

Would you take a look at doing that for SaskEnergy and Sask 

gas and oil and gas energy board? I believe sir, that something 

like that would go a long way to taking out some of the irritants 

that do crop up in an industry as big and as important as what 

the gas industry is. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we had not thought 

of an independent board. And in fact we're not even 

considering it now because we really don't feel that that's 

necessary. It would be an added expense obviously to retain 

this board, given the assurance to this House and the Assembly 

and the people of Saskatchewan and for that matter the 

industry, that all these things that are not written in the Act will 

be covered under the regulations. And before the regulations 

are written, there will be extensive consultation. 

 

One step further than that, we do have an Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board, as the member probably is aware of. We 

have this board, and this board deals with disputes. It doesn't 

set the original rates or minimum price or anything of that 

nature. But if there is a dispute that cannot be resolved between 

the department and whoever it may be, then this Oil and Gas 

Conservation Board can be brought in, and they will look after 

resolving the dispute. 

 

As your question related to SaskEnergy and TransGas, they are 

not within my jurisdiction, so I can't really comment on those 

two. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I appreciate the 

answer. I hope you will look at that a little bit anyway within 

your own jurisdiction. Mr. Chairman, I have no more 

questions. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, in the expediency of time, we 

would have no problem in going through the Act page by page. 

 

The Chair: -- I appreciate that, although with the amendments 

we have, it may be just as expeditious to proceed clause by 

clause. 

 

Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some 

amendments for section 6 of the printed Bill. It says: 

 

 Strike out subsection 10.1(2) of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 6 of the printed Bill, and substitute the following: 

 

 "(2) The minister shall cancel all of those portions of Crown 

dispositions where: 

 

(a) either: 

 

(i) the Crown dispositions or portions of Crown 

dispositions are within an area affected by a 

development if: 

 

(A) an environmental assessment and review process 

conducted under The Environmental Assessment Act 

determines that the development should not proceed; 

and 

 

(B) the Lieutenant Governor in Council, on the 

recommendation of the minister 



1712 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

responsible for the administration of The Environmental 

Assessment Act, directs the minister to cancel all or 

those portions of a Crown disposition within the area 

affected by the development; or 

 

(ii) the minister is directed by the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council to cancel the Crown dispositions or portions 

of Crown dispositions for the purposes of 

environmental protection; and 

 

(b) the holders of the Crown dispositions consent in 

writing to the cancellation." 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 

 

(1600) 

 

Clauses 7 and 8 agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 

 

The Chair: -- The minister has an amendment. Would he move 

it, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

amendment: 

 

Strike out clause 9(d) of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

"(d) by adding ',(f.1), (f.2) or (f.3)' after '(f)' in 

subsection (3)". 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister move his amendment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

amendment to section 12: 

 

Amend section 23.01 of the Act, as being enacted by 

section 12 of the printed Bill: 

 

(a) by adding "and the Crown is not responsible for paying 

any of those amounts" after "encumbrance" in subsection 

(2); 

 

(b) by striking out subsection (3) and substitutioning the 

following: 

 

"(3) subject to subsection (4), the right of an 

encumbrance holder to a percentage of production or of 

the value of production is fully satisfied by payment of 

the percentage specified in the encumbrance calculated 

on the amounts paid by the Crown to the person 

entitled to compensation pursuant to subsection (2)"; 

 

(c) in subsection (4): 

 

(i) by striking out "the coming into force of this section" 

and substituting "February 1, 1990"; and 

 

(ii) by adding "by a person described in subsection (2) 

as entitled to compensation" after "consideration 

payable"; 

 

(d) in subsection (5): 

 

(i) by adding "from a person described in subsection (2) 

as entitled to compensation" after "greater than $10,000" 

in the portion preceding clause (a); and 

 

(ii) by striking out "section" in clause (a) and 

substituting "subsection"; 

 

(e) by striking out "the coming into force of this section" 

in subsection (7) and substituting "February 1, 1990"; 

 

(f) in subsection (8), by adding "or to any transfer of an 

encumbrance holder's right to money or other 

consideration when the minister or the minister's designate 

has consented in writing to the transfer" after "is entitled"; 

 

(g) in subsection (9), by adding "by a person described in 

subsection (2) as entitled to compensation" after 

"consideration payable"; and 

 

(h) by striking out "the coming into force of this section" 

in subsection (10) and substituting "February 1, 1990". 

 

I shall so move. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 12 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 13 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I move the following 

amendment to section 18: 

 

Strike out section 18 of the printed Bill and substitute the 

following: 

 

"18(1) Subject to subsections (2) to (6), this Act comes 

into force on the day of assent. 

 

"(2) Subsection 11(2) of this Act comes into force on the 

day of assent but is retroactive and is deemed to have been 

in force on and from January 1, 1974. 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1713 

"(3) Subsection 11(3) of this Act and subsections 23.01(1), 

(2) and (3) of The Crown Minerals Act, as being enacted 

by section 12 of this Act, come into force on a day to be 

fixed by the proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor but 

are retroactive and, on proclamation, are deemed to have 

been in force on and from January 1, 1974. 

 

"(4) Subsection 11(1) of this Act and subsections 23.01(4) 

to (12) of The Crown Minerals Act, as being enacted by 

section 12 of this Act, come into force on a day to be fixed 

by proclamation of the Lieutenant Governor but are 

retroactive and, on proclamation, are deemed to have been 

in force on and from February 1, 1990." 

 

"(5) Clause 3(1)(a) and sections 16 and 17 of this Act 

come into force on a day to be fixed by proclamation of 

the Lieutenant Governor. 

 

"(6) Section 15 of this Act comes into force on the day of 

assent but is retroactive and is deemed to have been in 

force on and from June 22, 1990." 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the 

members of the opposition for their questions and for their 

co-operation. We dealt with this Bill expeditiously and I'd like 

to thank them for it. And I'd also like to thank my officials, 

who are on this side of the House who helped with this Bill. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I too 

would like to thank the officials for their help. And I also thank 

the minister for being quite up front and helpful to me to 

understand some of the Bills and parts of the Bills that I was 

not totally clear on. Thank you so much. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, for the information of 

those whose memory is not perfect and just to make sure that 

I'm answering the right question, the question, I believe, in 

principle was: what are examples of the kinds of regulations 

that might be used under the section of the Act where the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council is authorized to make 

regulation. 

 

I just wanted to say that first of all the Act prescribes very 

clearly that that authority is restricted to the matters with 

respect to the distribution of milk. So it's a narrow area. 

 

And the kind of thing that it may address might be, for 

example, for a specific distribution area requiring a processing 

plant as well as a distributor's licence in order to distribute milk 

in the area. Or it might be around the question of milk 

distribution areas across the province if the Milk Control Board 

were to have made the decision 

that was not seen to be in the public interest. So it is within the 

restricted area of the distribution of milk. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay now let's take that and contrast that with 

section 10 where it talks about at the beginning: 

 

 The board may make make regulations: 

 (a) prescribing the areas in which the regulations made 

pursuant to this section are to have (an) effect; 

 

Now as I read through that part, I almost got the feeling that the 

board had that same authority that you were dealing with in 

relation to the (l), (g), and (c), and I wanted you to explain 

what the difference is, if there is one, and then we'll visit about 

it after that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the question 

from the member opposite, the areas that are addressable are 

similar. The Lieutenant Governor in Council may . . . their 

regulation may be additional to that which the Milk Control 

Board might establish, or it would in the event where it was 

considered to be a matter of importance, the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council's regulations would supersede the Milk 

Control Board's authority in some specific area. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So that I understand the process, Mr. 

Minister, would you outline the process? Does the authority 

rest in the board to make those areas designated as -- and we 

might as well talk about it -- Beatrice or Co-op Dairy 

Producers, you will define that, or the board. And then if the 

board does it and you find it not to your liking, then you will 

have the authority to override that decision. 

 

(1615) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, both circumstances could 

exist in the general case where there could be a regulation 

established which would guide . . . describe the milk control 

areas and the conditions under which licences might be 

granted, just as a general statement of how the province 

believed policy should be implemented. And on the other hand 

there could be a situation where the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council could react to a circumstance where they thought the 

province's interest should be served differently. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The regulations made by the board, do those 

regulations have to go through OC (order in council) in order to 

be established? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thanks for the question. 

The Milk Control Board functions independently in, I think 

best described, quasi-judicial fashion. They have the authority 

to establish regulations except in this case where there's a 

specific . . . and in this area they do as well, but where the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council could pass a regulation that 

would be superseding the Milk Control Board's decisions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- So what I read you to say is that in section 10 

the board has the authority to make the regulations. The 

minister, through OC, has the power in section 11 to 

framework if the board doesn't make the right decisions. 



1714 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

Am I right? 

 

Sorry. If the board sets regulations that would be contrary to 

what you believe were in the best interests of the province, you 

would then override those regulations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I again thank the member 

opposite for the opportunity to explain this. In section 12, it 

defines the relationship between the board regulation and other 

regulation. And it describes the relationship there where the 

regulations are concurrent. 

 

And it also describes then in section 12(4) where there is a 

direct conflict. Then the other regulation described in the Act 

as the regulation made by the Lieutenant Governor in Council 

pursuant to section 11 will prevail over the board regulation. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There is one other point, Mr. Minister, that I 

want to raise, and that's in section 5. It deals with the minister's 

capacity to appoint temporary members of the board and 

designate the period of time and designate even the purpose. 

And I have a great deal of difficulty with that, and I left it to 

the last to explain it to you why we have the difficulty. 

 

I believe the discussion that we've had here has pointed to the 

fact -- and you've reiterated it over and over again -- that this is 

a quasi-judicial kind of a board. It may not be defined that way, 

but it has through the history of or the evolution of the milk 

processing industry, the dairy producers themselves, and the 

sale of the milk, has established a pattern for itself in relation to 

this. 

 

And I'm not sure whether that's a part of the old Act or whether 

that's a part of the new. But I find it a little disconcerting I 

guess, to say the least. That's why I've pointed it out, and I went 

to the structure of the regulation-making power that you as a 

minister have and the board has. 

 

And why would you then want to say to the board that I can 

appoint anybody I want at any time, over and above, to do the 

kinds of things that could conceivably happen. And I'd like you 

to give us an explanation of what you see that doing, and then 

we'll visit about it after that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member 

opposite for the opportunity to explain this again. I would refer 

to the old milk control Act which actually probably outlines it 

in paragraph form similarly. 

 

Under section 4, I will read it: 

 

 If a member is interested in a matter before the board, the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may, upon the application of 

that member or otherwise, appoint some disinterested person 

to act as a member with respect to that matter only, and the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council may also appoint a person to 

act during the sickness, absence or disability of a member. 

 

I think the intent in the new Act is not different than that. It is 

not seen as an avenue through which government would try to 

intervene. Clearly the dairy industry would 

respond negatively to that kind of intervention. They have 

appreciated their quasi-judicial status, the management of their 

own affairs. And it is only in response to concern about 

specific circumstances in some area of the province or the other 

that they recognize the appropriateness and have actually 

requested the changes in section 11. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I think I understand what the purpose of that 

was, and I think it explains it reasonably well to define it. But I 

don't think that that's what this does. It gives you the power to 

appoint. 

 

If your determination is that members of the board are not 

doing what you want them to do in even setting regulations, 

you have the power even on the other hand to overpower the 

regulations made by the board. But I find it a little 

overwhelming that you could even appoint additional members 

to the board when you've got a personal axe to grind, and the 

board has this tradition of being fairly independent. 

 

And I want that independence to stay, and I'm prepared to leave 

you have control over the regulation-making power that the 

Lieutenant Governor in Council should have, but I'm not sure 

that you want to take the power that you have in the regulation 

that was . . . or in the old Act and transfer it into something that 

is typical of this. 

 

And I understand what you read. If somebody gets sick and 

you got a problem, then you can appoint a temporary to finish 

off the term of office. I have no problem with that. However 

that is one of the things that you should have left put into 

regulations and said, I have the authority to do this, and dealt 

with it that way. I wouldn't have minded that. 

 

But this, in my view, gives you the opportunity to say, okay I 

am going to appoint board members to this committee or this 

Milk Control Board that may reflect some opinion that I have. 

And, for example, if you had eight on that board, three 

appointed temporaries who were not in the industry or who 

didn't understand the industry or didn't have any problem with . 

. . or had their own independent view of what the board should 

do so that it could take a different direction than what the 

producers wanted to have, and that is the concern that I have 

with this section. And it's been brought to my attention on a 

number of occasions that this part causes serious problems. 

 

It's an infringement on the freedom that the board has 

established through -- I don't know how many -- 50 years. It's a 

freedom that has been established by them being able to 

manage their own affairs. And I was there and I allowed the 

board to do that. At times it makes it difficult because you 

didn't always know where the board stood in all of the details. 

 

But that independence has its own strength and it has a lot of 

merit. Because the control is in the producers' hands 

themselves. And so I have a great deal of concern with section 

5. And I'd like you to respond to that, please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the 

question and the opportunity to respond. I agree with the 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1715 

member opposite entirely. I believe the last thing I would want 

would be to be in the middle of a serious dispute within the 

industry relative to many matters. It is for that reason that there 

is really no change in either intent or structure here. The only 

authority that Lieutenant Governor in Council has ever had, but 

it has always had it with respect to the Milk Control Board, is 

the appointment of the board. 

 

It has never been restrictive of the numbers or the 

representational groups from which those members may come. 

So there has never been a time when Lieutenant Governor in 

Council should have considered it to be appropriate where they 

could not have changed members, appointed more members, 

altered the membership. I think which then clarifies in the Act, 

if one wanted to change people for one's own reasons somehow 

in conflict with the industry, one could as easily do it under 

5(1) which is the appointment of the board. 

 

So there would be no purpose served in using the temporary 

section for that purpose because that authority already is there 

and was there in the old Act for the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council to alter board membership when they believed it was 

necessary. I think it's worked well for 58 years because the 

industry has wanted to run its own affairs and it's been, I 

believe, in the interests of government to allow the industry to 

run its own affairs, and in the interests of industry. 

 

So there is then the understanding would be the temporary 

membership would be for the specific kinds of purpose where 

there might be conflict for a member on a specific hearing or 

where there was temporary illness where you really didn't want 

to do a permanent replacement. Because clearly, the authority 

would have always rested with Lieutenant Governor in Council 

to be able to change board members on a permanent basis from 

the beginning of the Act. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Will the minister put into the regulations that 

definition that he just provided to us today? Will you provide in 

the regulations that that definition of what this section means, 

would you provide that, for section 11? Would you provide that 

so that the industry understands that that is clearly what it's for 

and it's for no more than that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, again in . . . hopefully we 

can generate an understanding within the industry that that is 

the purpose. It is the same . . . I'm informed by our officials that 

it is the same provision, I think to the word but maybe not to 

the word, as in the municipal board, that the Act does not 

permit regulation to deal with this section. But I think it would 

not require more than an attached explanation of the 

circumstances I just described to you for the industry to feel 

comfortable that that was in fact the intent. 

 

Because I think we could make it quite clear in an explanatory 

brief to the industry that those kinds of actions that you're 

concerned about could in fact always have happened under the 

first section and that is the authority of government in that 

regard and therefore that the second section on temporary 

appointments has no 

need to deal with that kind of issue and hopefully with great 

comfort in that light if that would be acceptable to the member 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the minister be prepared to provide 

that in writing to me and then I can have that assurance that 

you'd be prepared to put it in that framework. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me 

there's no reason not to provide that kind of an explanation just 

to clarify for people who read this from a perspective other 

than lawyers about what the apparent framework here is. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, if 

you want to proceed, we can. 

 

(1630) 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 33 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to point 

out to the minister and to his officials that it's taken a long time 

to get the industry to agree to have some changes, because they 

have struggled within themselves in relating to what those 

changes should be. I want to say that we will be tracking what 

the consequences of the decisions that you've made are going 

to be. 

 

I want to also say that the industry needs to examine itself very 

carefully because there's a lot of dairy producers who are in 

very, very serious financial difficulty. And it's significant 

because our quotas are being cut on every hand and it's 

lowering the income. The production of the cows are going up, 

and it is very, very serious. 

 

So when you're dealing with the national Dairy Commission, I 

want you to know that we would be very much pleased if we 

could initiate some assistance in developing more quota for our 

individuals in the industrial side so it would not negatively 

impact all of the things that are going on. And I know that the 

discussions in the Canadian Dairy Commission are sometimes 

put on hold and related to that. But it's significant that we keep 

our dairy industry and that we keep it well and whole. 

 

I want to point out one other thing that I want to say about the 

constitutional debate in its relation to agriculture, and 

specifically to the supply of managed products. Quebec has 

significant function in Canada as it relates to supply of 

managed products, both in the dairy and the feather industry. 

And I guess this is my challenge to you, that we don't need any 

negotiations on the part of agriculture to respond so that our 

production volume goes down over the period of time with the 

negotiations on the constitution. 

 

And I wanted to raise that with you as a part of something that 

needs to be clearly understood. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman. I missed your last 



1716 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

comment only so I could determine whether I should respond 

to you right now or later. And I think I caught the gist of most 

of your statements. 

 

I appreciate your concern about the dairy industry both in 

Saskatchewan and in Canada and some of the difficulty it's 

having both internally within the country in terms of the 

struggles with declining quota, declining consumption, and on 

the other hand the variety of serious consequences of the 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) negotiations 

that result, first of all, from the threat of tariffication on one 

side and then from the threat of very little interest by our 

American neighbours often in a level playing-field even when 

we do come to agreements about other things. 

 

So the dairy industry, like others, is substantially at risk and I 

appreciate the offer of the members opposite in trying to bring 

forward some positive changes not only for Saskatchewan but 

for Canada to support this industry which has been, while a 

small part of our total production here, an important part and in 

certain concentrated parts of the province extremely central to 

the agricultural base. 

 

So I would like to at this point, before the passage of the Bill or 

the passage out of committee, thank the members opposite for 

their co-operation in the questions they've asked and look 

forward to working together with them in this and other 

agricultural matters. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the 

officials for their answers and for the work that they've done on 

this and we'll visit with them again in the future I'm sure. 

 

Clause 33 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair would like to thank the officials for 

assisting in the work of the committee. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 37 -- An Act to amend The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill be now read 

the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 10 -- An Act to amend The Crown Minerals Act 

and to make consequential amendments to certain other 

Acts resulting from the enactment of this Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 

be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title, by leave with 

amendment. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Bill No. 35 -- An Act respecting the Production, Supply, 

Distribution and Sale of Milk 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

The Chair: -- I will ask the Minister of Education to introduce 

her officials please. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd like to introduce on 

my left, deputy minister of the Department of Education, 

Arleen Hynd. Immediately behind me is the ADM (associate 

deputy minister) Fred Renihan, and seated to his left is Robin 

Johnson. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, 

the last time you appeared before the committee, I asked you a 

number of questions about the Mortlach School situation and 

gave an indication of, I wish for you to bring some stuff to the 

Assembly, some correspondence, Fire Commissioner's report, 

that type of thing? Have you had the opportunity to review that 

stuff and now bring it to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to provide 

the member opposite with a package of material that represents 

answers to all of the questions that were posed in the previous 

session, I believe, including the questions put by the member 

from Thunder Creek with respect to the Mortlach situation. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Madam Minister. I'll certainly 

take the time to go through the information you've provided. 

Since we last met I've had the opportunity to further discuss the 

situation there with various board members, and I don't know if 

you're aware or not, but there has been a fairly large public 

meeting held since we last met in Estimates. And I wonder if 

you've got an update that you can give me on the situation there 

in regards to the renovations that they were talking about. Do 

you have anything to publicly put on the record? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, in response to the 

question, the notes I think that were provided in answer to the 

previous question were dated about June 9, and I am aware that 

there has been some activity; but as to the current status, I 

could undertake to discover the nature of the requests that have 

been put before the facilities branch. But I wouldn't be able to 

provide the answer 



July 23, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1717 

today. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'm going to give you 

the benefit of the doubt today because I'll need to go through 

the information here. But I would suggest to you, Madam 

Minister, that this is one situation where maybe seeing is 

believing. I don't know if there's . . . Having been a minister 

myself, I'm not sure that there's any way that my staff could 

have adequately explained this particular situation. 

 

Mortlach isn't that far from Regina. And if you were to walk 

the steps that the kindergarten children walk each day during 

the school year in that facility and know fully well what the 

rest of the plant is like, I think you would cringe each day as an 

adult, going up those stairs. It's just absolutely ludicrous that 

you have three different heating systems in one building. The 

access out of that old portion of that school . . . well there is 

only one way, and that's out the window and hope you survive 

the fall. 

 

And I guess that's what's got so many parents in that area upset, 

is that they thought they were on the track of rectifying that 

situation. They've been very patient, I might add, all the way 

along, not wanting to sort of stick themselves out in front in 

their division to require something to be done. But it's to the 

point where people are talking about changing their tax status 

in order to get their children out of that school. 

 

It would be very unfortunate because it's one of the few schools 

in the Thunder Creek School Division that is stable or growing. 

They have good, long-term projections in that particular area 

for stability, and it's very important to our rural communities, I 

think, particularly with what we see going on in the Coderre 

School in that division, that they have that stability. 

 

And I can only suggest to you, Madam Minister, that it might 

be very useful to take that hour and a half drive and go out, 

because this school was on the short-list. And you and I can 

disagree on how many schools were included in that short-list, 

at what period of time, but this is one that I think needs 

something done, some commitment, and there's nothing like 

the Minister of Education actually showing a particular interest 

in something. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, certainly the health and 

safety of students and staff in our school system is of 

paramount importance to our department. We are doing a 

re-evaluation of the criteria for capital allocation. We did have 

some $11 million available and budgeted this year for what 

would be described as emergency repairs that relate to health 

and safety issues in school buildings, and in fact I do believe 

that the board, which is concerned with the condition of the 

Mortlach School, was offered an arrangement whereby 

emergency funding could have been provided for relocateable 

units and the board didn't favour that request. 

 

So I think that the department, the facilities branch of the 

department, and certainly the school board has a responsibility 

to make the best arrangements possible within whatever fiscal 

constraints we have. 

 

We certainly hope in our new capital proposals to be able 

to have a construction program next year. And the priorities 

will be established according to the criteria that are being 

consulted with in various parts of the province now in terms of 

a new program for the allocation of school capital. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, I'm only going to ask one 

more question. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member for Saltcoats on his feet? 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- To beg leave to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Knezacek: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, guests that have arrived and are seated in the west 

gallery. One of the guests is a particular friend, particular 

partner, and the other half of my life -- my wife Marlys; and 

our four children: Nathan, Tennille, Nicole, and Kristin. They 

are here as part of their holidays, and what better way to spend 

part of your holidays than to watch the Assembly and the 

politicians at work. 

 

So if I could, Mr. Chairman, ask the members of the Assembly 

to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair joins the member for Saltcoats in 

welcoming his guests. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Education 

Vote 5 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, as was pointed out, the cost 

of relocateables would be $19,000 more than the permanent 

construction. And that I don't think isn't even something that 

the board should consider. And any reasonable trustee faced 

with ratepayers today who don't have much money in rural 

Saskatchewan would . . . well would be, I would think, quite 

angry with that type of alternative. 

 

So what I want, I want you to tell me what I should go back 

and tell the folks in Mortlach. And I don't and never have 

considered the education of our children to be something that is 

a terribly political item. And I don't want it to become one. But 

I can tell you, Madam Minister, in this case that it will be very 

political if it doesn't seem like people are being on the money 

with this one. So I want you to tell me what I'm going to go tell 

the folks in Mortlach. And maybe you and I together can do 

something about fixing it. 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to say that 

at the time earlier this year when we announced prior to the 

budget that there would not be any dollars 



1718 Saskatchewan Hansard July 23, 1992 

available for new capital construction beyond the amounts that 

were allocated for emergency repairs for health and safety 

considerations, that there was a backlog of requests of over 

$350 million in the K to 12 system. And a number of these 

requests are to replace ageing buildings, buildings that don't 

have good air quality, a number of reasons. 

 

The most I can say is that there is no possible way that we 

would ever be able to accommodate a backlog of $350 million 

worth of new construction in a single year in a single budget in 

the K to 12 system. That would be an unprecedented amount to 

undertake in one year. 

 

What we are doing is we have a draft of a new proposal for the 

allocation of capital construction which would bring projects 

that have the conditions to contend with that the member 

opposite describes. Within the new criteria those projects 

would move up to the top of the list very quickly. 

 

So all I can offer to the member at the moment is that in the 

fall, within the next few weeks, we hope to get approval for the 

proposal for capital allocation that's being circulated amongst 

stakeholders right now. When we have that we will be in a 

position to start making plans for the next year. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, 

pardon me. Madam Minister, I wonder if you would mind 

taking the time to explain to me the priority list for schools. 

How is that arrived at for upgrades or new construction? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the four . . . what the 

member calls upgrades -- I think he's referring to the 

maintenance; the emergency funding; the type of repairs, 

maintenance that the $11 million was allowed in this year's 

budget for. That would be to address health and safety, 

occupational health and safety considerations, including such 

things as fire, air quality, such as the school in Eston, which 

you'll be familiar with. And the money for the renovations on 

that project would come from that pool. 

 

Now in the allocation of capital for new buildings, that is the 

proposal that's being circulated now. In fact I think the 

consultation program is just about complete. And we will be 

making a recommendation to the cabinet very shortly on the 

new plan for allocation of new capital for new school 

buildings. 

 

And it's proposed that it would be based on, of course, 

increasing enrolments, lack of space -- a number of different 

relative criteria. The kind of facility, of course, that's being 

replaced would be a consideration if it's considered to be 

unsafe or inadequate in some way. Credit would be given for 

relocateable construction in areas where the school enrolment 

is seen to be not stable. And there are a number of factors. 

 

I'm not sure exactly . . . I do remember the draft that went out, 

but it went out into the field for input by school boards, the 

construction trades, people that would be affected by the new 

proposals. I will be seeing the revised proposal very soon. 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, I wondered though . . . I 

understand your answer, but I wanted to know how you 

priorize each renovation or each type of renovation. What is the 

highest priority? And going down the list with respect to 

renovations and then with respect to new construction, what is 

the priority list for new construction as well? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said before, 

we haven't finalized the criteria yet for the new proposal for 

new capital allocation, but I can tell you that it would be much 

simplified from the previous system where there were a 

number of different schedules and levels. 

 

And what is proposed in the new plan, is it would be very 

simple that once the criteria are applied that the project would 

receive a number from 1, 2, 3, 4 and they would be exactly in 

numerical order so they would know very closely the amount 

of new capital that's available on an annual basis, how many 

years it would be before their project would be approved. 

 

In the maintenance, in the allocation of maintenance, the 

criteria there are the health and safety considerations. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:02 p.m. 

 

 

 


