




















































Hansard: August 13, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2427 

 August 13, 1992 

 

The Assembly met 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that Your Honourable Assembly would be pleased to cause 

the government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Job Creation Strategies 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My questions this 

afternoon are for the Minister of Economic Diversification and 

Trade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the latest labour statistics are in, and they are a 

clear indictment of the NDP's (New Democratic Party) abysmal 

record in economic development and job creation.  The number 

of unemployed is up 5,000 people from July of last year, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the NDP Premier has betrayed those 

who voted for him with his promise to enhance health care.  

The NDP Premier has betrayed farmers who voted for him with 

his pledge to help farmers.  Now the NDP Premier betrays the 

unemployed who voted for him for his vow to create 

employment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm wondering if the Minister of Economic 

Development has any plan, any plan to create jobs and 

economic activity in this province.  This province, Mr. 

Speaker, has been . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to take 

this opportunity to respond to the member in terms of exciting 

job-creation proposals and announcements that have been made 

recently.  Obviously in Saskatoon the expansion of Hitachi 

which was announced two weeks ago -- a program and a plant 

that was built to do some construction on Shand 1, then 

intended to shut down -- not only staying open but expanding.  

The first major industrial plant by Hitachi outside of Japan in 

the world being announced and expanded in Saskatoon, that is 

very, very good news. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday, yesterday 

the announcement by Mr. Phillips of an expansion at IPSCO 

that he said very clearly could not have been built under the 

previous administration because of the tax laws that they 

refused to change to allow him to expand here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that the 

member opposite, who raises this question, yesterday indicted 

that that expansion was a result of their planning -- was a 

complete falsehood, a complete falsehood by Roger Phillips's 

own declaration yesterday that he could never have built the 

plant in Saskatchewan under that previous government's 

administration and taxes. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister's 

command of economic development policy is overwhelming.  

The 5,000 people your bungling government has put on 

unemployment insurance, I'm sure, are all heaving a big sigh of 

relief at your comments, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, you promised the world in job creation and 

delivered absolutely zip.  You stood in this House yesterday 

and proudly declared your government's success in developing 

two industries -- industries that you had absolutely nothing to 

do with. 

 

Let's talk about businesses you did have something to do with, 

Mr. Speaker.  Could the minister please update the 5,000 

additional unemployed people in Saskatchewan on the progress 

of relocating Piper Aircraft to this province, the business you 

claimed would be building planes within weeks of your 

announcement this spring. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, on two points.  One, 

obviously the member doesn't understand much about statistics 

and jobs.  If he did he would know that the number of people 

employed in Saskatchewan has increased in the last month.  He 

would know that the labour force has grown in Saskatchewan 

considerably in the past year.  True, unemployment is up but 

we still have the lowest unemployment rate in Canada and we 

have more people working, and we have more people working 

than there were a month ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in today's Star-Phoenix . . . pardon me, on August 

12, new home construction up in Saskatchewan, an increase of 

more than 100 per cent from last year under their 

administration.  Talk about confidence in the economy. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Talk about confidence in the 

economy.  That member from Kindersley is speaking through 

his hat when he talks about the economy of Saskatchewan 

going down.  When it comes to Piper he can run at Paul Hill 

and the private sector all he wants, but I'll tell you clearly, Mr. 

Member, you would get a lot more done by co-operation, 

working together, than running at the private sector who are 

trying to negotiate a deal to bring Piper to Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Five thousand people 

more unemployed in this province since last year, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, could you explain to those 



2428 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

5,000 people, as a result of your bungling of the AECL 

(Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) agreement, an agreement 

incidentally that may have been able to provide jobs for that 

entire 5,000 people if you would have went ahead with it, Mr. 

Speaker, would you please tell the 5,000 people that are 

unemployed in this province what your job-creation plan is for 

this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'll tell the 

member opposite, that the plan certainly isn't things like 

GigaText and Supercart and Promavia. 

 

I want to say very clearly, I want to tell the member very 

clearly that in a recent chamber of commerce publication, in a 

recent publication by the chamber of commerce there's a 

picture of one Don Pringle, the former chief of staff to the 

former PC (Progressive Conservative) government, who is 

receiving a certificate on the issue of doing and being able to 

get into business in Saskatchewan as a great place to do 

business since the election. 

 

Even former PC staffers are saying Saskatchewan is in fact a 

great place to do business.  So I say to the members opposite, 

instead of the gloom and doom that you are trying to 

perpetuate, the despair that you find yourselves in as a result of 

losing the election, I say lighten up.  Try to come along with 

those positive people like Paul Hill, like Roger Phillips, and get 

a handle on . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The minister likes to 

talk about how housing starts are up.  Well housing starts are 

up as a result of the relocation of FCC (Farm Credit 

Corporation), the relocation of Crown Life, and much, much 

lower interest . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I recognize the member and I 

would ask the member to conduct his questions through the 

Chair please. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Those are all of the 

reasons why housing starts are up in Regina, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would explain to the thousands 

of unemployed in Saskatchewan today what your foot-dragging 

with Saska Pasta . . . and how that fits in to your economic 

development plan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, obviously we're very 

interested in getting the Saska Pasta plant going.  And as soon 

as the private sector wants to start that plant in Swift Current, 

we'll be more than happy to go there and work with them -- just 

as we were yesterday at the IPSCO sod turning, just as we were 

in Norquay at the alfalfa plant, starting it up -- local people, 

entrepreneurs, local people putting their money on their table. 
 

If you have any influence with the private sector people 

and the Saska Pasta deal, get them to build the plant, and we 

will very much facilitate. 

 

When it comes to housing starts, you say that it's in Regina 

where they're occurring.  Well I want to correct that.  Estevan 

housing starts, '91 -- 5; '92 -- 22 per cent, a 400 per cent 

increase in Estevan.  Part of the optimism in Estevan is getting 

rid of the Tory government and that premier and electing a 

New Democrat and the leader we have now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Now the minister's 

taking credit, again, for lower interest rates that are helping 

housing starts all over this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, this government's relationship with business 

leaders, with business leaders in this province, is at an all-time 

low.  These are the people who in co-operation with 

government generate thousands of jobs.  Mr. Minister, one 

meeting, one meeting with a few business leaders and now you 

people think you are captains of industry.  It takes a little more 

than that, Mr. Minister. 

 

Now I wonder if the minister would be so glad to tell us a little 

bit about the famous 700 club, 700 businesses that you 

promised were going to be relocating in Saskatchewan 

following your election.  Mr. Minister, how many of the 

unemployed you created will soon be employed in your famous 

700 club? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Minister, I'm sure what brings 

this question period about is all of the good news in the 

Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix in today and yesterday. 

 

I know this does not make the member from Kindersley happy.  

He's wishing for economic failure in the province.  The premier 

is wishing for frost to kill the farm economy.  And they just 

can't stand it, for example, when Mr. Phillips in today's Leader-

Post says . . . And the members opposite say that the plant 

would have been expanded under their government, but he 

says: 

 

 Phillips said a change in provincial government tax policy 

(that was in the last budget) erased Ipsco's ideas of installing 

the new mill in the United States. 

 

They were planning, under their government, to expand to the 

United States.  And as a result of the member, the Finance 

minister bringing forward proper tax changes, we have a new 

IPSCO plant being built in Regina.  That wouldn't have been 

done under your operation. 

 

And I say to the member, try to be more positive in your 

approach to economic development, and it just might work. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Unfortunately, Mr. 

Speaker, the 5,000 extra unemployed in this province 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2429 

can't be quite as optimistic as you are, sir.  You have misled 

them.  You've betrayed your own voters.  You have broken 

contracts with your own employees; you've extinguished GRIP 

contracts with thousands of farm families; you've thrown out 

the AECL agreement, dragged your feet on Saska Pasta, and 

refused to honour the contract with Saskatchewan's partners in 

the Bi-Provincial upgrader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, is this the kind of economic development plan 

we've all been waiting for?  Is this the new order of 

co-operation between business and government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say again, that if the 

member opposite knew anything about statistics, he would 

know that the labour force grew by 8,000 in the period from 

June to July in 1992 -- up by 8,000.  Up by 8,000. 

 

Now the members opposite shout from their desks . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  We have shouting on both sides.  

When the member was asking his question, we had the same 

problem here.  Now the minister's answering, then the 

opposition starts.  When the opposition member asks his 

question, we've got the government members starting.  I ask 

members to let the member and the minister ask their question, 

answer the questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say to the members 

opposite, that if they knew how to read the StatsCanada 

numbers they would find that the number of people in the 

labour force grew by 8,000 from June to July of this year in 

Saskatchewan.  That is exceptional and phenomenal to have 

that many more people in the employment group. 

 

In fact the out-migration from Saskatchewan is down, and 

down not as much as we would like, but down from where it 

was last year.  That's significant. 

 

When it comes to housing, I want to say that in the community 

of Estevan, housing starts are up by 400 per cent.  In Moose 

Jaw, they're up by about 300 per cent.  In The Battlefords, 

they're up by about 900 per cent.  In Swift Current, they're up 

from 2 to 6.  In Yorkton, they're up from 7 to 10.  In 

Saskatchewan as a total, housing starts are up from 305 to 729. 

 

That is no small amount, my friend, and you should recognize . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ties Between Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and Government 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, my 

question is to the Minister of Agriculture.  Yesterday, Mr. 

Minister, I asked you a number of questions concerning the 

secondment of one Nial Kuyek from the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool to the Department of 

Agriculture.  The minister stood in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

with a lot of indignation and claimed that his hiring practices 

were totally above-board, that this individual was simply a 

good civil servant.  Well, Mr. Speaker, after the media asked 

for proof of Mr. Kuyek's political affiliations, a little research 

revealed that there are several fairly large donations to the NDP 

Party over the past several years. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, now that these donations, these 

financial donations to your party have been revealed, will you 

admit today that the main qualification was not the status as a 

civil servant but the fact that he was seconded to your 

department because of his political affiliations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to be aware that I had friends from across the province who 

were Conservatives who made donations to my election 

campaign because they were needing to get rid of the mess that 

you guys were creating. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The lesson that the members opposite 

have obviously not yet learned is that they are insulting one of 

the most significant business organizations in Saskatchewan, 

run by an elected group of officials from across the province by 

the 60,000 farmer members, members who have . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The members of this organization respect 

their leadership.  The organization functions in a democratic 

fashion.  The organization hires significantly loyal and 

competent civil servants, and in this case one that, as I 

answered yesterday, who previously worked for the federal 

government and now is working for us.  I continue to be 

dismayed at the depths to which you would grovel to ask 

questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, after your protestations yesterday about the 

unfairness, I had a phone call from a Wheat Pool person in my 

constituency who was quite concerned about my raising this 

issue yesterday. 

 

And he asked me: did this individual have any donations to the 

federal Tory Party seeing as he worked for them.  But upon 

checking there aren't any donations to the federal Tory Party.  

There are only donations to your party, sir, and they average 

about 300 bucks a year. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the bottom line is here:  what is the level of 

political donation to get a senior civil service job in your 

government?  Because we've established that boards in your 

government . . . it requires a certain level . . . 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Let the minister, let the 



2430 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

minister answer. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just . . . I didn't want to do this but I 

think I'm going to have to ask the member from Rosthern to 

please cease interrupting.  You've been doing it now, sir, for 

four or five times today, after I've been getting up.  I've been 

getting up asking members not to interrupt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

obviously accustomed to a management style that involves this 

kind of practice they're suggesting, that has everything to do 

with incompetence and patronage, and nothing to do with the 

value of a civil servant.  I continue to be dismayed that the 

members opposite would ask those kinds of questions. 

 

The logic that says a person contributes here and not there even 

though he works for both parties and that somehow there's 

something wrong with that, is absolutely insane.  And that's 

information that I personally don't have and I'm interested that 

the member opposite would go find it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, I can tell you that Wheat 

Pool members and farmers all across this province want to 

know why the individual that you would select to get you out 

of your GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) mess as a 

senior policy advisor in your department would not have been 

someone selected through a public process, after you and your 

party promised them last fall that that's the way your hiring 

would be done, that there would be no political patronage. 

 

Those same farmers, Mr. Minister, want the absolute assurance 

that Mr. Garf Stevenson doesn't have the inside track through 

your political appointment.  Can you assure farmers of that 

today in this province, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 

continues to degrade himself and those he represents with the 

kinds of questions he asks.  He continues to try to exhibit 

towards a good public servant the kind of negative 

characteristics that obviously led to the demoralization of a 

civil service under the government of the members opposite. 

 

And I would hope they would begin to have a more reasoned 

and respected approach to people in the province, respect their 

right to have reasonable political affiliations, whatever they 

are, and respect the competence of individuals who've clearly 

demonstrated their competence through broad service in a 

variety of areas of public affairs. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, there's only one thing 

will demoralize the civil service, and that's knowing that with a 

certain financial contribution to your party, one attains certain 

status within the organization. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, no one is casting aspersions on the 

individual.  I know him personally.  I know him personally.  

He's an intelligent individual.  But the fact is, sir, that he is a 

big donor to your party.  He is a partisan of your party and I 

don't think, given what farmers want in this province, and the 

promises that you made, that this is the appropriate practice.  

Don't you agree, Mr. Minister, that you should have publicly 

advertised in the agriculture community for a public policy 

individual like this to set your government straight?  Don't you 

believe so? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the member opposite ought 

to be aware that if Executive Council manages the affairs of 

selection of senior civil servants, and regular practices were 

followed in this case, it is neither a concern of mine that there 

may be donors in our departments to your party, or donors to 

the Liberal Party, or donors to the Reform Party, or donors to 

the New Democratic Party. 

 

The object of creating a competent and respected civil service 

is to respect the rights of individuals who have a freedom to 

engage in political process in this country, and who have a 

competence in the area for which they have been selected.  I 

will continue to respect that tradition, a tradition much 

disrespected by you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate your 

discomfort with this, but I take it from your answer, I take it 

from your answer then that these political hirings and this 

patronage that we're talking about in the civil service is 

directed from the Premier's office. 

 

Is that what you said, that it's the Premier of Saskatchewan and 

his officials in his office that directed the hiring of Mr. Nial 

Kuyek, the secondment from Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to 

your department?  Is that what you just said, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- No, Mr. Speaker, it is not what I said.  I 

hired the person.  The selection and the advertising and the 

identification of candidates for our process happens in a regular 

way.  The quarrel I have with the member opposite is that he 

somehow continues to want to, while saying he respects this 

person and says he is a good civil servant, on the other hand 

attacks him for working for our government. 

 

It's my objective to have good and reasonable and competent 

people working for government, who are selected because of 

their competence, and we'll continue to follow that practice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2431 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Mr. Minister, yesterday I asked you to table in 

this Assembly this individual's contract, how he was hired, is 

he still an employee of Sask Wheat Pool while the government 

is paying him -- all the details of his secondment. 

 

Today in question period in the answer you just gave, you 

talked about an advertisement on hiring.  I would like you also, 

Mr. Minister, to table the advertisement that went with the 

senior policy position in your department that Mr. Kuyek 

answered in applying for this job.  Would you do that today, 

Mr. Minister -- table those things in this legislature? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I will confirm to the member 

opposite that we have hired a competent civil servant for the 

department, that he has a record of good service to the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, a record of good service to the 

federal government several years ago, and I am confident he 

will serve the people of Saskatchewan well in his present role. 

 

And I continue to be absolutely astounded that the members 

opposite would even consider questioning the propriety of a 

member such as Mr. Kuyek as a leader in our Department of 

Agriculture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Well, Mr. Minister, in the absence of a public 

advertisement, in the absence of any documentation, would you 

then tell this Assembly: was Mr. Kuyek hired at your request, 

was he hired at the request of the Premier, or was he hired at 

the request of Mr. Stevenson?  Which one of the three then 

requested his employment in that very senior position in the 

Department of Agriculture?  Would you answer that sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, the hiring of Mr. Kuyek was 

done in consultation between the deputy minister and myself. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, is Mr. Kuyek still an employee 

of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kuyek is an employee of 

the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool to the extent that he, as the 

member opposite knows from his question yesterday, to the 

extent that he's seconded to the Department of Agriculture for a 

two-year period. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Husky Bi-Provincial Upgrader 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I rise today, 

Mr. Speaker, to update this House on the successful completion 

of an agreement to fund Husky Bi-Provincial upgrader at 

Lloydminster. 

 

I say successful, Mr. Speaker, because after months of 

negotiations and pressures brought to bear by other 

governments, Saskatchewan's unswerving position that it 

would not put any more money into the project has been 

vindicated. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Husky Oil announced today, out of 

Calgary, plans for the upgrader would go ahead, despite no 

further injection of money from the Saskatchewan taxpayers 

and without any penalty to this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Mr. Speaker, this marks an important 

victory for the people of Saskatchewan for two reasons.  First, 

we have saved $33 million of taxpayers' money. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Secondly, Mr. Speaker, and more 

important perhaps, we've established an important principle of 

the taxpayer not accepting cost overruns.  If a project is 

approved based on a budget, then it must come in on time, on 

budget.  The people of Saskatchewan have indicated they will 

no longer tolerate a government which blindly hands out 

taxpayers' money to projects which don't provide an adequate 

rate of return. 

 

This is a precedent-setting agreement for Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is proof that investments and business activity will 

continue in the province of Saskatchewan without massive 

government hand-outs of money.  It's also proof that other 

governments are beginning to get the message.  Saskatchewan 

is serious about getting its financial situation under control. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a government which intends to proceed on 

sound business principles and has proved that sound business 

principles work and work well.  This is a government which 

requires government business to put as much stake into a 

venture as the people of Saskatchewan.  That is the only viable 

way to proceed, Mr. Speaker, and this case proves such an 

approach is successful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Associate Minister 

of Finance talks in glowing terms, Mr. Speaker, about the 

wonderful deal that they've been able to strike. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Let's examine this deal for the people of 

Saskatchewan a little bit, Mr. Speaker.  Let's examine it for 



2432 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Let's take a look at what you've done here, sir.  You have 

reneged on yet another contract, the same way you've reneged 

on contracts with farm families.  You've broken another 

contract with the partners of the Bi-Provincial upgrader, Mr. 

Speaker.  You've broken another contract with Husky Oil, the 

people of Alberta, the Government of Alberta, and the federal 

government, Mr. Speaker.  You've weaseled your way out of 

yet another contract. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what did the partners have to do?  What did 

the partners in this agreement have to do?  The partners have to 

garnishee the provincial treasury in order to get their 

investment back, Mr. Speaker, that's what they have to do.  Mr. 

Speaker, there is absolutely no return on the investment for 

Saskatchewan people until all other partners are paid out in this 

wonderful deal that you've struck, Mr. Speaker.  That's the kind 

of deal that you people have put together for the province of 

Saskatchewan.  You should be really proud of that, the partners 

garnisheeing, the partners garnisheeing the provincial treasury.  

Not one dime of return on investment for the people of 

Saskatchewan.  Wonderful deal, folks, wonderful deal. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Could I call the member 

from Rosthern to order, please.  I believe the Minister of 

Agriculture wants to make another ministerial statement.  It 

certainly has been the tradition of this House that at least 

during ministerial statements and the response that is given, in 

the past as far as I can recall, we had the courtesy to give those 

two people the right to stand and make their statements.  Surely 

we can at least have patience to do that. 

 

Could I call the member from Rosthern to order. 

 

Possible Merger Between Canada's Two Airlines 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

talk about a very serious matter facing our province's airline 

industry.  For the past couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker, there has 

been considerable talk in the news about a possible merger 

between Canada's two airlines.  We understand that both 

Canadian Airlines International and Air Canada face serious 

debt and are losing money which puts into question the future 

viability of both airlines. 

 

Understanding all this, Mr. Speaker, and the need of both 

airlines to find a cost-effective solution to their problems, we 

on this side of the House do not see a merger of the two airlines 

as that solution.  It doesn't take a rocket scientist, or in this case 

an industry analyst, to figure out what a devastating effect a 

merger would have on Canada, and especially Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is our understanding that a merger between Air 

Canada and Canadian Airlines would immediately see the loss 

of about 10,000 Canadian jobs.  And we know, Mr. Speaker, 

that even though such a merger may not have its major impact 

on Saskatchewan, the possible loss of 200 jobs is of serious 

concern to us as well as our western provincial counterparts.  

We understand that all western provinces face a serious threat 

when it comes to losing jobs in the airline industry. 

 

So in the interests of economic growth for the western region, 

we support any effort by western provinces to find a solution 

that will not only save jobs, but strengthen and improve 

competitive service and bring stability to the industry.  Without 

stability, Mr. Speaker, people and businesses who rely on the 

airline industry would experience a loss of service and higher 

ticket prices. 

 

The government of Saskatchewan is committed to economic 

growth and jobs.  We are not convinced the joining of our two 

national airlines is a way of creating economic growth and job 

stability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, employees from both airlines are concerned, the 

travelling public is concerned, and we as a government are 

concerned.  That is why we want all possible options for the 

survival of our national airline industry to be identified and 

scrutinized by the federal government.  And those options 

should be discussed at public hearings throughout 

Saskatchewan and the rest of the country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the future of our airline industry, and the many 

economic spin-offs it brings to the province, is at stake.  We 

urge the federal government to help come up with a solution 

that will save the industry and protect our workers. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm happy to say 

that we've heard a statement by the minister that we can, in 

most part, agree with today.  On this subject, he has done his 

homework well by reading the papers and getting the feeling of 

the people, and we're happy that we were able to contribute in 

some way to spurring his thoughts in this direction with our 

questions in question period some days back. 

 

We too had agreed that the services to Saskatchewan were 

extremely important and that they would be lost.  We had 

agreed and realized that the prices of tickets would probably go 

up if we saw this merger go ahead, and we were extremely 

worried about the job losses as well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We do kind of wonder about the fact that there seems to be an 

open division between the provincial NDP and the federal NDP 

on this issue and we hope that they are able to heal their 

wounds in some way there. 

 

But the fact of the matter is that the federal government has 

been reported as being in favour of keeping two airlines and 

having that competition.  And I'm sure that they will receive 

this news and this invitation with a great deal of anticipation of 

being able to accomplish these ends.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2433 

Mr. Neudorf: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm going to raise a point of 

order and then I would appreciate your ruling directly 

thereafter or at your convenience. 

 

We've seen an example, Mr. Speaker, today of what ministerial 

statements are supposed to be and what ministerial statements 

are not supposed to be.  My assumption of ministerial 

statements are that if the minister gets up and gives . . . sets a 

course of direction and makes a policy statement for the 

government, a new policy, that is the intent of a minister's 

statement.  And then our member has the opportunity to reply. 

 

What we just saw from the Minister of Agriculture . . . pardon 

me, the Minister of Highways in this case, was a classic 

example of a good ministerial statement.  It was a policy 

statement.  Our member reacted to it and it was a done deal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my point of order is that the previous minister's 

statement was a political rhetoric argument which got in like 

turn, and then it destroys what the purpose of a ministerial 

statement is and we get ourselves into the political rhetoric and 

uproar in this Chamber that we have just witnessed. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I would like to speak to the point of 

order . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, it's to speak 

to the point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member may proceed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in listening to the 

member from Churchill Downs, who is the minister responsible 

for Crown Investments Corporation, he outlined how, in light 

of the fact that we have a huge, huge deficit in this province -- 

$14 billion in total -- that the elimination of a further 

commitment of $33 million to the Husky oil upgrader in 

Lloydminster is significant not only to this Assembly but, more 

importantly, to the taxpayers of the province. 

 

And I want to say very clearly that while the members of the 

opposition may not like that announcement, I think the vast 

majority of taxpayers in the province will find it significant. 

 

The Speaker: -- I just simply want to advise the members that 

I'm going to reserve my judgement on it.  I want to go through 

Hansard and analyse the two statements that were made by the 

minister and I'll bring a judgement back.  I'll bring a judgement 

back. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens that Bill No. 87 -- An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

begin by mentioning the fact that it wasn't that long ago we had 

a former long-time member of this Assembly speak at a 

function and talked about the ability of members in their debate 

to relate stories and bring them in to bring a point. 

 

And as we adjourned at lunch time or just prior to lunch time, I 

was attempting to bring a story in to relate to the session.  

However, Mr. Speaker, I apologize for having not done such a 

good job on it.  But anyone who's interested, the member from 

Wilkie would certainly be willing to inform them about the 

story and about the punch line that was there that I missed on. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, getting back to the GRIP Bill, Mr. 

Speaker, we see from this Bill, and we've seen over the past 

number of days and certainly a while not that long ago where -- 

and I'm reading from an article -- "NDP will use closure again 

on GRIP bill." 

 

We see how the NDP government continues to abuse or take 

advantage of the authority that they feel was placed and 

entrusted to them back on October when I think most members 

and many members of the House will indicate that some of the 

added . . . additional votes and seats that they received were 

because of a lot of annoyance with the former government.  

But I don't believe people really at that time intended to give 

the NDP Party the type of majority in this legislature that they 

have today. 

 

And what the NDP government has done is use this massive 

majority to their advantage or to push whatever they feel led to 

push through this Assembly.  The article says: 

 

 The nine-month-old NDP government has now twice used 

closure to choke off debate in the legislature -- (it says) a feat 

the Progressive Conservatives took close to a decade to 

accomplish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what we have seen . . . and that was when this 

article was written there were two items of . . . or two uses, 

moments of the use of closure.  We've now had a third and 

today a fourth time the government has used its majority to 

bring forward a closure motion to limit the debate in this 

Assembly on certain items, motions, or questions brought 

before the Assembly. 

 

The article continues with the . . . by saying: 

 

 . . . we're seeing is a further classic example of an arrogant 

government that is bound to get its way. 



2434 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

It also says: 

 

 Government House Leader Dwain Lingenfelter said the PCs 

have stalled the legislature for months now and don't show 

any willingness to get down to work, either on bills or budget 

Estimates. 

 

And even as the House Leader was indicating this morning, the 

lack of work that had been accomplished.  But I must remind 

the Assembly and must remind people that some 44 Bills have 

already received Royal Assent. 

 

In fact it was about two . . . I believe it was two weeks ago 

when the House Leader spoke up and invoked closure on a 

motion, I believe it was on the bell-ringing question, and used 

the rhetoric that we haven't been able to accomplish anything in 

this House.  And then shortly after that motion was brought 

forward then Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered this 

Assembly and gave her approval to 27 more Bills.  And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it is very inaccurate of the 

House Leader or even the government to indicate that no work 

has taken place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest problems we do find in this 

Assembly, and having been in the Assembly for some six years 

now, I believe we find the biggest problem has been created 

with, through the House Leader and even the present House 

Leader for the government, was the House leader while he was 

in opposition. 

 

And on many occasions when the House Leaders tried to 

negotiate, this certain member . . . it seemed that every time 

you turned around what you had agreed to would change just 

prior to the working of the Assembly.  And you can just sit 

back now and look very closely and begin to realize the 

scenario that is taking place. 

 

When the House Leader stands in his place and tells us we 

haven't accomplished anything through all the debate, I must 

also remind the House Leader and government members, and 

many members of this Assembly, that over the period of time -- 

and certainly many members of this Assembly have been here 

long before I was here -- there was a process where House 

Leaders would get together, would discuss matters of business 

and the different Bills or committees or where the House would 

proceed. 

 

On numerous occasions I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, there were 

times when members found that what they had kind of agreed 

to prior to orders of the day or coming into question period, 

when they came here for question period maybe something had 

changed, maybe a minister was called out and wasn't available 

to come forward with their committee or forward with their 

Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the opposition has accepted that and 

usually there has been a bit of a debate that has taken place on 

the floor between the House leaders negotiating to work their 

way around, to try and keep a rapport within the House. 

 

(1445) 
 

However, Mr. Speaker, that has not existed to date in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and it hasn't existed because we 

find that every time we turn around, and we would make a 

move to proceed on a Bill or a motion, or in committee, the 

rules may change.  Sometimes we've been left to wondering, 

Mr. Speaker, whether even the government ministers have been 

aware what the process . . . and what Bills and motions were 

coming forward in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the House Leader on August 4, '92 when he 

talked about the Conservatives not showing a willingness to get 

down to work . . . is indicate that was why he was using the 

closure, why he brought in closure on a supply motion, brought 

in closure on a motion which had very little debate or 

opportunity for debate in this House.  And he indicates, and as 

he continues to indicate, the public is demanding that the 

government . . . is demanding that the government get on with 

the agenda of government. 

 

Now I wonder who the public really are.  Is it the public in 

general, or is it friends and workers and all the people who 

worked so hard to get this government elected, who are now 

finding that the election of this government is hurting them? 

 

And yes I can appreciate the fact that many members in this 

Assembly, back-benchers and the Executive Council and 

ministers as well, would like to get out of the Assembly.  Not 

simply because it's summertime.  Not simply because possibly 

the 70 days of paying per diems are going to be coming to an 

end, Mr. Speaker, but because of the fact as well that we're 

getting through the summer period when people are away on 

holidays and don't particularly pay very close notice to this 

Assembly.  We're getting to a time and period again when 

people are going to be getting back to their jobs.  Students are 

going to be getting back into the class-room.  Men and women 

are . . . The weather is going to be turning a little cooler; you 

won't be spending the time outside that you have in the 

summertime. 

 

You might be catching . . . being updated more in the news, 

keeping your eye on the news, Mr. Speaker.  And I don't 

believe the government really wants to be sitting here when 

people will have more and be taking and giving more time and 

more attention to what takes place in this Assembly, in light of 

the debate that is taking place. 

 

Not just on the GRIP Bill but, Mr. Speaker, there are many 

questions that are going to be and must be raised regarding 

health in Saskatchewan.  What is happening to the medicare 

system in this province?  And what is happening to our health 

care and to hospitals and the promises of a better system, a 

more sound system, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Many of these questions . . . and many people especially in 

rural Saskatchewan are wondering what is actually taking 

place.  And not just the NDP supporters, but people right across 

the province. 

 

Certainly when I talk about NDP support, Mr. Speaker, I look 

at a letter to the editor back in the August 4 issue of the 

Leader-Post, 1992.  And it says:  "Government questions 

before and during . . ."  Maybe I should read the whole letter, 

just so it's clear: 

 

 When one seeks to criticize the leadership of a 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2435 

political party, government or any other organization, one 

should be activated and motivated from the purest desire to 

change and improve upon the actions and directions of policies 

adopted by such leadership.  One should not be motivated by a 

desire for personal aggrandizement or pecuniary achievement. 

 

 Before and during the last provincial election, the NDP 

leadership kept reminding the electorate generally, and the 

membership in particular, of the philosophies and 

achievements of Tommy Douglas and his colleagues.  There 

is ample proof that the policies of the present government are 

diametrically opposed to the philosophies and positive 

actions of Douglas and his colleagues. 

 

And the letter goes on: 

 

 If the present neo-conservative policies were well-thought 

out and planned, without the knowledge and consent of the 

party membership in general, then it is my view that the 

membership has to take a very serious look at the leadership 

of this party in government and ask: "have you abandoned 

the basic tenets and economic and social philosophies of the 

founders of the CCF/NDP in deference to the belief that your 

NDP government can more efficiently apply Conservative 

measures than the well-heeled representatives of the 

Conservative system?" 

 

 Fortunately, democracy affords me (and you) a platform to 

express my apprehensions and views. 

 

It would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that this letter writer is 

becoming very incensed with the policies and the programs that 

are being brought forward by a government that would appear 

this individual worked on behalf of. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we have other letters as well that have come 

from individuals who have indicated their great dissatisfaction.  

We've had phone calls where people have indicated they have 

returned their membership card or they've torn up their 

membership card. 

 

And I remember when we were sitting on that side of the 

House, as we were leading up to the last provincial election, 

Mr. Speaker, many members on that side of the House 

indicating that they were running into people daily who were 

tearing up their PC membership cards.  And we're not saying 

that people weren't annoyed with the government of the day.  

But I think, when you look at it today, to find that people 

across this province are becoming very dissatisfied in only a 

few short months, I think that speaks very loudly of what is 

happening to this party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think another of the reasons people are being 

somewhat annoyed and another one of the reasons that the 

NDP would like to get out of this place is because of articles 

such as this where it says:  The first nine months in office 

disappointing.  And the article goes on to talk about the fact 

that it's easy to blame someone else, but sooner or later you're 

going to have to start living up to your actions. 

It's easy to put the blame on the former government, or in this 

case on the  GRIP Bill, Mr. Speaker, and the lack of support for 

the farm programs in this province, the lack of support for their 

share of . . . or being a part of programs to support and 

strengthen agriculture and, as we saw today, to strengthen our 

economic activity and development and create jobs in the 

province.  It's easy to look at someone else and always blame 

the other person. 

 

And we find that over a period of time, that is exactly what the 

government has been doing.  In fact since we have begun 

sitting in this legislature, beginning back last fall and now since 

late April when we first sat in this legislature, every time we 

come to a point or place where the NDP can't really . . . many 

NDP ministers have a difficulty in trying to find an answer to 

the questions placed before them, especially on agriculture and 

economic development.  They either blame the former 

government under the leadership of the member from Estevan, 

or they blame the federal government.  And it seems I think, 

Mr. Speaker, that it's time we all looked within ourselves. 

 

People on October 21 voted for what they thought would be a 

government that would indeed do everything that they had 

promised.  They also voted for them on the basis of, I believe, 

the Premier today talked about opening the books, and they 

thought, well yes they'll open the books.  But I believe most 

people in particular across this province also knew, without the 

fact of the government saying they should open the books or 

they would open the books, knew that the books were open as 

the chief commissioner, Mr. Gass indicated.  The books were 

indeed open for the public to see if they were interested. 

 

People also realized that the debt of this province had grown, 

had grown substantially, Mr. Speaker, and we can . . . I think 

when people went to the polls back in October they went to the 

polls looking at electing a government that they felt would 

make an effort to address the deficit we are facing, but also in 

addressing the deficit having some compassion on those who 

are less fortunate. 

 

Certainly they didn't expect a government to turn around and in 

a matter of a few short months just slash at government 

programs and services that people in Saskatchewan that, if you 

will, Mr. Speaker, that Tommy Douglas worked so hard to 

implement and to bring about, not only in health care but 

certainly in agriculture as it is a very major part of the economy 

in this province. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, we're apprehensive of what the 

government and what the House Leader is doing.  We find it 

very offensive that the government would even continue to 

place the blame at somebody else's feet when the blame should 

be resting right solely at the feet of the Premier of this province 

and the Finance minister and maybe even . . . who knows?  Mr. 

Speaker, maybe not even all of cabinet are totally aware of the 

direction, don't even know and understand what the direction is 

that . . . what direction this party is heading or what direction 

this party is trying to take the province of Saskatchewan into 

now, just as I read in the letter that was in the Leader-Post in 

August 4, 1992. 



2436 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the GRIP legislation before 

us and again I come back to a number of comments that have 

been made earlier on . . . and I'm going to go back to some of 

the debate that took place in April 1990 when we first started 

talking about bringing forward a GRIP Bill or a farm income 

revenue insurance program. 

 

The member from Humboldt of the day talked about and 

accused the government, asked the government if they'd really 

been consulting.  He said you talk about consulting with farm 

groups, and you're the government that claims to have this 

great in-touch with rural Saskatchewan because you have all 

the rural members.  Well I've been to my constituency and 

several other of their constituencies, Mr. Minister, and I know 

farmers simply will not take this loan.  They would sooner cut 

back and do without.  Even though the prospects of moisture 

look good this year, even though the fact that they could 

possibly get some return this year by crop, they won't take that 

because they know that in the end run it's not what they need. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt was indicating 

at that time that many people were saying no, they really didn't 

want an insurance program.  And I grant you that.  Most of the 

farm community would just as soon see a price up front.  But 

let's take a look at the agricultural system across this nation.  

Let's take a look at where the areas in agriculture that are 

moving ahead, or at least that are stabilized.  Every one of 

them, Mr. Speaker, have some form of stabilization or 

subsidized program in place that guarantees them a bottom 

line. 

 

If it's right for the milk industry, if it's right for the poultry 

industry, even though farmers in Saskatchewan and farmers 

across this nation are very independent individuals, are 

entrepreneurial individuals who would like to do it on their 

own, Mr. Speaker, we all realize that the bottom line must be 

reached as well. 

 

And so if we look at the GRIP program, Mr. Speaker, when we 

take a very serious and close look at it, we find that there are 

people right across this province, men and women and 

teenagers and boys and girls in the farm sector who need to 

have a bottom line that they can look at and they can secure for 

themselves -- not to make a lot of money at the expense of the 

taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, but to guarantee that they're able to 

meet their commitments, so that they aren't coming to the doors 

of the Minister of Social Services or they aren't coming to the 

doors of the Minister of Health because they don't have the 

finances available to pay their bills or even to meet their 

medical costs or put food on their table, such as a call I've had 

recently, Mr. Speaker, from a couple who are facing some very 

severe financial restraints. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan you can have a fair 

number of dollars move through your pocket.  You can move a 

fair bit of grain into the system.  You can move livestock into 

the system and generate a number of dollars in cash flow.  But 

by the time you pay your power bill and your telephone bills, 

Mr. Speaker, and if you have natural gas, your gas bill and your 

heating bill and your fuel bills, and your fertilizer and 

chemical, and try to bring your loans up to date, Mr. Speaker, 

you could see $35,000 move through your hands and find out 

that you don't 

have a dollar or cent left in your pocket to put food on the 

table. 

 

And that is the major problem farmers have been facing for 

centuries and facing for years in this province, Mr. Speaker, the 

fact that many thousands of dollars can be generated through 

farm sales and yet because of the costs of operating and 

running their farm, they are left with very little for personal use 

and for looking after their children, for educating their children, 

for even meeting the health needs of not only themselves but 

their family members.  And, Mr. Speaker, farmers are no 

different than the labourer or the teacher or the business man.  

They have many of the same problems. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we can look at people many times and that 

person may look to be healthy, may look to be feeling 

excellent, may have a pleasant personality.  But who knows, 

that person may also have . . . be facing a health bill or a drug 

bill of 120 to $200 a month due to no fault of his own.  It's not 

that he asks for it, or he or she asks for it, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

think of even some of my own family . . . family members, not 

directly, who are affected with the problem of asthma and the 

costs of asthmatic drugs, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1500) 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when farm families are faced with that 

and we see low prices for a product, and even though you move 

that product to market and it may generate sales of $5,000, by 

the time you take off all the expenses there is nothing left.  

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it was imperative that we work at a 

program that would at least give farm families a measure of 

security.  And I would suggest if farm families have a measure 

of security, it creates a measure of security for our small 

communities, as I indicated earlier. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I come back to the consulting process too, 

and one wonders how much consultation really took place.  Did 

the same form of consultation take place that we saw back in 

the spring of 1990 and trying to develop the 1991 GRIP 

program?  Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the committee that 

was put in place by the former government in the summer of 

1991 to address the problems with the GRIP program, the '91 

program, in coming up with recommendations . . . And in 

October 1991 that committee was altered a little bit; a couple 

more members were added to the committee. 

 

And when you sit down and look at their proposals, they had 

some very sound proposals to bring forward.  However, as you 

review the proposals you wonder how much or how strongly or 

how sincerely was the Minister of Agriculture and Executive 

Council in addressing the concerns that were raised and in 

bringing forward the proposals that were suggested. 

 

And the Minister of Agriculture would suggest that everyone, 

all of the farm organizations, from SARM (Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities), from the Saskatchewan 

Wheat Pool, from the grain growers, all of these organizations, 

from the farmers' union, were in support of the changes to the 

new program, and yet simply because they signed their report 

for the minister. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2437 

But my understanding, Mr. Speaker, as I hear from many of 

these individuals, is that the events, the end result, and the 

changes that came about in the end, Mr. Speaker, were totally 

against and contrary to the recommendations that their 

committee had made.  And many of these individuals are very 

sad and unhappy that they were asked to put their name to a 

report, sign a report, which after the fact they find out the 

realities of the new program missed by a long shot the 

recommendations from their committee.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

therefore it's no doubt . . . no wonder, that we are into this 

debate today.  It's no wonder that the government has been and 

continues to use closure to try and push the Bill forward in this 

Assembly, because of the fact that there is so much opposition 

across this province. 

 

And the unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was talking 

to an individual who had talked to a number of people that 

approached him on the street and asked him:  what can you do 

about this?  It was a health problem and a health question.  And 

he said one of the individuals who had talked to him happens to 

be on a local board and brought up the question:  what can we 

do about our rural hospital because from what we see it looks 

like it could be one of those hospitals that the government is 

talking of closing.  And so this person said:  well why don't you 

hold a public meeting, organize a public meeting, or get some 

petitions, call the Minister of Health, or send in some petitions, 

talk to the opposition and ask them to raise these questions?  

And the comment was:  yes, but I'm on the board, if I speak out 

about the concerns I have right here, will I have my job or will 

I continue to be part of this board? 

 

And it appears to me, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people 

out there who are afraid to speak up.  And I believe that maybe 

they're somewhat fearful of speaking up because of the fact that 

this . . . we're only nine months into a new mandate and we 

have to live with this government for the next three, three and a 

half, four years.  And I'm appalled that people, if they have 

major concerns, would feel that they must be quiet rather than 

take the chance of losing a position they may have. 

 

I think in our democracy, Mr. Speaker, it would be appropriate 

for people to feel that they could speak out at any time on any 

question, not just on the GRIP question before us, but on any 

question, be it health, be it rural development as we saw with 

our highway system.  And we note the uproar that took place 

when the Minister of Finance announced that there'd be some 

1,000 miles of highway allowed to go back to gravel.  And that 

affects the rural communities, rural farm families and, Mr. 

Speaker, in an indirect way it affects the question of GRIP that 

we have before us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as we talk about the GRIP question, as we 

continue to raise the questions, I also have been interested in 

sitting here and following the debate.  And I've been listening 

with interest on many occasions to a number of the catcalls that 

have been coming across the floor.  And it would appear to me, 

over the period of the last number of days and weeks and 

months, that many of the government members have indicated 

that they would be more than happy and willing to get into the 

debate. 

In fact, I think as the July 30 article of the Leader-Post . . . the 

headline is "Gov't getting prepared for another GRIP battle".  If 

the government was really getting prepared, I'm sure they 

would have had many of their members prepared to stand in 

this Assembly and argue or debate in this Assembly the reasons 

why we should push the GRIP Bill forward, why we should 

move it forward and implement it upon the people of 

Saskatchewan, upon the 60,000 farm families of this province, 

even though it goes against the basic, fundamental rights of the 

individual rights and freedoms that we enjoy and goes against 

the basic, fundamental principles that we all appreciate in this 

province. 

 

This article says: 

 

 The provincial government is getting ready for what could be 

another marathon battle over GRIP in the legislature. 

 

 This time, however, there'll be a difference -- no bell-ringing 

walk-outs from the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see the media picked up on the fact that the 

debate on bell-ringing and the ability to stall the legislature to 

get a message across was unilaterally changed by this 

government.  First of all they brought in a . . . unilaterally 

brought in changes to the rules.  And the normal process, Mr. 

Speaker, has always been to allow for the government and 

opposition, all members of this Assembly, to sit down and 

negotiate through the Rules Committee to come to a basic 

agreement on rule changes. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, what we found and what we saw back 

on July 30, and just prior to that date, Mr. Speaker, the 

government unilaterally used their majority to change the rules 

to limit bell-ringing.  And as we indicated in the bell 

_ringing debate, it certainly wasn't our and isn't our intention to 

continually use bell-ringing as a way to obstruct the working of 

this Assembly.  But bell-ringing was a way of getting a 

message . . . and making people aware of some of the concerns. 

 

Because it's not always easy to get the message out there, in 

light of the fact that the criticisms we face over how 

communications budgets may be spent and the fact, Mr. 

Speaker, that even this year, MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) gave up 25 per cent.  And it doesn't give us the 

ability to get the information out there with the few dollars we 

have to try and do a mail-out so that people are aware of what 

we are facing, of the reasons we're standing in this House and 

speaking on the GRIP Bill. 

 

And so while the government unilaterally took away 

bell-ringing, they also attempted to wear down the opposition 

by, at the same time, extending sitting hours from 24 hours a 

week to 50 hours a week.  And, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 

the debate in this Assembly and certainly I take a look back 

over the debate in 1989 regarding the debate on the potash Bill 

. . . and I must remind the Assembly that the debate at that time 

took place over a period of some 120 hours, I believe phased 

out over a period of 30 days.  It took place . . . and the 



2438 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

debate on the potash Bill was interlinked with government 

workings and proceedings in this Assembly.  And never once 

was a motion brought forward to extend the hours from 9 

o'clock in the morning to 11 o'clock at night. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, for someone watching on TV, they may say 

well if you were only working 24 hours well no wonder they 

increased the hours to 50 hours a week.  I must also remind 

people that 24 hours in the legislature doesn't necessarily mean 

that that's all . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've been listening for a fair length of 

time.  I do want to remind the member from Moosomin that we 

are on second reading, second reading.  That means we speak 

about the principle of the Bill.  And it may be interesting to 

know about whether we sit 24 hours or 50 hours or 

bell-ringing, but on second reading we should keep our 

speeches on the principle of the Bill. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

principle and the reasons for the debate in this session is 

regarding the GRIP Bill, and I appreciate your ruling on that.  

But there were a number of other principles or responses that 

took place leading up to the debate that is taking place today, 

and as I've been speaking, I've been trying to link the process 

that has taken place so that people are aware of what has 

happened, rather than they being left with the idea that the only 

reason that we're debating this is because the opposition is 

totally opposed to it. 

 

And at the same time I think, Mr. Speaker, we all agree that it's 

appropriate that people be aware of the work that MLAs do on 

behalf of constituents and in this Assembly in light of the . . . 

certainly, an area, another area of debate as well. 

 

But I would also indicate that, as I indicated earlier, the original 

article that I read, the headline was "Gov't getting prepared for 

another GRIP battle."  A day later it indicates the opposition 

were also getting ready for a GRIP battle.  And the article says 

that the government: 

 

 . . . promised to re-introduce its changes to the . . . revenue 

insurance today (GRIP) or early next week and this time the 

Tories will have to answer the bell. 

 

And that's where I got into some of the debate on the 

bell-ringing and the reasons for it and the changes. 

 

It also says: 

 

 The Conservatives (or opposition) are furious that the 

government is moving the bill out of suspension before they 

found some compromise, as recommended by (the) Speaker . 

. . 

 

 But the government seems prepared to use every weapon in 

its armoury to force its agenda through the assembly. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, and I won't deliberate on that, we see 

where the government used . . . continually used closure to 

force its agenda on people. 

One of the biggest reasons we continue to debate the GRIP Bill 

before us, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that while we entered into 

this debate and when we originally entered into the debate we 

found that even though we had put forth a number of ideas, a 

number of suggestions, a number of proposals regarding the 

GRIP Bill and regarding the GRIP legislation, we find that the 

NDP continue to argue that they wouldn't change this 

legislation. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we're speaking today on the legislation 

and on the Bill before this Assembly, we trust that as we bring . 

. . the points we bring forward and endeavour to bring forward 

in light of all the arguments that have been presented, that 

when we get to committee the government will be willing to 

consider and accept some of those amendments, Mr. Speaker, 

to the Bill.  And one of the reasons we're arguing about the 

GRIP Bill is the fact that, as I indicated earlier, it says, and the 

headline again reads:  farmers argue that premiums too high 

and coverage too low. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, prior to the lunch break I did go through a 

scenario of how the 1991 GRIP legislation and insurance 

program stabilized the farm economy and gave the farm 

community and farmers themselves a bit of an understanding 

and ability to stabilize and plan their business and their farming 

occupations, and the fact that also the present legislation, the 

present GRIP '92, has certainly taken away farmers' ability to 

establish their bottom line and to plan for tomorrow. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, remember back last fall one of the major 

areas of debate, when we were talking about GRIP and we 

were talking about the costs, was the provincial government at 

that time had indicated that if we harmonized the provincial 

E&H (education and health) tax with the federal GST (goods 

and services tax), we would have access to millions of dollars 

in which the provincial government could not only maintain its 

commitment to health and maintain its commitment to 

education but would also, Mr. Speaker, be able to maintain its 

commitment to rural Saskatchewan and to the GRIP revenue 

insurance program that was brought in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the debate before us, and the 

process that has taken place, and as I indicated earlier, the 

government indicated they wouldn't change GRIP. 

 

Another article in June '92 indicated that: "Lingenfelter defends 

GRIP revisions".  Mr. Speaker, I think we must be mindful of 

the fact that the process that is taking place, and when we're 

talking about the GRIP motion before us, as the Government 

House Leader indicated at that time: 

 

 The government has no choice but to unilaterally attempt to 

rewrite history with its changes to the gross revenue 

insurance plan, says (the House Leader). 

 

 The bells will keep ringing until at least Monday to give 

farmers fighting a breach of contract suit against the 

government their day in court, says Opposition leader Grant 

Devine. 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2439 

And we all know of the process that took place and the reasons 

for the bells, to allow the Court of Appeal to hear the case that 

was brought before it.  And the reason we wanted to allow that 

to happen, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that even the Premier of 

this province believed the Tories had and the opposition had a 

good issue, had a sound issue, and that it was appropriate for 

them to stand up for the principles of democracy. 

 

(1515) 

 

And we just have to take a look back at some of the comments 

and some made by the Premier and quotes that have come out 

from a number of the papers.  In the Star-Phoenix: 

 

 While he said he can see the Tories' point, the premier said 

the government won't withdraw its legislation. 

 

And this point he talked about was: 

 

 (You see) I worry about contracts and all of that.  I mean one 

has certain rights.  That's where the merit of the PC walk-out 

is. 

 

And then it continues on, Mr. Speaker, by saying: 

 

 The substance of what we did is right.  And if it's the 

substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal picture and 

the like, process becomes less important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's a point that we must continually raise in this 

Assembly.  The fact of the process and the fact that the 

government would go against what it fundamentally believes to 

be right.  The fact that individuals have rights and those rights 

should be upheld and supported in this Legislative Assembly 

by every member of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, including 

Executive Council. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't believe it is right that the government 

should be retroactively changing contracts, or be able to 

retroactively change legislation and GRIP contracts. 

 

And as the Minister of Agriculture, when he was asked about 

that continually refused to comment on that.  And that comes 

from . . . he was quoted in the Star-Phoenix in April: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to the 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 

15 deadlines would create legal problems, say members of 

the crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

And I believe that's very unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that a 

minister of the Crown would -- even though he, in his heart of 

hearts, would realize that he was being asked or his department 

was being asked to bring forward legislation that would destroy 

the rights and the ability of individuals -- would suggest that 

we can get around it 

somehow. 

 

I don't think you or I or anyone else in this Assembly, Mr. 

Speaker, could get away with that.  I don't think the people that 

elected me to represent them in this Assembly would expect 

me to ask the justice system to change a contract.  Or even if an 

individual, a constituent comes to me with a problem they've 

run into, because of maybe an error of judgement they've made, 

that they would expect -- my constituents would expect -- me 

to go to any of the legal channels and ask that they overlook the 

problem that took place. 

 

I think we all, whether we're in government or whether we're 

out, must realize that we must honour and live up to contracts 

and agreements and respect the rights and the privileges of 

other individuals. 

 

The Leader-Post of June 17 said: 

 

 "Essentially he (Wiens) . . . didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not to be identified.  "He 

thought we could get around that (legal question) . . . (and) 

said he would get around it . . . 

 

And I believe as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, that it's very 

unfortunate that a minister of the Crown would take that kind 

of thought and would give that kind of thought and would feel 

that he had the ability simply because he had the legal people 

around him, or access to the legal individuals in his department 

who could maybe give him the leverage and the out that was 

needed to get around the contract.  And that's why we continue 

to stand and debate in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another reason we stand and debate in this 

Assembly is maybe because of the fact that many people across 

this province, not just Conservatives and not just NDPers, but 

also Liberals and even Reformers, Mr. Speaker, are speaking 

out on the actions and how this government has moved to work 

as a government, how it has brought forward its policies and 

how it has disrupted the lives of individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was borne out on July, I believe it was July 

30, in an article in the Star-Phoenix, July 31, says: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, Premier Roy Romanow 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP. 

 

 But just a few kilometres away, farmers remained oblivious 

to the message. 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," said Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just south-west of the Battlefords. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gentleman, Stewart Mitchell, isn't the only 

one, only individual, who has been speaking out on the 

question, on the issue before us.  He isn't the only one who has 

taken exception to the direction that the government is taking 

regarding the present legislation that they have before this 

Assembly.  And I believe it 



2440 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

behoves Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition to take their place in 

the Assembly and to debate at length and fully the question of 

GRIP and GRIP contracts and how GRIP contracts were 

honoured or whether they weren't, how they weren't honoured. 

 

And we have . . . There are all kinds of articles, Mr. Speaker, 

that support the fact that the Conservative Party and the 

opposition did do the right thing, did take the right action. 

 

An article in the Leader-Post: Just how wrong the NDP 

government has been in attempting to retroactively change the 

rules of the old program by the new GRIP Bill.  The reasons 

behind the 18-day bell-ringing with the walk 

_out and the source of much of the problem this session is 

something the NDP still doesn't fully appreciate.  An 

unyielding, ham-handed government clearly broke contracts 

with farmers by not properly notifying them of changes to the 

program by March 15 deadline.  The image problem the NDP 

has on the GRIP issue has now been compounded by the way it 

has tried to cover up its mistake through what has been nothing 

short of political bullying. 

 

And here again we get into the other questions that have 

superseded and followed and brought us to the place where 

we're at today, Mr. Speaker, regarding other unilateral changes 

that have taken place in this Assembly. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, as we look at the comments made here, no 

wonder the members opposite would like to get out of this 

House because certainly I believe it's an image problem.  I 

believe when you look back to the 1989 debate or at any time 

when . . . Any time a government would attempt to change a 

program, Mr. Speaker, even though it's not totally liked, there 

are enough people around that you offend by doing that.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, I also realize that there are many decisions that 

would be made by myself and by my opposition colleagues, by 

the government, that are not going to be appreciated by all 

people.  But I think, Mr. Speaker, this GRIP Bill, the changes 

to the GRIP Bill, have certainly become offensive to many 

individuals across this province. 

 

And not just the farm community, Mr. Speaker, even people in 

the business community, people within our small, local 

communities, Mr. Speaker, people who feel that an individual 

must . . . their fundamental rights must be protected.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the reason we continue to debate this is because we 

also see articles that indicate that the Tories are on the right 

side and the government made the wrong move. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's appalling that when we sit here and you begin 

to wonder how true . . . and you assess the comments that have 

been made by the media and by people on the street and by 

people at public meetings, and you begin to wonder, does the 

Minister of Agriculture really know what he's talking about? 

 

And I listened to my colleague yesterday, the member from 

Arm River, when he was going through a scenario on the GRIP 

program, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that it would take away or 

has really destroyed or undermined the stability for farm 

families, and the Minister of 

Agriculture just kept shaking his head.  No, you're wrong. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, there isn't any way that the Minister of 

Agriculture can sit down, crunch the numbers, and tell me or 

tell anyone else that his program or the program we're debating 

in this Assembly is going to be better than the 1991 program.  

There isn't any way that that is possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is unfortunate.  And I believe that's why 

farmers are finding it frustrating trying to deal with the 

Minister of Agriculture, trying to get the Minister of 

Agriculture to at least listen to their point and accept the fact.  

Who knows, maybe the problem isn't totally with the Minister 

of Agriculture. 

 

Maybe the problem rests even a little further on the front 

benches with the Minister of Finance and the fact that the 

Minister of Finance today is trying to cover up all the extra 

dollars that he has unilaterally written off on the budget and 

placed in last year's budget, putting it all at the feet, as I 

indicated earlier, of the former government, and now today 

trying to take that 1.6 billion additional debt that he threw into 

last year's deficit and trying to cover it up and trying to build 

himself or dig himself out of the hole, crawl out of the hole he 

has dug for himself. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, in doing that he has left himself with very 

little room so that if indeed the Minister of Agriculture is 

sitting around the cabinet table and saying, listen, isn't there 

something we could do . . .  Because I know the debate that 

took place in our caucus on numerous occasions, a debate 

where the Minister of Finance would stand up and unilaterally 

say, no, we cannot; we can't move; we mustn't budge off of our 

commitment or else we're going to destroy our budget plans. 

 

As caucus members, we'd be there.  Because what we were 

hearing, Mr. Speaker, whether it was with Agriculture, whether 

it was in Rural Development, whether it was in Health, 

whatever it was, Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us would 

raise the question, well can we give a little bit here so that we 

can be more supportive?  Is this a more compassionate way of 

addressing the problems we face today? 

 

As I suggested, Mr. Speaker, and as I suggested earlier, yes, 

there's no quick solution to the GRIP debate.  And maybe, 

maybe just maybe, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, if 

he had a little more support, might be able to get the Minister 

of Finance to move a little bit to indeed put the support into the 

agricultural program that is needed, even to back up and to 

grab a hold of the commitment made by the federal 

government to inject an extra $40 million into the 1992 

program. 

 

And certainly that $40 million, with an injection of $23 million 

from the province, isn't going to bring the '92 program up to 

what the '91 level would be, Mr. Speaker.  But what it would 

do, Mr. Speaker, is inject some added funds and support into 

the areas where farmers most desperately need it, areas where 

farmers are ploughing their crops down today because they just 

didn't have the moisture to grow that crop, areas where farmers 

are going to find that the crop that they thought they had isn't 

going  



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2441 

to be quite as large as it would have been. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as we continue to . . . Oh, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to come back to some other comments made by farmers 

too.  Talking about the Premier being in North Battleford, I 

found another article that indicates comments made by farmers: 

 

 But farmers in the North Battlefords area are concerned the 

federal government's irritation over the GRIP changes could 

jeopardize drought aid for Saskatchewan. 

 

We find the Minister of Agriculture continually arguing in this 

Assembly that we must go to Ottawa and ask for more funds.  

And they warn, but farmers are afraid that because the province 

of Saskatchewan isn't willing to work with and to co-operate 

with the federal government that it might be even more 

difficult for the province to even think or consider getting more 

federal aid from Ottawa. 

 

 And they warn the provincial government is courting political 

disaster by pushing its program through the legislature. 

 

 Joe Beckman, the reeve of the Rural Municipality of Battle 

River, said discontent with the program cuts across party 

lines. 

 

 Beckman, who runs a large mixed farm just west of the 

Battlefords, said the new program, which calculates yields on 

an area basis rather than an individual basis, will penalize 

farmers who grow specialty crops. 

 

And I hear that even in my own area.  The individuals who, 

over the last period of years, have diversified their farming 

operations are finding that the new program is basically 

encouraging them more to go back to the older forms of wheat 

and barley and oats production, rather than diversifying into the 

oilseeds and the pulse and specialty crops, Mr. Speaker.  And it 

appears that it's not just in my area, but as the article indicates, 

even into the northern parts of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Bill that has been presented 

before this Assembly, there's no doubt that it is going to create 

a nice little mine for the legal profession in this province and 

across this nation.  And certainly we have a number of lawyers 

who have indicated that they feel very strongly, and 

constitutional lawyers that feel very strongly that this Bill has 

serious implications and certainly is the type of Bill that could 

be taken further, even taken to the Supreme Court. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the period of the debate, we find that on 

numerous occasions the Premier has been asked to comment on 

the GRIP legislation, comment on government actions.  And 

we find that the Premier refuses, continues to refuse to 

comment on the actions of the government regarding GRIP 

other than to indicate that even though the Tories have the right 

to have taken the right course of action, the GRIP Bill will not 

change. 

Mr. Speaker, what else do we find?  We find that not only are 

the government indicating that they won't change the GRIP Bill 

and the Bill before this legislation . . . before the Assembly, 

and not only have they resorted to closure, to eliminate or limit 

debate in this Assembly, but it also appears as well that there 

may be future GRIP changes which may eliminate agents 

across this province.  And what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? 

 

We just had question period taken up with the question of 

economic development and trying to create jobs, trying to 

create employment in this province.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, as 

we found out the other day, a pamphlet has gone out to 

producers right across this province, asking for their thoughts 

on the GRIP program, asking for their ideas.  And one of the 

areas that they're asking about is whether or not they would be 

willing to pay a premium or pay an additional bit of money to 

help cover the costs of GRIP agents, crop insurance agents 

across this province.  And many of our people argue, well we 

really don't need them.  But I would suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that there are many people out there working to 

explain a program which has become very complicated. 

 

And maybe that's one of the biggest problems with the GRIP as 

well, is not only was the old program complicated, but I think 

when you look at this one even a little more closely, you find 

that it is more complicated than the old program.  And certainly 

many of the agents I have talked to have indicated that it is 

becoming more difficult for them to perform their jobs. 

 

But if the government is asking if people are willing to help 

cover some of the cost, it would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, 

that it is a roundabout way of getting a response that would 

indicate that they will do away with the agents, which would 

mean some 200-and-some jobs lost in rural Saskatchewan jobs.  

And I must indicate to members of this Assembly, and I think 

if anyone took the time . . . not jobs like the teaching profession 

or the health profession with that type of income coming in, but 

certainly jobs with a lot less.  But needless to say, it was still a 

job that was putting money into people's hands and money into 

families' hands and giving them the opportunity to continue to 

live in our small rural communities. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we find it offensive that the government 

would even consider that in light of the fact they continue to 

tell us that they're looking at ways and means of creating 

economic activity and spin-off across our province. 

 

We also find that the questionnaire . . . the minister of 

Cunningham . . . minister, pardon me, the Minister of Rural 

Development indicated that a new review committee will be 

convened to review farm incomes and decide on more 

substantive changes to GRIP.  And I find that interesting. 

 

If changes are needed today, then why are we doing such 

substantive changes through this Bill right now to the old 

program rather than allowing the program to continue and 

getting into this fall and getting our heads together with the 

federal government and through co-operation, through 

consultation, and by taking all the suggestions 



2442 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

that have been given to us, handed down to us, been made by 

crop insurance agents, by the committees, the provincial 

committee and by the federal committee, and sitting down with 

. . . 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, not just farm groups, not 

just the directorship of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool or not 

just the president and vice-presidents of the United Grain 

Growers or the Western Canadian Wheat Growers or the 

executive of SARM, Mr. Speaker, but sitting down with 

common, ordinary, everyday farmers who are out there actually 

working on the land, and getting their input on GRIP changes, 

Mr. Speaker.  I think that would be a more appropriate forum 

of getting a better consensus and a better idea of the type of 

changes that would be needed to strengthen and solidify the 

gross revenue insurance program, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this morning my colleague from Arm River, 

when we were speaking on the time allocation motion, 

presented a proposal.  And it's a proposal or suggestion that has 

also been sent to the Minister of Economic Development and 

the House Leader by my colleague, the member for Rosthern, 

and asked the minister to take serious thought . . . look 

seriously at allowing this Bill to go directly to the courts, or 

putting it in the courts and asking the courts to give their 

impressions of the Bill, to rule on the Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we've asked that question on two or three 

occasions in this legislature.  We've asked the question of the 

Minister of Justice on three occasions.  The Minister of Justice 

continued to refer the question to the Minister of Agriculture.  

And the reason we went to the Minister of Justice, Mr. 

Speaker, because we feel very strongly that the Minister of 

Justice would have a better understanding of the legal 

implications of the changes to the GRIP Bill. 

 

And I believe the proposal that was put forward by my 

colleague, the member from Arm River, was an appropriate 

proposal.  I believe it was appropriate for the member to ask 

the Minister of Justice and ask the House Leader to refer this 

Bill to the courts and allow the courts then to make a decision, 

to give us an idea of how they felt, to allow them to rule on the 

Bill. 

 

And if indeed, Mr. Speaker, if indeed the government are as 

right as they indicate they are, even though the indications we 

have are they aren't right, but if they are right, Mr. Speaker, the 

courts will rule in their favour.  And at that case it would be far 

more convenient and far more beneficial for the government, 

for Executive Council, for the minister to have that ruling in 

their hands sooner rather than later.  It would be a lot more 

beneficial for the five farmers who are presently in the process 

of taking the government to court, Mr. Speaker.  They would 

have a better understanding of where they stand today. 

 

And if indeed the government is wrong, then, Mr. Speaker, the 

courts, as the Minister of Agriculture indicated, will at a future 

date indicate that they are wrong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be appropriate for 

us to ask the Justice minister, or ask the Agriculture minister to 

go to his colleague and sit down 

with him, and if the Minister of Agriculture and the Justice 

minister and the House Leader could agree and would agree, 

certainly as my colleague indicated this morning, Mr. Speaker, 

we would be more than willing and we would more than able 

to move onto other business in this Assembly.  We would be 

more than willing and able to get with a number of the Bills 

that must be passed in this Assembly. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be a very . . . We're asking 

the House Leader to give very serious thought to what is taking 

place, give very serious thought to this proposal that we have 

put before him. 

 

When we look at the . . . I have mentioned on a number of 

occasions the fact that there are many people who feel that it is 

inappropriate for the government to retroactively work against 

individuals, individual rights and freedoms. 

 

I'm going to do another quote, give another quote from the 

Star-Phoenix: 

 

 "After signing a contract with farmers on the GRIP safety 

net, the NDP is changing the rules of the game without 

providing the required notice.  Some farmers see that as a 

breach of contract and are suing.  The government's response 

is to bring in legislation that will say the government has 

followed the rules.  In effect, Romanow and Agriculture 

Minister, Berny Wiens are telling farmers 'yes, we broke our 

contract with you but here's a law that says we didn't.'" 

 

And Bill No. 87 is that law, is that piece of legislation.  And 

indeed, Mr. Speaker, the Bill may not say specifically that they 

didn't break the contract, but the Bill says, he's now telling us, 

that the contract that was signed by some 50,000-plus farmers 

across this province is now null and void, or has been void 

from day one, Mr. Speaker.  And I find that to be very 

inappropriate.  And I'm sad that the government has taken this 

direction. 

 

I quote, Mr. Charles, a spokesman for the producers action 

committee:  It's a sad state of affairs when farmers have to sue 

the government for breach of contract. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people out there who really feel 

that indeed it is a sad state of affairs that a government would 

sue the government . . . or that farmers would have to sue their 

own government for breach of contract when all they're asking 

is to give them the support they need to stabilize their 

individual farms, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then I look at what did the judge say in the appeal: 

 

 It would appear that (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance) has put 

the cart before the horse. 

 

And this is a quote from the Leader-Post made by Judge Darla 

Hunter. 

 

 If the Crown and agents of the Crown undertake costly 

system changes before effecting the necessary . . . changes, 

they cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown, or its agents, 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2443 

have voluntarily incurred. 

 

Mr. Speaker: 

 

 "The issue is also compounded by the fact that the 

government intends to use its (GRIP) legislation as a defence 

in court.  It will argue it did not break its contract, because 

the bill says it didn't.  In effect, the government is changing 

the facts in the case." 

 

And then we go back to: 

 

 "A court affidavit filed earlier in the day from the deputy 

Agriculture minister, Stuart Kramer suggested the NDP is 

about to introduce legislation to retroactively force farmers to 

accept changes to GRIP . . . Kramer's affidavit -- a response 

to a lawsuit filed against the government in a Melville court 

room -- stated Wiens intends to introduce legislative 

amendments 'in which notice of the 1992 changes will be 

deemed to have been given to producers by March 15, 1992 

as required in their individual contracts.'" 

 

And as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, all the information we've 

received indicates very soundly to us that the government was 

more intent on ramming through and continuing to push their 

legislation, rather than listening to the desires and wishes of 

individual producers and individual people across the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is something that we wouldn't expect of any 

government in the province of Saskatchewan or even in the 

Dominion of Canada, to use their power, use their large 

majority, to force those type of changes. 

 

And why do we say that, Mr. Speaker?  Because we believe 

that farm families must have their day in court.  We believe 

that the individuals who went to court against the government, 

because they felt very strongly about their contract -- we 

believe as well that they must have their day in court.  And as 

I've indicated earlier, we believe the government should give 

them that opportunity for that day in court. 

 

We believe the government should look very closely at the 

clause . . . and here again I would suggest that as we get to the 

clause-by-clause study in committee, we will be making 

amendments that would at least give the government the 

opportunity . . . or the government would give the courts the 

opportunity to address the process that they are involved in and 

the suit that has been filed against them.  It is a shameful and 

undemocratic misuse of government authority that should not 

be allowed to go unchallenged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe the government should be brought to 

task and that's what the farmers' Office of the Farmers' 

Advocate and the producers action committee indicated as 

well.  Mr. Speaker, they find the . . . very offending that the 

government would indeed take this action against individual 

producers in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe when we look at the question before us 

and the debate that we've been in for a number of hours at this 

time, or at least a couple days, and we look 

at the fact that we've been inviting government members to 

enter into the debate, and we've been asking the Minister of 

Justice to refer the decision or the Bill to the courts, one also 

has to be mindful of some of the comments; and I'm sure as 

we've indicated, a number of the rural members and a number 

of the members on the government side of the House, 

back-benchers, have been facing a number of questions, or 

questions have been raised with them as well, regarding the 

principles of the Bill before the Assembly and the fact that it 

would challenge the rights of individuals. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader 

said the government is not considering the referring of the Bill 

to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal at this juncture.  Mr. 

Mitchell, as the article indicates, has refused to answer the 

opposition demands directly, but told reporters he has no 

position on it at all. 

 

(1545) 

 

I would trust that the Minister of Justice, the highest person in 

the province regarding justice, would indeed take a moment to 

sit down and assess the real impact of this legislation on the 

rights of individuals and -- indeed, Mr. Speaker, as his 

counterpart did back in 1989 -- refer it directly to the courts 

because I believe, as we see a number of the NDP 

back-benchers are, I'm sure, getting comments from their 

constituents as well and finding out that even though some of 

the constituents might accept 1992 GRIP, many would just as 

soon have '91. 

 

And I quote from an article, August 12, 1992: 

 

 In an interview, Evan Carlson (NDP -- Melville) said he's 

been getting a number of calls from people who preferred the 

old version of GRIP introduced by the Tories, as well as 

those who want the new version. 

 

And he indicates it's about an even split, as I've indicated 

continually in my speech.  There are people on both sides of 

the fence.  It depends whether you've had rain or whether you 

haven't. 

 

Also the member from Redberry indicated there's some 

disappointment about the limited coverage coverage of the 

1992 GRIP.  Mr. Speaker, yes there is, and I believe there will 

be more disappointment as more and more people become fully 

aware of what the 1992 GRIP does to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to just bring your attention to a poll that 

was conducted by, I believe it was the Farmers' Advocate, if I 

can find it in all my papers here, Mr. Speaker.  And when Mr. 

Kormos from the Farmers' Advocate were talking to farmers 

about the changes, Mr. Speaker, they did a poll and they asked 

three questions.  And the questions were, the Government of 

Saskatchewan, they were asking people if: 

 

 The Government of Saskatchewan has fairly and adequately 

consulted farmers before approving the changes to the Plan. 

 

And of their poll, Mr. Speaker, 97 per cent said disagreed 



2444 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

and 2 per cent agreed that they had been properly notified.  

They also asked: 

 

 The changes to the Plan are injurious to farmers participating 

in the Plan by significantly reducing the level of protection 

while increasing the cost to the farmer of maintaining his or 

her coverage. 

 

And many producers also agreed that yes, the plan was quite 

injurious to their operation, Mr. Speaker, in fact 95 per cent of 

respondents.  And the question was given: 

 

 A comprehensive review of the Plan through direct and 

meaningful consultation with farmers is required before 

implementation of the present or any future changes to the 

Plan. 

 

Is that true?  And that was the understanding many of the 

farmers had.  And again, when the question was placed, Mr. 

Speaker, 96 per cent agreed that before any major changes 

were implemented, they would have proper and ample 

notification and consultation of the changes. 

 

And then they asked if farmers were in favour of restoring the 

1991 program.  And they said: 

 

 I am in favour of restoring the 1991 plan pending a 

comprehensive review of the plan and any changes to it. 

 

Do you agree or disagree: 95.8 per cent agreed; 4.2 per cent 

disagreed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And Mr. Speaker, I also had the privilege of attending a farm 

rally at the Agridome.  And when the same questions were 

raised and placed before the floor . . . and many of my 

colleagues as we observed the number of people who stood for 

and against . . . I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the percentages 

were along the same lines.  And on many occasions the 

members or the individuals standing against the questions, Mr. 

Speaker . . . we observed a number of NDP back-bench MLAs; 

they seemed to be about the only very few that stood up against 

the questions that were raised by the Office of the Farmers' 

Advocate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also see that this GRIP program has created 

another problem for the present government.  And because of 

this, the government is trying to find ways of working their 

way out of the program or working their way around the 

program.  Mr. Speaker, we see on July 21, 1992, a letter went 

out to producers across this province.  And I just want to quote 

a bit out of the letter, a letter from the Hon. Minister of 

Agriculture and Food.  And it starts out by saying this: 

 

 Income problems continue to cause tremendous hardship for 

Saskatchewan farm families. 

 

And I'll repeat that: 

 

 Income problems continue to cause tremendous hardship for 

Saskatchewan farm families.  Your Premier and government 

are sensitive to these problems and want to ensure that the 

federal government in Ottawa understands just how 

serious the situation is in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to indicate that, yes, there are 

serious income problems.  There are serious income problems 

because of one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is the fact that the 

provincial government has substantively changed the 1991 

GRIP program as I've been outlining for the Assembly today 

and the fact that the changes continually turn and destroy the 

revenue insurance program and the bottom line and the 

guarantee that farmers had under the 1991 program. 

 

And as we've noted on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, we find 

that this letter does what the government has been doing all 

along.  It asks people to write the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the 

Rt. Hon. Brian Mulroney, letting him know of the difficulties 

we face in rural Saskatchewan and asking him to go to his 

cabinet and give approval for a substantial cash injection to the 

people of Saskatchewan or to the farm families of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is . . . there again, we may 

get a cash injection.  If the federal government were to come up 

with a major cash injection of funds into the province of 

Saskatchewan, what would it do?  Would it help those people 

who don't have a crop this year?  Mr. Speaker, no it wouldn't.  

It would not, for the simple reason that if you're going to put a 

cash injection into the province of Saskatchewan and if indeed 

the federal government were to come up with $500 million for 

this province, the pay-out would be based on the fact that the 

price of grain is maybe . . . I believe it's in that neighbourhood 

of just over $3 for number one hard prairie red spring wheat.  

And they would possibly look and say okay, we'll bump that by 

another 10 or 20 or 30 cents, and it'll go out to all producers in 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if it's made on the basis of crop production, then 

there again, if it's made on the basis of the fact that the prices 

are too low, there again the producer who has had their crop 

destroyed because of lack of rain and because of the drought or 

hail or frost, Mr. Speaker, that producer wouldn't get much of a 

pay-out. 

 

Or, Mr. Speaker, if the federal government would decide to 

make it on the basis of an acreage pay-out of maybe $10 an 

acre, that payment would go to everyone, as we've seen before.  

There again, Mr. Speaker, that is not a fair way of putting 

money into rural Saskatchewan and trying to stabilize the farm 

economy. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I feel it would be more appropriate to 

design an appropriate crop insurance and revenue insurance 

program that lays out the bottom line so that individuals know 

exactly where they stand.  And I just want to make note of the 

bottom of this letter, and it was photocopied and sent back to 

us.  Mr. Speaker, it says . . . the comment is this, Mr. Speaker:  

Berny, maybe you should have kept the old GRIP format and 

we wouldn't need to be begging from the federal government.  

Just because you're too cheap to pay up doesn't mean farmers 

should do your dirty work and write to the federal government.  

Do your job. 

 

Many people across this province have that same viewpoint, 

Mr. Speaker, because just to take and ask the 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2445 

federal government for an acreage payment or for a payment 

based on prices would not do one thing for the individual who 

faced drought or hail or frost. 

 

And you wonder why we stand in this Assembly and continue 

to debate the Bill before us.  What are other people saying 

about the Bill?  I'm just going to quote a number of comments 

made by people around this province regarding the GRIP 

legislation, regarding the changes. 

 

 I don't think the government should be able to easily change 

something they set up like that . . . I don't support a 

government that makes wholesale changes to programs 

people have put their life into. 

 

That's from a gentleman in the Saskatoon area in the Leader-

Post of June of 1992. 

 

Or this quote, another quote from the Leader-Post: 

 

 I think they (farmers) had a pretty good deal going and then 

Mr. Romanow turns around and tries to wreck it . . . I think 

Devine had every right to walk out. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as well another article from a gentleman 

from Canora: 

 

 Yes, I do (and talking about the walk-out and talking about 

the walk-out on GRIP) support the walk-out.  The main 

reason is I believe last year when they (the government) 

initiated the program, they guaranteed us they would not 

change the program unless they gave us due time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many people around us, many people 

around this province who continually tell us, continue to tell us 

that we did the right thing.  They continue to tell us that we 

must stand in this legislature, and we must continue to inform 

people about the changes that are taking place so that indeed 

people can react. 

 

And hopefully in the end, people and the Executive Council 

and ministers and the Minister of Agriculture will decide that 

when we come to committee they will accept and introduce a 

number of the amendments that we propose to bring forward, 

that they will have a listening ear, that they will have a 

consultative ear, that they will be very understanding of the 

situation that is arising.  And certainly I believe the Minister of 

Finance would want to be understanding and somewhat 

compassionate, as you find whenever the farm community is 

making a dollar, the farm community is paying some taxes, and 

the taxes are coming into the coffers of . . . so that the Minister 

of Finance has more money with which to balance his budget.  

And I think that would be more appropriate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what about an individual from Moose Jaw in the 

Leader-Post.  His comment was: 

 

 Yes I agree with them (the PCs).  Somebody's got to stop the 

government, otherwise they'd pass laws and do whatever they 

want to do. 

Or another comment from an individual from Moose Jaw: 

 

 They (the NDP government) changed the program without 

doing it by the rules.  I signed a contract for four years, and 

they changed the contract.  If I wanted to change the contract, 

I couldn't. (Only the government can.) 

 

And those are a number of the concerns that are being raised 

out there, Mr. Speaker, concerns that have been put down in 

writing, concerns that have been in the media.  And certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I have had people from all 

walks of life in and outside our constituencies raise these same 

concerns with us.  And not just on the area of agriculture, but in 

other areas and other dealings that the government is dealing 

with.  And we could get into the debate on optometric and 

chiropractic services, but I realize that's for another day, Mr. 

Speaker.  The same problem arises there as arises with the 

changes to the GRIP program that we face today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think one comment and quote that is appropriate 

in putting before the Assembly as well is the fact that over the 

years people in Saskatchewan not only believed and supported 

the individual rights of people, but they also believed in doing 

business very simply.  And when you said something and when 

you shook your hands on it, that handshake was like signing a 

contract.  That comment, Mr. Speaker, a farmer who was 

visiting with us, farmer Boyd Charles said, farmers do business 

on a handshake, on a word of mouth.  Your word better be your 

bond, and this action the government is taking now, to make a 

lie a law, is against everything that we believe in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers over the years have always lived on the 

basis of honouring contracts, of honouring their commitment.  

And that contract may have just been a verbal agreement, but 

they never moved or swayed from that agreement.  If they said 

they made a commitment to you, Mr. Speaker, they stood by it. 

 

And I know many people in our area.  And what I also find, 

Mr. Speaker, is that many people, many farmers, many 

individuals, even business men . . . And I must indicate just 

recently while I was on my way home I stopped by at a local 

business to pick up some items.  And as I was going through 

the till, the cashier indicated to me and said, the next time your 

wife is in, tell her just to stop by because I accidentally 

overcharged her for some produce she picked up and I'm more 

than willing to replace that produce. 

 

And I thought, well, boy you don't often hear that.  You don't 

often hear someone offering to repay for something that they 

did, not knowingly did it, and it wasn't . . . they didn't intend to 

do it.  But because they made a mistake, they were willing to 

make up for that mistake. 

 

And I believe that is excellent, and it's positive to see in our 

society that people are . . . there are still people out there with a 

conscience, still people out there who are willing to honour 

their commitment to individuals. 

 

(1600) 



2446 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

And certainly I think over the years we've seen farmers are 

more than willing to stand and to live up to their commitment 

-- to their commitments to their community and to the people 

they deal with. 

 

We can argue and say the NDP has got to give in.  That is the 

government's only viable choice, the option to save face.  But it 

would appear to me, Mr. Speaker, that the government is not 

intent on giving in.  But I trust that through the debate that has 

taken place and I trust that through the comments and the 

debate that has taken place in caucus and the number of 

suggestions that have been made by caucus members again, 

Mr. Speaker, that the government, that the Minister of 

Agriculture, will indeed listen and accept the amendments and 

the suggestions that have been placed forward by the 

opposition and by farm groups and leaders and individuals 

across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from one more individual 

regarding . . . And this is just a very recent quote.  This is from 

Bernard Kirwan, president of SARM, in the Leader-Post, July 

29: 

 

 The 1991 version of GRIP would have given solid, 

bottom-line protection to farmers and that's what attracted 

them last year. 

 

 But the Saskatchewan 1992 version ended that backing . . . 

"It rewards you when you have a crop, but it doesn't protect 

you when you don't have a crop," (Bernard Kirwan) said. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're also aware of the fact that people would like 

to have that bottom line.  They'd like to have that guarantee.  

They'd like to know that they are protected and that the bottom 

line is there for them to make that business-type decision, so 

they know how to set up and build their business and run their 

farms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have talked about working and co-operating 

and working along with governments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like at this time to ask, pursuant to rule 

no. 55.1, I hereby request that proceedings on Bill No. 87, An 

Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation, be suspended for three sitting days, allowing for 

the House to get on to normal business. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  At the request of the official 

opposition, under rule 55.1, proceedings on Bill No. 87, An Act 

respecting amendments to Certain Farm Income Insurance 

Legislation, are hereby suspended for three sitting days. 

 

I might point out to the members that the suspension takes 

effect immediately and continues until the same hour three 

sitting days later. 

 

Bill No. 66 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 66 -- An Act 

to amend The Industrial Development 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Bill No. 66, The 

Industrial Development Amendment Act, I believe we can ask 

all of the questions with respect to this Bill in committee and 

we'd have no problem allowing this Bill to move forward into 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 78 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 78 -- An Act 

to amend The Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations 

Act be now read a second time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 79 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 79 -- An Act 

to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan offered people in Saskatchewan, 

offered them the opportunity to participate in a pension that 

they'd ordinarily not have that opportunity.  It was an excellent 

plan, Mr. Speaker.  I think testimony to that is such that 55,000 

people in Saskatchewan enjoyed the benefits of belonging to 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 82 -- I believe it is -- per cent of the people 

involved in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan were women.  And 

approximately in that same number, 80-some per cent of the 

people involved in it had incomes of less than $16,000.  

Obviously a program that is excellently targeted to people most 

in need of a pension plan in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan absolutely couldn't believe a 

government that would take a pension plan away from 

home-makers, small-business owners, people most in need of a 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker.  And yet in the budget of April 27, 

that's exactly what the Finance minister of this province did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through public pressure -- tremendous public 

pressure -- pressure from the opposition, pressure from all over 

Saskatchewan, including government back-bench MLAs, the 

pension plan was brought back in skeletal form, Mr. Speaker.  

They took out, and they remain out, the two most important 

features of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan -- the matching 

government contribution as well as the minimum guaranteed 

pension, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, those two aspects of the plan were what attracted 

people to the plan in the first place.  In this day and age, 

everyone, I believe -- except perhaps the 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2447 

government members -- believes that a pension plan is 

something that is extremely important and should be carried on 

at all costs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of questions with respect to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  We believe we can ask them in 

committee and we'd ask now that this Bill move forward to 

committee. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 83 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Mitchell that Bill No. 83 -- An Act 

respecting Pension Benefits be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is a fairly 

comprehensive Act dealing with pensions and pension benefits 

throughout Saskatchewan.  And I believe that there needs to be 

some time.  And I'm hoping that the government has taken the 

time to consult with the pension industry, with the insurance 

industry that is dealing with this Act because there are some 

parts in here that I think everyone should be aware of, that it 

gives the government, the superintendent of pensions, the right 

to enter, to search, and to seize without a warrant, similar to 

what is in the environment Bill. 

 

Now we can have some understanding as to why it's important 

to have this in an environment Bill, but we find it rather strange 

that it be involved in a pension Bill.  Now I'm sure that none of 

the pension industry have anything to hide that couldn't be 

investigated.  But it's still rather strange, Mr. Speaker, that such 

a thing be included in the pension Act. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we're prepared to let this go on to 

committee, but I think the insurance industry, the pension 

industry should be aware of some of the provisions of this Bill.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

(1615) 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister please introduce his 

officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'd like to 

thank the opposition members for their indulgence while we 

waited for the officials to come.  It's a long ways and we're a 

little out of breath, but we made it and we're ready to go. 

 

The officials that I have with me right now -- and there's one 

more to come, and I'll introduce her when she gets here -- is 

Bruce Wilson right beside me here.  Bruce is the 

executive director of the petroleum and natural gas division.  

Directly behind me is Lynn Jacobson who is the director of 

personnel and administration.  Beside Lynn is Phil Reeves.  

Phil is the director of the mines branch, and I'll introduce the 

other officials as they come in. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

appreciate the speed in which you got your people here.  We 

understand that.  For today, Mr. Minister, we'll probably just 

stay on some of the routine kind of questions if it's all right 

with you, and then we will get into the major concerns a little 

later. 

 

First of all, I would like to start with your own staff, sir.  Could 

you give me a list of all the persons working in the minister's 

office, or otherwise, who report directly to you, each of their 

titles, their salaries, job descriptions, qualifications, and 

employment history including their last place of employment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I have the list here and I'll 

just pass it over if the page would take it over there, please. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Chairman, I 

would like to ask have any of them been reclassified since 

joining the government? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is no. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Would you then, Mr. Minister, provide . . . 

covering all persons terminated or vacant positions eliminated? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, again I have the list with 

me here and I would pass it over there, please. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and members of the opposition, we just had 

another one of my staff come in.  Jane Forster is over here now, 

and she's the director of metallic minerals division. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Minister, could I ask for a list of 

all persons fired, retired, or otherwise terminated in the 

department since November 1, 1991, including the nature of 

termination and whether with cause or without cause, where 

applicable. 

 

A separate list also, Mr. Minister, of positions eliminated, 

including the names of incumbents, where applicable. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the list I just sent over, I 

think includes that list as well.  I think you'll find them after the 

first page.  I think you'll find the answers to the questions that 

you've sent over some time ago for that second question.  I 

think all the names and the positions are all listed on that 

document I just sent over. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will continue on 

with some general questions and we'll check later on.  Then 

again, I would suggest . . . Is there also a list then, Mr. 

Minister, for each position in both categories that I 



2448 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

referred to of that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, yes. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Then could I then have the name of the 

supervisor, the immediate superior? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I think you'll also find that 

in that information I sent over.  I think it's all in that section. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It's moving along 

quite nicely.  Could I have a job description for each position? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I think it's also attached 

on the document I sent over. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We will . . . We 

don't seem to find the supervisor in the list, but we can come 

back to that in another day. 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, then could you please provide a complete 

compensation details including salary, expenses, allowances, 

special payments, severance pay and so on? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the document I sent over, 

I've just got the copy of it here right now.  On the second page 

-- at least in my copy -- you will have the supervisors.  I think 

you were asking for those earlier.  If you've got the same order 

I have, the supervisors are there and the salaries are on the first 

page, monthly salary for each of the people that you're asking 

about.  And in the case of the out-of-scope people, the salary 

range is given there. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, I will reserve 

judgement until I have had a check.  And I appreciate the speed 

in which we're going along here.  I see that you've come 

prepared and I appreciate that. 

 

Could then you provide me with the length of time employed, 

including the date the person first started to work for the 

department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, on the first page of 

the package I sent over is the date that these people were hired 

and also the date that the job was abolished.  And in both cases 

it's . . . one is two years, one is three years. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman.  

Could you then provide the employment record, including 

place of last employment and the most recent incumbent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the records that I've sent 

over have the history of employment since they came to the 

department.  We do not have with me today the record of 

employment prior to them coming to the department. 

 

But we also have . . . the supervisors and the job descriptions I 

think are attached to the document that I sent over.  It's about 

the second and third last page I 

believe you'll find the job descriptions and the responsibilities 

of the individual. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could I then . . . 

would you then commit yourself to providing that information 

at a later date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Yes, we will. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Then could you 

provide me with the employment qualifications, including 

education, of the most recent incumbent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, before I answer the 

question I'd like to introduce another one of my officials that 

just came in.  The person that just came in is Malcolm Wilson.  

He's the assistant director of the Energy department. 

 

In answer to your question, Mr. Chairman, the answer is that 

these were casual positions, and they were vacant.  There was 

no incumbent on those positions.  They're casual positions that 

you see on the first page there. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Then could you provide me, Mr. Minister, 

where contracts exist, true copies of these contracts, and again, 

the most recent incumbent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not quite clear on 

the question here, whether he wants employment contracts or 

non-employment contracts.  We will be able to provide them, 

but we need to know which ones he's specifically asking for. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Minister, what I need to know is, 

where contracts exist, I need to know the true copies of those 

contracts and the most recent incumbent.  By the way, sir, it is 

employment contract.  I think that's the question you asked. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I may have more information here than 

the member's asking for, but my department's been so diligent 

in getting the answers to all these questions that we will 

probably overwhelm you with paper here if we keep on much 

longer.  I have only one copy, but we can get you another copy 

if you desire another copy of this contract.  And I have with me 

the 1991-92 personal services contracts and those are history 

obviously.  I also have with me the 1992-93 current contracts. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman -- I guess I'm 

backwards there; it should be Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister -- I 

do appreciate that we're getting along really good here and 

we'll get out of these routine kind of things and get into the 

meat of the matter.  And I really do appreciate your 

co-operation.  Could you then provide me the physical location 

of the person's place of employment, where the most recent 

incumbents actually did their work? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, if you're asking about 

those that were terminated, I think their location of 

employment is given on the front page there -- the clerk typist 

II and the clerk II -- and the ones on the personal service 

contracts I believe are also on the sheet that I tabled with the 

Chairperson.  I think they're all on there; 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2449 

their location . . . probably three or four different locations. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Okay, thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

maybe I didn't phrase the question quite right.  What I'd like to 

have is the physical location of the person's place of 

employment.  And I don't think Regina is quite what I want. 

 

And also, where the most recent incumbents actually did their 

work.  It's kind of a two-part question there, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- The actual physical location for the 

Regina office is the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank Building.  I 

don't know the exact address of that but I can . . . 1914 

Hamilton Street.  And we have the top floors of that building.  

And in Creighton it's the Creighton office, and I'm not sure if 

Creighton's big enough to have street addresses. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I think 

you're on a little dangerous ground there, because that's out in 

Mr. Muirhead's country and I don't think he'll want you to 

downplay Creighton. 

 

Anyway, could you provide me the information, Mr. Minister: 

if a replacement was hired, the name and the same details that 

we requested for the above for the new employee. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer is that we have 

not filled those positions.  We have not hired replacements.  

These positions are vacant and are going to be left vacant 

because of budgetary reasons, so there's no replacement has 

been hired. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if the 

position was eliminated, why was this position eliminated as 

opposed to some other position?  And what was the process 

and the resulting rationale for getting rid of this employee or 

this position?  Could we have that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, the answer to that 

question is that, as I said, no replacements were hired.  And the 

particular permanent positions were eliminated because they 

were deemed to be most expendable in terms of department 

functions and because it involved the necessity of terminating 

the employment of an individual.  So it was just deemed that 

this particular position was expendable in the department at 

that particular time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I noticed you're 

using the word deemed.  It seems like a favourite word, keeps 

running through the government policies.  And I thank you for 

the answer. 

 

Could you provide me if the incumbent had been hired since 

November 1, 1991, the name and the same details requested 

above for the immediately preceding incumbent? 

 

(1645) 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we have not replaced any 

of those positions.  Those positions are 

vacant at the current time, the ones that you're referring to.  

They're empty. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I was 

looking at . . . glancing at some of the reports you sent over.  

Could you tell me in the question of David Degenstein, senior 

ministerial assistant, could you tell me who he worked for in 

the seven years of government experience, '75 to '82? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, Dave Degenstein worked 

in the Department of Highways.  I believe that was his most 

recent position.  He was a ministerial assistant, I think towards 

the end of his career, to Bob Long, the former minister of 

Highways back in '81-82. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, am I to assume 

from the answer that the seven years was with Highways under 

. . . the Department of Highways in the two years prior as a 

ministerial assistant to the hon. Bob Long? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I can't give the exact 

locations that he worked, but I would not firmly commit that he 

worked for Highways all this time.  But he worked within the 

government departments and for a short period of time he was 

a ministerial assistant to a minister. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you then 

provide us with that information at a later date?  Are you 

nodding affirmative?  Thank you. 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, could you provide a list of all the positions 

created since November 1, 1991? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, no new positions have 

been created in the department since November 1, 1991. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to go back.  

When I said later date, I should maybe say, before the 

Estimates are finished.  A later date could be a long time.  

Could I have the commitment that the information that I'm 

asking will be given to me before we finish the Estimates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- We certainly can.  I can get this 

information over to you fairly shortly. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- And I understand from your last answer that 

there were no new positions created since November 1, 1991.  

You're nodding in the affirmative? 

 

Then I will drop down then to . . . All right.  Mr. Minister, 

could you then provide me with a list of all the reclassifications 

in the department since November 1, 1991, including the 

names of all the affected employees? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I'll table a list of the 

names with the Chair. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  It would seem, as 

we're going along, that you may have had a copy of these 

questions that I'm answering . . . or that I'm asking.  Could I ask 

you then to give me your assurance that you will provide the 

answers to all of these questions later in 



2450 Saskatchewan Hansard August 13, 1992 

the Estimates, and then we can probably get into some of the 

meat of the matter. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for 

the question.  We did have a list of questions that you've sent 

over at an earlier time.  It must be several weeks ago by now.  

And the department has prepared answers to all those 

questions.  If you want them read into the record, we can have 

them read into the record.  If you would just like to have the 

answers, we could table them and then you can have them after 

that. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that.  

I think that we can go into the reading of them into the records 

at a later date.  I appreciate . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, we'll undertake to get 

them to you in a short while. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Minister, the Associate Minister of Finance today suggested 

that the Bi-Provincial upgrader at Lloydminster was a good 

deal for Saskatchewan.  Mr. Minister, would you agree with 

that assessment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a fairly 

broad-ranging question and I guess I could answer that in two 

different ways.  There are probably parts of it that were a very 

good deal and parts of it that may not have been a very good 

deal.  So if the member would be a little more specific, I could 

probably give him specific answers. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think the statements of the 

Associate Minister of Finance today were pretty clear.  He felt 

that the people of Saskatchewan today through your 

government had put together an arrangement, an agreement, 

that was good for Saskatchewan people, good for the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan, and good for investment in Saskatchewan, 

and good for everything and anything, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 

Minister.  But, Mr. Minister, there were a whole lot of things 

that are wrong with that -- his assessment. 

 

Mr. Minister, it's our understanding that there will not be one 

nickel of investment returned to Saskatchewan until all other 

players in the agreement -- Alberta people, the people from 

Husky, the Government of Alberta, and the federal government 

-- are paid out.  Not one cent of return on investment to 

Saskatchewan until everyone else is paid out, Mr. Minister.  

And, Mr. Minister, I don't think that's good enough.  And I 

suspect the people of Saskatchewan agree with me and don't 

think it's good enough. 

 

And on top of that, Mr. Speaker, it's another obligation and 

another contract broken by this government which has a 

history, a history of breaking promises and a history of 

breaking contracts and obligations right since the moment they 

formed government.  Right since that very moment, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Within days, within days of taking over as government, they 

cancel outright the AECL agreement with AECL.  They 

cancelled that agreement.  It, Mr. Minister, had the potential for 

millions and millions of dollars of investment 

in this province and thousands and thousands of jobs. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, you folks just sat back and said, no, no, we 

don't want that in Saskatchewan.  We don't have the ability to 

look after and manage that type of thing in Saskatchewan.  We 

don't need that kind of thing in Saskatchewan.  No to progress, 

as my colleagues says. 

 

That's what you've said to the people of Saskatchewan.  And 

it's no wonder, Mr. Minister, that the business community is 

upset with your government.  Absolutely no wonder they're 

upset with you.  And the reason why the Premier was 

summoned to a meeting in Saskatoon with business leaders is 

because they're upset with you, sir.  It's because the don't see 

any initiatives that will move this province forward, Mr. 

Minister.  They don't see any things like AECL happening. 

 

What they do see from you, sir, is a government that has no 

indication of where they're going, has shown no indication, has 

no economic plan for this province, particularly with respect to 

energy development, but in a whole host of other areas as well. 

 

This upgrader deal, as I said, provides Saskatchewan with not 

one nickel of return investment now.  It essentially puts a 

garnishee on the treasury of Saskatchewan by all of the other 

governments associated with Husky Oil, Mr. Minister. 

 

Contracts broken -- you've weaseled out of another one here.  

And we see that again today, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Chairman.  We see that again.  A government that simply 

cannot be trusted or their word cannot be trusted, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it little wonder after these types of things, these 

types of broken promises, and broken contracts, broken 

obligations, that there isn't business wanting to come into 

Saskatchewan?  The Finance minister in his budget said 700 

companies waiting at the doorstep, wanting to come into 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet we haven't seen a single one.  And it's no wonder, Mr. 

Minister, with the kinds of things that your government is 

doing -- breaking contracts every time you turn around. 

 

The AECL agreement called for a penalty of $2 million if you 

broke that contract.  One only has to wonder whether you paid 

that.  Was that paid out? The taxpayers of Saskatchewan would 

like to know that, I'm sure.  Or did you break that obligation as 

well?  Broke that obligation as well, I suspect. 

 

Other provincial governments will never want to do business 

with you people, if that's the way you're going to conduct 

yourselves.  The federal government, it's no wonder, doesn't 

want to have anything to do with you either, Mr. Minister.  It's 

no wonder they don't want to have anything to do with you 

when the conduct that you people have shown since you 

become elected . . . let alone business interests -- let alone 

business interests in North America, Mr. Minister. 

 

Little wonder they don't want to come here.  You see that 



August 13, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2451 

kind of thing going on day after day, month after month, ever 

since you've taken office.  You've broken contracts with your 

own employees, you've broken contracts with AECL, you've 

broken contracts with farmers, you've broken contracts in a 

number of areas.  And yet, Mr. Minister, the associate minister 

stands up and says, in glowing terms, that this is a great deal 

for Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, we don't agree with that assessment for one 

moment.  We don't agree with it for one moment and neither do 

the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, the Associate Minister of Finance says projects 

of this nature are often long-term investments and we're not 

even sure there would be a return to Saskatchewan people.  

Well he absolutely and you absolutely guaranteed that with this 

type of an agreement.  We won't see a return on investment in 

Saskatchewan as a result of your actions, as a result of the 

actions that you've taken with respect to the upgrader, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, your government is fast becoming the 

laughing-stock of North America -- fast becoming the 

laughing-stock of North America.  Everything from spandex to 

a government that won't honour contracts, to your economic 

development strategy -- or lack of. 

 

And I would say lack of, sir, because we don't see any 

indication of a strategy.  The only strategy that you seem to 

have is if the previous administration had anything to do with it 

at all, it's got to go.  That's all the strategy that you have.  It has 

to go.  If it has a Tory hand that has touched it, Saskatchewan 

simply can't have it as far as the NDP administration is 

concerned -- Saska Pasta, AECL, Piper, the upgrader, all kinds 

of things, Mr. Minister. 

 

And yet again, as I say, the associate minister of Finance stands 

up and says, this is one of the success stories that I'd like to tell 

you about today, to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  We 

successfully weaseled out of a contract today.  That's what we 

did.  We successfully weaseled out of a contract and we 

successfully negotiated a project that will give us not 1 cent of 

a return on investment. 

 

That is a wonderful success story.  The people and the 

unemployed in this province will be just jumping for joy this 

evening when they listen to the news, I'm sure, that that's what 

your government has been able to do today, sir. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 5 o'clock, the committee will 

recess until 7 o'clock p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 


