




















































Hansard: June 01, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 789 

 June 1, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 

The Chair: -- The business before the Committee of Finance is 

interim supply and the motion of the Minister of Finance: 
 

 Resolved that a sum not exceeding $469,935,000 be granted 

to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 

31, 1993. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When we 

concluded at 5 o'clock, the minister made some observations 

about the Potash Corporation, and I'd like to ask him if he 

would be able to tell us what was the price of the potash shares 

when they started?  What was the lowest price they went to and 

the highest price? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- All the information I have here is 

the information I provided when the shares were privatized or 

sold.  As a part of the privatization, they were $18; I am 

informed that they are now selling at $25. 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, the Minister should reflect a little bit 

and find out that they probably went down to 12.  I believe 12 

was the lowest that they sold.  Now you tell me which is the 

price to sell these shares at. 
 

You talked about losing money, and I can clearly recall the 

discussion as it related to Saskoil, as it related to the 

Saskatchewan Potash Corporation, in that when we said it was 

$18 a share or when it was established at $18 a share, when 

you were on this side of the House there was just criticism all 

over the place.  The shares wouldn't sell.  One time it's too 

high.  One time it's too low. 
 

So what do you sell a product that has no . . . is not moving in 

the market.  And that is what we had to do.  And consequently 

when we were in the process of the shares selling and they 

moved down in price, we had criticism in this Assembly for 

selling the shares too high.  We didn't know anything about the 

market.  Now when they go over $18 a share, then you get 

criticism, well you didn't sell them high enough.  Now what is 

right?  That's the question that you need to answer.  And I think 

you should take and evaluate before you give a response. 
 

I just want to make another observation.  You mentioned prior 

to the break that the member for Thunder Creek was a part of 

the treasury benches and you were mistaken on that one too.  

So I just want to point out that you get some of your facts 

straight so that we can at least understand where you're coming 

from and why you're doing it. 
 

Have you got an observation about the prices of the potash? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't know what 

this has got to do with interim supply and you might want to 

consider what the member is up to.  But I do have an 

observation.  My observation is that you don't sell a paying 

asset, especially a paying asset when you knowingly take a loss 

of $442 million.  It wasn't our decision.  It was your decision.  

You were there.  It was an 

asset that was paying dividends.  It was paying taxes.  It was 

operating very well.  You decided, for strictly ideological 

political reasons, to privatize it.  You spent tens of millions in 

dollars hiring advisors from Great Britain from Margaret 

Thatcher's advisory group to tell you how to do it. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, in the end you sold it, you lost $442 

million, the assets gone.  The Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan is operating at 50 per cent of its capacity.  And 

the Saskatchewan taxpayer is paying interest on $442 million 

of debt because there is no asset to pay for it and eventually we 

have to pay off the principal and the capital. 

 

What is right is that you should not have sold those shares in 

the first place, nor should you have sold the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan in the first place.  It was a mistake.  You 

know it was a mistake.  The Saskatchewan public knows it was 

a mistake.  And it's too bad that it was done because it's part of 

the price that we now have to pay. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, there were a lot of mistakes 

made.  And I'll tell you where the mistakes were made.  They 

were made in buying the potash mines in the first place.  They 

never created one more new job in this province.  In fact I had 

some people from the oil patch down at my place on the 

weekend and they said that was the most ridiculous thing that 

the NDP (New Democratic Party) government ever did was to 

buy potash mine -- didn't create one single new job.  And that 

was a billion dollars put into the economy taken and made 

available to the potash mines.  And it's like the member from 

Thunder Creek said: it went to New Brunswick and is in exact 

in competition with the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

In fact, Mr. Minister, the president of Sask Power Corporation 

was in Manitoba for years, earning significant dollars dealing 

with trying to get some potash mines established in Manitoba 

that would be in direct competition and now he sits at the head 

of the Power Corporation.  Is he going to do the same thing 

with Power Corporation that he wanted to do with the potash?  

That's the kind of things that we're really wanting to know and 

find out about. 

 

I don't believe that at any time that it was right for you to buy 

Intercon.  I don't believe it was right for you to buy the Biggar 

malt plant.  I don't believe it was right for you to buy 

Intercontinental Packers.  I don't believe it was right for you to 

buy the pulp mill at P.A. (Prince Albert). 

 

And, Mr. Minister, I can clearly recall in 1971 when you paid 

$10 million to Parsons and Whittemore down in New York 

because you didn't want to put a pulp mill up at Meadow Lake.  

And what is there now?  One of the best kind of pulp mills that 

you could ever want to have, completely integrated within 

itself.  And that, Mr. Minister, we could have had a pulp mill 

there to help the economy in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

You made an observation earlier.  You said that you had built 

in the '70s.  Well, Mr. Minister, you name me one thing that 

you built.  You bought but you didn't build.  You 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

put on the record here one thing that you built in the 1970s. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the record speaks 

for itself.  In 1982 . . . '81-82, March 31, '82, the net equity of 

the province was $2.608 billion.  In 1991, October 31, the 

province no longer had a net equity; it had a net debt of $5.5 

billion. 

 

If the members opposite can say that they built, I ask the 

member from Morse to explain why this difference occurred in 

short 10 years. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- There was an article in the paper just on May 

30 that I thought was interesting. 

 

 The NDP must end its long-standing affair with using Crown 

corporations as its primary tool for economic development.  

It's too expensive and, what's more, doesn't work. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Chairman, I agree with that 100 

per cent.  It doesn't work.  Because what you're doing is exactly 

what you're planning on doing with the SGI (Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance).  You want to have your insurance 

program here, subsidizing all over Canada.  And you, Mr. 

Minister, were a part of the treasury benches that made a 

decision on SGI to have reinsurance insure some ships in 

Ireland for somewhere around $54 million. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is why we have some of the serious 

problems, is because in the 1970s you did not build.  You did 

not build anything, and that's the seriousness.   You didn't build 

nursing homes; you didn't build hospitals; you didn't build 

infrastructure for the economy to grow.  You didn't do anything 

of that sort.  All you did was buy.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

heritage that you have to carry forward into this whole process. 

 

And, Mr. Minister, what we're here to check on is to see 

whether you're going to be buying more and more and more.  

As I see the Bills coming forward, that's all I see is you're 

deeming this to have established that and purchased that and do 

a whole lot more of exactly what you did before.  And that, Mr. 

Minister, in my view is not right, nor is it a good thing to do. 

 

On dealing with the debt carried forward from all of the funds 

into the Consolidated Fund, it says here you're going to have 

$160 million worth of interest.  And would you expand on that 

$160 million on page 45 of your budget speech.  Would you 

expand on that to see whether there's any of that money 

involved in the Appropriation Bill that we have before us 

today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to 

comment on the member's comment.  He talked about we didn't 

build.  That's right.  We didn't build debt.  The members 

opposite built the debt when they were in the government.  We 

built prosperity.  That's what we did in the 1970s.  And that's 

why in the 1970s we had a credit rating of AA plus.  Because 

the members opposite, when they were the Conservative 

government in Saskatchewan, did nothing but build debt and 

accumulated it at a tremendous rate, we now have a 

credit rating of BBB plus. 

 

I mean that's the difference, Mr. Chairman.  The numbers speak 

for themselves.  The public has passed judgement.  I'm really 

quite amazed that the members opposite have spent now three 

days, not talking about interim supply, not once, but talking 

about their record.  It's almost like a reaction of guilt, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

For three days they now have wasted the time of this House, 

held up the funding for non-government organizations -- 200 of 

them -- held up the funding for school boards so they're now 

having to go and access their lines of credit.  And all they've 

done is talk about their record when they were in government.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, the public has passed judgement on that 

record.  I don't intend to debate it at great length.  The public 

has had that debate. 

 

If the member wants to continue to talk about that record of the 

former Conservative government instead of the interim supply 

which is what we're considering here, he can stand here for the 

rest of the night for as long as he wants.  I'm prepared to listen 

to him.  But quite frankly, nobody out there who's watching the 

final game of the NHL (National Hockey League) play-offs or 

the Blue Jay baseball games gives a care about what the 

members opposite are saying.  And they said so on October 23, 

1991. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you tell me how much the special 

warrants were that you issued as a part of cabinet?  Can you 

give me the value or the volume of dollars in the two special 

warrants that you had? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, you might want to 

consider passing some judgement here at some time.  But this 

afternoon I was asked the question on the two special warrants.  

I gave the answer.  The member from Morse now gets up again 

tonight again to just kill time, asks for the question, the same 

question again.  I'll give him the answers.  The April special 

warrant was 316.925 million.  The May special warrant was 

$360.882 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Earlier I believe in the discussion that we had, 

you made an indication that the province had a special warrant 

prior to March 31.  Was there any money, special warrants in 

that period of time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the member would clarify what 

he is talking about, I might be able to answer the question. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I'm not sure what you were talking 

about.  I wanted to know . . . I think you indicated that there 

were special funds that you had paid out of special warrants 

prior to March 31.  Were there any dollars paid that were there 

because you had authorization, and then you moved money 

back to 1990? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer, Mr. Chairman, is no, 

there was never money moved back anywhere. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

as you undoubtedly know, the transfer of 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

monies to the provinces from the federal government is 

governed by a complicated formula and this formula includes a 

cash component that, according to officials of the federal 

Department of Finance, can change an amount over the course 

of a year. 

 

Mr. Minister, how can you assure us that the figure cited as 

one-twelfth of the province's expenditures for 1992-93, in this 

Appropriation Bill, will indeed be one-twelfth of this 

expenditure when this figure can change over the course of the 

coming year? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, clearly the member 

from Saskatoon is talking about apples and oranges.  She's on 

one hand talking about federal transfer payments and the 

uncertainty there.  We can only estimate the revenues on the 

basis of the existing formulas that are in place, whether it's 

equalization or established program funding.  That's got 

nothing to do with the interim supply Bill which talks about 

expenditures and has nothing to do with the revenues.  The 

interim supply Bill simply provides one-twelfth of the 

expenditures, because it's for one month of the total budget 

that's been presented in the House, plus any additional 

expenditures because of payments that have to be made at a 

quicker rate than on a month-by-month basis. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Perhaps what you can do, if you're not 

interested in talking about the revenue side, is to help me to 

understand if you can assure us that you've not overestimated 

the amount that you'll receive from the federal government and 

as a result underestimated the size of the deficit. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, I don't think we've 

overestimated.  On the basis of the knowledge that we had 

when we put together the budget, that's as close an estimate as 

we can come with.  We tried to be precise as we can.  We tried 

not to overestimate, especially never to overestimate, because 

that would have a very deceiving indication of what the 

revenues are going to be.  We have existing arrangements with 

the federal government.  On the basis of those existing 

arrangements, there are certain amounts of monies from the 

federal government -- part of it by contract and agreement, 

most of it by contract and agreement -- that we can expect.  On 

the basis of that expectation, we make an estimate.  And at the 

end of the fiscal year we'll have to determine how close we 

were.  I predict that we will be pretty close. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, in preparation of your budget 

did you employ the services of any polling or marketing firms? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In the interim supply Bill that we're 

considering, there was no polling or marketing firms that are 

being appropriated for, and therefore we're not considering 

that.  But the Department of Finance has indeed done some 

polling throughout the year -- yes. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  If so, could you 

tell us at what cost this polling was done and the firm and be 

willing to table the results? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well because we're considering 

interim supply I don't have that, but I'm quite 

happy to provide it for the member opposite.  And we'll arrange 

to have it, and I will make it available.  I've indicated, quite 

frankly, to the media -- because of the freedom of information 

-- that we will publish the amounts expended.  We will publish 

the questions of the poll.  We will publish the results of the poll 

during the 90-day period of time during in which the provisions 

are for that. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I thank you, Mr. Minister.  The NDP, 

while in opposition, raised heated objections about the 

government of the day coming back to the House for special 

warrants to cover its budgets shortfalls. 

 

And my question to you, sir, as you seek approval for this 

interim supply Bill, is this: what study has your government 

done with respect to the new taxes, the cuts to jobs, the changes 

in programs to analyse the financial impact that this will have 

and to assure the taxpayers that the numbers projected in the 

budget, at least in terms of the revenue side, are accurate. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, in response to 

the member opposite, the government obviously has to 

consider the impacts of any budget provisions.  One of the 

reasons why the deficit is $517 million rather than considerably 

less is because we had to balance the need to bring the deficit 

down and then set a trajectory so that it would come down each 

and every year until it's balanced in four or five years. 

 

We were able to determine from our internal studies and 

evaluations that the economy would remain fairly stable.  The 

Investment Dealers Association of Canada, which has analysed 

the impact of the budget and has released its report since then, 

has indicated that the real provincial GDP (gross domestic 

product) is forecast to expand by a modest -- they say modest -- 

1.2 per cent.  If we're able to achieve that I will consider that to 

be fairly significant.  That's their outlook.  The Royal Bank has 

a similar estimate. 

 

But we had to make sure that that balance was there so that . . . 

because I want the member to contemplate this.  If she thinks 

that by continuing to build a deficit the rate at which the former 

government did would not have a dampening impact on 

economic development and economic growth in the province, 

that would be very wrong. 

 

The most important thing for us to do is to begin to restore 

confidence in investors that they will be able to invest in 

Saskatchewan and know that in the long run growing deficits 

will not just end up being more taxes.  A deficit is nothing less 

than a deferred tax.  We have had deficits for 10 years.  

Therefore we have had some deferred taxes, some of which we 

had to impose this year. 

 

As much as I would have preferred not to do it, it was 

important that we do that to begin to narrow the spread 

between the revenue side and the expenditure side.  And we did 

it, and we're on the right track. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, I ask the Minister of 

Finance once again, and I remind him that I campaigned on a 

deficit reduction act, amongst other things.  I ask you, 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

has your government done a study with respect to the new 

taxes and the cuts to jobs and the program cuts that you 

brought in and modifications to programs and analysed their 

financial impact. 

 

I don't have to remind the minister any more than he needs to 

educate me about the fact, with people leaving the province, 

with industry leaving the province, that in fact that changes all 

of the numbers. And I'm wondering if he'd be willing to table 

any studies done by the Department of Finance that could help 

us to know that, at least in terms of the revenue side, that his 

numbers are correct. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Of course the government would, 

in considering and putting together a budget, consider all of the 

impacts that it might have.  We had internal evaluations made 

for the consideration of the cabinet.  I'm not going to table them 

because we don't . . . as a government will not table the internal 

analysis that we do. 

 

The member can look at various analyses that others have done 

of the provincial budget.  They will give you the same kind of 

information as we're looking at.  We're basically working on 

the assumption that the result of the budget will be that the 

economy will remain at a stable position for this year but that 

next year, assuming things stay normal, we're going to see a 

growth of somewhere like 3.2 per cent. 

 

In order to be able to get that kind of growth you have to take 

the steps today to get the deficit under control so that you can 

benefit from the growth.  Because if you don't, then all of the 

benefits would be eaten up by the increase in the interest on the 

public debt. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Finance Minister, the 

NDP was not only justified, but they were relentless in 

demanding to see an impact study done by the Conservatives 

when Fair Share was imposed.  And I don't think I'm asking for 

anything much different. 

 

Are you saying that the implementation of the largest tax 

increases and most onerous changes to our health care system 

in the last 20 years do not merit impact research to determine 

whether your Estimates are correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We do the evaluations internally.  

The member asked whether we can be sure . . . she asked 

earlier whether we can be sure why fluctuations won't throw 

the budget off.  I want to remind the House that we have things 

like equalization which are a stabilizer.  If for some reason -- 

we don't anticipate that; in fact the price of oil is higher now 

than we had estimated that it would be; it's something like $22 

a barrel; our estimation was at $20 a barrel -- but let us say that 

for some reason the price of oil happened to drop below that. 

 

That would not be a full impact on Saskatchewan because of 

equalization, because equalization would take up the difference 

by and large.  So we have that protection.  That's why we have 

fiscal federalism.  And if equalization is working -- we don't 

think it's working as well as it should be because of the federal 

government's arbitrary cut-backs that they have made -- but 

that that 

stabilizer is there in the event that there are certain shortfalls on 

resource revenues, for example, oil. 

 

So I can assure the member that we said we were going to have 

a deficit of $517 million.  We're going to have a deficit of $517 

million or less unless there are some extreme, unexpected 

events that take place.  Fortunately, we've had a good 

forest-fire season so some of those unexpected events likely 

will not take place.  Still another period in the late summer in 

which that could happen. 

 

No one can predict what the crop is going to be.  We base our 

Estimates on a normal crop year, not the kind of exceptional 

crop that we had last year.  If there is a better than normal crop 

year, the growth in the economy will be greater than we 

estimate.  But all we can do is estimate, and then there are other 

factors that'll impact on the final result. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I will pursue this further I think when 

we're dealing with some more specific Estimates. 

 

Did you know about the reduction in the province's bond rating 

before today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- You never know for sure what the 

bond rating is going to do until the announcement is made.  

The announcement was made today.  We had indications, of 

course, what the considerations were going to be, but I don't 

make assumptions on anything like that until I know what the 

facts are, and the final facts came down today. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, did you calculate what 

impact a reduced bond rating might have on estimated 

expenditures to the province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, and earlier this afternoon I did 

explain that to the House.  I want to tell the member opposite, I 

have expressed my concern about what the legacy of the last 10 

years will cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer and Saskatchewan 

families because of this reduction in the bond rating.  They're 

really two components. 

 

What might happen is there may be an increase in our costs for 

borrowing of up to a quarter of a per cent -- 25 basis points.  

What that would mean, that if we borrow a billion dollars, if 

the province borrows a billion dollars, there would be an 

additional cost of two and a half million dollars in interest 

charges, assuming that our costs go up to that amount.  It's too 

early to tell whether they go up to that amount.  We'll see what 

the markets do after the announcement today. 

 

The other part of the impact is more troublesome.  The part that 

is even more troublesome is the fact that there will be certain 

investors, certain institutional investors, for example most 

pension funds, who will not invest or will only invest a very 

small part of their portfolio in BBB bonds. 

 

So that means we will have lost some of the normal, regular 

investors that buy Saskatchewan bonds and it will make it more 

difficult to borrow the money that the province needs to pay the 

bills, to provide funding for 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

third parties, to run government, to develop new programs.  It's 

going to be much, much more difficult because of the huge 

mountain of debt that we have in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the purpose 

of interim supply, as I understand it, is to grant funds to the 

government in order that it be able to pay its bills and operate 

its programs and departments.  Now in the past, the last people 

to be paid have been private suppliers of goods and services 

who have had to wait as long as six months before receiving 

payment on services and goods which had long since been 

consumed. 

 

What assurance will you give the Saskatchewan small-business 

communities that steps have been taken to ensure much quicker 

turnaround in the processing of payments to private business 

from government departments once this supply is granted? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We've actually succeeded quite 

well.  The turnaround, by and large, is I believe 30 days.  After 

that, if that is not accomplished or achieved, the government 

pays interest on the money that's owed.  But every effort -- and 

there are systems in place -- is being made to make sure that 

there is a turnaround of no longer than 30 days. 

 

We are keeping a running check and if we find some troubled 

areas . . . if the member knows of some areas in which there is 

a problem, please let me know and we will address it, because 

suppliers should not have to wait longer than that.  And we are 

making any effort to make sure that they don't. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Finance Minister, I do commend the 

government if this is indeed the case.  It's been an issue that's 

been raised with me.  And I will take you up on your offer and 

turn some names over to you. 

 

This will be my last question to the minister.  And it really is a 

comment and a question combined.  In view of the many crises 

which face our province in agriculture, employment, and most 

certainly the economy, I believe that far too much time is 

wasted asking questions that are not specific enough to interim 

supply, which as I understand is purely about whether the 

government of the day can have access to a portion of money 

from the budget presented. 

 

Although turn-about I believe is fair play, and although the 

New Democrats did exactly the same thing to the 

Conservatives, in what the Conservatives are presently 

attempting to do in holding up interim supply, quite honestly in 

the feedback that I've had from people who have called my 

office, they are saying that the whole process seems overly 

political and without . . . or rather with little salient purpose to 

the people of our province at this desperate time. 

 

So in the interests of the taxpayers and of the image of those of 

us who do serve in this House and serve the public, I would 

like to ask this.  Will the government and the opposition 

consider exchanging written questions from the opposition in 

order to move this process along more quickly at this juncture? 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I want to say this to the 

member opposite.  First of all, we did not do exactly what the 

official opposition is doing in the legislature in the last few 

days. 

 

Secondly, I think any minister would welcome any written 

questions prior to coming to Estimates.  And in fact when we 

were on the opposition, during the last few years in fact took 

that route on a number of occasions and wrote to ministers on 

the Conservative front benches in advance of Estimates 

indicating that we would be asking certain questions.  And you 

know, I want to say, Mr. Chairman, never got any answers.  

They ignored them.  But if the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone has some questions that she wishes to pursue when 

the different Estimates are considered, we would welcome 

advance notice of those questions.  And I can assure that the 

operations of the House would then run much smoother 

because there would be better preparation. 

 

Now interim supply, you're right.  The member is right, Mr. 

Chairman.  Interim supply is simply interim supply to provide 

an interim amount of money for the one-twelfth of the fiscal 

year.  That's why in May 10, 1990, the Speaker of the House, 

or was it the chairman of the House, made a ruling.  And the 

ruling said that: 

 

 . . . members must realize that this is not an appropriate place 

to get into detailed questions on the operation of specific 

department programs . . . 

 

 . . . the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of the government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of Estimates at a later 

(time) . . . For this reason members must reserve their 

detailed questions on Estimates and government financial 

policy for the regular review of the main Estimates. 

 

That's quite appropriate, Mr. Chairman.  I remind the House 

and the Chair and I would welcome that.  By delaying the 

interim supply, all that the members in the official opposition 

are doing is delaying the opportunity to consider in detail the 

Estimates of each of the departments. 

 

Now if they want that information so badly, I cannot help but 

be somewhat amazed that they would continue to delay the 

interim supply and therefore prevent themselves an opportunity 

to ask the detailed questions of the Department of Health or the 

Department of Agriculture or the department of the Executive 

Council or whichever.  I can't explain that.  They're going to 

have to explain that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Well I want the 

minister to realize that in all probability, one of the reasons 

why we are evading going on in the process and waiting for 

detailed questions to be answered later is because we haven't, 

in the last couple of weeks, been able to get any legitimate 

answers. 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

If we can't get answers in the process to date, where is the 

confidence that we could get answers by delaying or being 

patient or waiting some time in the future.  I think we'd better 

start to get some answers here and now, before we proceed, so 

that we can see that this government is going to be accountable 

to us and that they will in fact answer our questions as we pose 

them. 

 

And there are several questions that I have for you, Mr. 

Minister.  A lot of things have been talked about, and so I'm 

going to ramble from one subject to the other just a little.  You 

said earlier that it was bad business for the government to have 

sold some particular shares and then they went up in value.  

Would you tell me, considering that Saskoil shares were sold at 

between 9 and $10 -- they varied at the time when they were 

originally sold -- and now they are selling for between 4 and 

$5, was that good business on the part of the government or 

bad business on the part of the government to get rid of those 

shares at that time, at that price? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I think I'd like to ask 

the member to tell the House which questions he's not been 

able to have answered.  The Saskatchewan Property 

Management Corporation is the only department and I think 

they have begun on the Public Service Commission.  SPMC 

(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) was the 

only department that's been here for any length of time. 

 

And I read the Hansard and I found that the minister in charge 

answered every question that was asked -- in fact found that 

most of the answers that were asked, he was able to have paper 

on which the answers were prepared passed over to the 

members opposite.  So for the member to say that questions are 

not been answered is stretching the point, I might say to some 

considerable degree. 

 

Mr. Chairman, on the question of Saskoil, Saskoil was 

privatized once again as part of the former government's 

privatization agenda.  It's hard to know what the benefits of it 

had been but the member can explain to this legislature how all 

of the people of Saskatchewan have been able to be benefitted 

by the fact that Saskoil has moved a great portion of its 

operation to Alberta rather than taking the initiative in 

Saskatchewan.  I'd be quite happy to hear the member's 

explanation of that. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I think I alluded to this type of 

questioning in last fall's session when I think, fairly clearly, 

indicated to you that in four years we will be in your chairs and 

then we'll answer your questions.  So in the meantime would 

you mind telling me whether or not you think it was a good 

deal or a bad deal for Saskoil to have sold shares at 9 and $10 

and now see them at 4 and $5?  Was it good or bad business for 

them to get rid of those shares at that time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't mind 

answering the question.  The whole privatization agenda of the 

former government was a bad deal for Saskatchewan.  There's 

no question about that, but the member is getting way off the 

subject.  He's getting way off interim supply and I would ask 

the Chair to rule on that. 

Would the Chair rule on whether I raise a point of order on 

this, whether that line of questioning has got anything to do 

with interim supply because interim supply has nothing to do 

with Saskoil. 

 

The Chair: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'd like to speak to the point of order, Mr. 

Chairman.  I have been listening very patiently all afternoon to 

get some answers out of the minister.  And all we've been 

getting out of the minister is rhetoric -- political rhetoric, 

blatant political rhetoric -- instead of any kind of answers.  And 

a case in point I give you the 25 minutes from 4:35 to 5 o'clock, 

just before the supper hour when he took it upon himself to 

prevent us from getting to our feet to ask questions and all he 

did for 25 minutes was going on a rambling political rampage 

which was so wide-ranging that, Mr. Chairman, that I would 

actually challenge you as chairman to find out anything that 

we're speaking here that is not pertinent to the point as raised 

by the member.  So I would suggest that the member's point of 

order is just totally out of whack and not well taken at all. 

 

The Chair: -- I'll consider the member's point of order and the 

comments from the member of Rosthern.  And I would tell the 

House that the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for 

the operation of government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of Estimates at a later 

time.  For this reason members must reserve their detailed 

questions on Estimates and government financial policy for the 

regular review of the main Estimates. 

 

If a member has a question, and I gather in this case with 

respect to Saskoil, has a question with respect to Saskoil, then a 

member should attempt to relate it to the purpose of interim 

supply. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I understand that 

the government still owns a sizeable block of Saskoil shares.  

So with all due respect, Mr. Minister, how is the effect of the 

share offering going to affect the interim supply bill?  And will 

there be any more shares sold off, and will that money show up 

in this particular group of money that we're discussing here 

today? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that has nothing to 

do with interim supply.  We're dealing with expenditures of the 

government.  The minister in charge of the Crown 

Management Corporation, which will be as responsible for any 

shares owned in the various enterprises, is the minister in 

charge of the Crown Management Corporation.  And the 

member is going to have to ask that minister when he comes 

before this House for his Estimates so that he can get the 

answers. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I certainly will do 

that, Mr. Minister.  I suggest, though, that you did earlier in the 

day make some reflection on the fact that certain shares that 

had been sold and then went up in price were in fact bad 

business because the government had lost money.  And of 

course here we have another situation that explains exactly the 

opposite situation.  So 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

you can give some and you can take some.  And I think that 

was the point I wanted to make. 

 

Now I want to talk to you for a few minutes about rural 

development because of course I have a little bit of experience 

in that area.  And I want to know from you . . .  Before we go 

into that, I want to get something clear in my mind.  We have 

folks out home who have said to me, the government is 

operating under special warrants so far this year; now they are 

going to go to interim supply.  And one of my constituents 

asked me what was the difference between the special warrants 

and the interim supply?  And I said to him that I would ask you 

that question when I got a chance so that you could explain it, 

and we could have it on the record as to what your 

interpretation is.  Because I have made my interpretation, and I 

would like you to make that interpretation for my constituents. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, for the edification of 

the member, special warrants are a special provision that is 

provided by the rules of the legislature by the various 

legislation so that the government can provide funding for 

expenditures of normal government expenditures when the 

House is not in session. 

 

Also there will be from time to time at the end of the fiscal year 

the need for some expenditures of money which may not have 

been budgeted because of unexpected circumstances.  That's 

what special warrants are for.  They're meant for special, 

unexpected circumstances.  Interim supply is when the House 

is in session, a budget has been introduced but a budget has not 

yet been passed because all of the various Estimates have not 

been considered. 

 

And therefore each month -- or for a two-month period, that's 

not uncommon -- the government will come to the legislature, 

as it should, to ask for interim supply.  But when the House is 

not sitting the only thing available, and rightfully so, is a 

special warrant procedure.  We had two special warrants -- one 

for April, one for May -- because of the lateness of the budget 

due to the lateness of the last election, due to the need for a 

special session in December, and therefore . . . Due to the need 

to open up the books, the results of which were not known till 

about the middle of February, the government only had about 

three months to prepare the budget and therefore had to have 

the special circumstances of special warrants in order to 

provide the funds that were necessary for April and May. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I thank you for your answer.  Other than the 

political rhetoric it was basically what I had thought, and I'm 

sure that my constituent will appreciate your answer.  His next 

question . . . in lieu of that answer which he had anticipated, he 

asked me, if you had convened the Assembly in January, would 

this process have been necessary then? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If we had been in the Legislative 

Assembly in January this process would not have been 

necessary until the new fiscal year of April 1, because the last 

fiscal year would have come to an end.  So this process would 

have been necessary as of April 1 -- the end of March or April 

1 -- providing that there was a budget introduced by that time. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I think I've made my point on that issue, so I 

want to talk to you for a minute about rural development.  You 

earlier stated that we were getting answers to our questions, 

and while we didn't do this in a supply debate, we did have 

some Bills before the Assembly that we have discussed where 

we asked some questions.  I particularly asked for a formula 

with regards to the cost sharing and the revenue sharing in the 

rural development area.  And we haven't received that in my 

office here in the Assembly yet, and so I say to you that you 

haven't been providing the answers as of yet. 

 

And we are unable, to some extent, to ask the questions in 

detail about this supply Bill as a result of that because we don't 

understand, for example, how the monies are being allocated to 

the rural municipalities in the cost-sharing formula at this 

particular time.  The government has alluded to a 7.4 per cent 

decrease in sharing, when in fact a lot of municipalities have 

come to us and told us that they have had up to 80 per cent 

reductions.  Now we wanted to get a hold of that formula so 

that we could provide it to an accountant and have him go 

through the formula and try to determine whether or not there 

had been any mathematical errors or any kind of slip-ups in the 

process because we have so many people saying that in fact 

their reductions are much, much more. 

 

Now can you explain to us how much of this money is going to 

be going to rural development?  How much of it goes out in 

these formulas?  How much goes to each municipality, and 

what the percentages are for each municipality in the province 

of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that's a detailed 

question which the member is going to have to ask when the 

Department of Rural Affairs is before the Legislative 

Assembly.  I don't know what kind of research staff the 

members of the opposition have, but the construction of the 

revenue-sharing formula is public information.  It's available.  

Tell your research staff to dig it up and explain it to you and 

you will have no problem. 

 

But as to the various fundings that are provided, Mr. Chairman, 

I cannot answer that.  That's an answer that can only be given 

per your ruling by the Minister of Rural Development when his 

Estimates are considered in the House. 

 

(1945) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- You see that's exactly the point we were 

trying to make is that each time we ask a question you put us 

off to some other area or some other time in the future.  And 

then somebody else gets up and gets smart and says, be patient, 

wait, and we'll get you the answer some other day.  And we 

eventually will go home for the summer and still never know 

where all this money went.  And I think it's incumbent upon us 

to find out what you're planning on doing with this money.  

You want to have the faith of this group of people over here to 

trust you with a blank cheque.  And I don't think in all fairness 

that that's quite the right thing to do. 

 

After all, I've been involved with municipal government for 12 

years, and I've 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

looked at a lot of budgets, and I've never seen one yet that I 

didn't understand.  And when I first got involved in provincial 

politics I thought all you've got to do is add a lot of zeros 

behind those numbers and a budget should be basically 

understandable.  But I walked in here and find out that I was 

totally wrong there.  This budget is nothing like an ordinary 

budget that you'd watch any place else in the world of ordinary 

people. 

 

I have never seen such a mixed up mess in all my life to try and 

figure out.  And I quite honestly don't understand where the 

money of the people of Saskatchewan is going to.  And if I 

can't figure it out, sitting here with all the things that you have 

supplied us, along with the things that we've asked for that we 

haven't got, how is the rest of the people of this province 

supposed to figure out where their tax dollars went to? 

 

So I say to you, you've got in the Department of Rural 

Development much more . . . and it's underlined here, and I 

thank you for that.  The copy you gave us, you have got this 

one underlined.  And you say that much more than 12 per cent 

is going to be spent in Rural Development.  Okay, where is this 

extra money going to?  What's it for?  Why is it more than 12 

per cent for Rural Development? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I know that the 

member used to think that all you had to do was add a bunch of 

zeros and explains the provincial budget.  But I want to assure 

the member that that's the process that was used when the 

former government was in power. 

 

Now that we have a different government, we're dealing with 

the principles of open honesty and accountability.  And that's 

why if the member wants to know where all the money's being 

spent, I invite him to take a look at the Estimates.  Every single 

dollar that is going to be expended by the provincial 

government this year is outlined here, subvote by subvote, 

program by program.  Pretty straightforward, all you have to 

look do is look at the Estimates. 

 

Now, this will now be the third time in three days that I'm 

giving the answer to the question that the member opposite 

asked.  I don't know whether he bothers reading Hansard or 

whether he bothers listening to the answers and the questions 

of his colleagues, but this is not a new question.  This is simply 

the same question being asked a third time because the 

members have run out of any really good questions so they're 

now killing time by repeating the same questions. 

 

The answer to the member's question is that in Rural 

Development there is one-twelfth allocation which is $4.948 

million.  Sorry, there is a . . . yes, that's the one-twelfth, isn't it? 

 

The interim supply amount that we're asking for is $7.159 

million.  That means that there is an addition to the one-twelfth 

of $2.211 million.  And as I explained to the House on 

Thursday and on Friday, the purposes for that is for the lands 

branch due to the seasonal nature of the pasture operations 

which have a peak period over the summer months. 

 

We need $300 million there in excess of the normal 

one-twelfth and grants for Rural Development for the first 

quarterly payment of unconditional revenue-sharing grants, 

$1.9 million.  We don't pay them on a month by month basis.  

We pay them on a quarterly basis.  The end of June will be the 

end of the first quarter. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well that may very well be, sir, and I guess 

we're going to wait for interim supply to see if your answers 

are right, but I seriously doubt that the figures are going to 

work out to this.  Now I know that some municipalities have 

had their money for a period of time already, so it can't be that 

they're all going to fall into the end of June period. 

 

Now in the event . . . and you've mentioned something about 

the grasslands and things like that and the costs of leases of 

grassland, so it sparked my questioning to wonder when you 

increase the pasture rents by 67 per cent for the ranchers in the 

Cypress Hills area, for example, is that money going to be built 

into this 12 per cent of the budget?  And where does it show 

up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're here dealing 

with expenditure.  We're not dealing with revenue items.  

Interim supply has nothing to do with revenue.  The member is 

asking a question on revenue.  He will have to ask that question 

when the Committee of Finance considers the Department of 

Finance Estimates, but better yet when the Committee of 

Finance deals with Rural Affairs. 

 

He will then get the answer precisely the way he needs it, and I 

invite him to pay attention to the rules of the House and ask the 

question in the appropriate place. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well thank you, Mr. Minister.  I certainly will 

try to pay attention to your rules.  And I will ask you then, in 

the area of expenditures, how much money are you going to be 

spending to help the ranch and farm community this year, in 

this interim supply.  Do you have any contingency fund laid 

aside for a disaster?.  For example, if the drought situation 

should spark a sudden hatch of grasshoppers that gets out of 

control -- we don't know if that'll happen or not, but that's what 

an emergency is about -- is there anything built into this mess 

of figures that provides for that type of contingency? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No.  The answer is no.  This is 

strictly a request for one-twelfth of the expenditures except for 

those areas which we have already explained. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I'm afraid that I just can't understand why this 

wouldn't be important in an interim supply in the middle of the 

spring season in Saskatchewan where we often have disasters 

of one type or another.  You could have a tornado go through 

and cause a lot of trouble.  You've seen your own people talk 

about the lightning strikes in the community pastures and the 

PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) pastures 

and the federal grassland pastures down at Val Marie.  So 

you've already seen one of your own members get up in this 

very Assembly and talk about the catastrophe down there and 

how there should be a disaster fund put into effect. 

 

So I fail to see where it wouldn't be important in this particular 

estimate whether or not there is any contingency fund or any 

kind of monies available for 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

those kind of things that the provincial government might find 

itself responsible for. 

 

You alluded to fighting fires a little while ago, in the forests.  

And you claimed that it was a great victory, that we wouldn't 

have to be spending money there to fight forest fires.  Now if 

we happen to have more prairie fires, are they not as important 

as a forest fire?  And is there a contingency fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm being patient 

with the new member, but I think the questions he asks I'm sure 

are sincere and legitimate.  But, Mr. Chairman, there is in 

interim supply Bill never assumptions of things dealing with 

actual expenditures.  We're dealing here with actual 

expenditures.  The legislature is in session.  If there is a need 

for additional expenditures, I'm quite prepared as the Minister 

of Finance to come before the legislature and ask for additional 

expenditures. 

 

We have said to the federal government already, and we will 

continue to say to the federal government . . . It's only 

unfortunate that the member opposite who asks the question 

voted against the request that was made by this Legislative 

Assembly by resolution, urging the federal government to pay 

the $500 million in third line of defence which they promised 

when the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) program 

was put in and have been derelict in their responsibility in 

paying that money out.  That resolution was in the House.  It 

was debated.  Every member of this House including the 

Liberal member, I believe, voted for that resolution.  You, sir, 

and your colleagues voted against it. 

 

But if there is a need for some additional funding beyond 

interim supply, there is a legislature in session, and the 

government can come before the legislature and request the 

legislature to provide it. 

 

Further there is provision in the legislation of the Department 

of Finance for payments under provincial disaster assistance 

program.  That provision is there.  There's a nominal sum of 

150,000 that normally put into that because you don't know if 

you're going to have this kind of a disaster.  But if we do, we 

have a legislature.  It's in session.  The members, including the 

member opposite, will have an opportunity to debate it. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I want to thank you for that, Mr. 

Minister.  You've actually given me a solid figure of something 

that is said to be there available for these problems, and it's the 

first time in about three or five hours that you've actually given 

us an honest figure that is there for something to really happen.  

And I really appreciate that answer.  We know now that we can 

draw on your government in case something happens out there, 

like the drought getting worse or that type of thing or if 

grasshoppers in fact do occur or if we do get some more prairie 

fires. 

 

I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, in this supply Bill, I've been 

trying to find out where expenditures for the Liquor Board 

come in and what those expenditures would be.  It's been 

pointed out to me that it is my responsibility to follow this area, 

and so I want to ask you why I wasn't able 

to find the heading any place in here and where is it? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, because the 

government doesn't spend any money on the Liquor Board, 

there is no request for any money for the Liquor Board in this 

interim supply. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well it's good to know.  I didn't know that 

you didn't spend any money on the Liquor Board.  I presumed 

that you may have in fact hired a minister to be in charge of 

that and that perhaps somebody's portfolio covered this and that 

he might actually get some wages and that he might in fact 

even hire some people that might advise him on how to run the 

operation.  And maybe some place the government is paying 

those people a salary. 

 

Now of course I could be all wrong; they might be volunteer 

workers.  And I'm sure that in Saskatchewan, with your ideas 

of co-operation, that wouldn't be too hard to find. 

 

I did want to answer your query about the fact that we voted 

against one of your Bills, and of course you realize as 

everybody that is watching this production tonight realizes that 

through your trickery and deceit the original motion was not 

the one that was voted on.  We in fact voted on a motion that 

you people put a whole different context to why an amendment 

that totally and ridiculously destroyed the motion as it was set 

out to try to help the people of this province.  And we voted 

against you and your trickery and deceit, not against farmers 

getting money. 

 

I would like to ask you, sir . . . we were also asked to check, 

seeing as how we can't find out anything about the 

expenditures that you're going to make on the Liquor Board, 

we were also asked to investigate with you what expenditures 

you will be making in the Department of Highways. 

 

We have seen in the last few days, your minister getting on the 

public airways and telling folks that you're going to tear up a 

thousand kilometres of our paved roads and that sort of thing.  

And I've had everything from the pot-hole government to all 

kinds of other things thrown my way as queries about which 

direction we're going in the province with highways.  And I do 

note that we do in fact have the Department of Highways listed 

in here.  And you have what seems to be a straightforward 

amount.  And I want to ask you if, in your expenditures, you 

take into account these miles of roads that are going to be torn 

up or if they are to come into future Estimates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I remind the Chair 

and I remind the House that this is also the third time this 

question has been asked.  It's repetition.  I don't know whether 

the rules of the House provide for this kind of wasteful use of 

the time of the legislature.  But for the third time, the third time 

the question has been asked and the third time I'll give the same 

answer. 

 

And furthermore, rather than giving the answer, I'll remind the 

member that on Thursday last I passed over to the member 

from Kindersley a complete list of all of the expenditures that 

are being requested in the interim supply.  The member from -- 

is it Moosomin or Maple 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

Creek? -- Maple Creek has that information.  And for him to 

get up in the House, even though he's got that information in 

front of him, it clearly tells you what the members of the 

opposition are doing. 

 

They're delaying the process of this House for I don't know 

what reason, except that for some reason they're determined to 

make sure that the payments to the school divisions don't go 

out on time.  They're already late.  They're determined to make 

sure that 200 agencies that the Department of Social Services 

provide funding, money won't go out.  Many of them do not 

have a line of credit.  They're going to have to shut down their 

operations because the members opposite choose simply to ask 

questions to which they already have the answers. 

 

But to expedite the process of the House and in order to help 

the members, let me just say this.  In the Department of 

Highways, one-twelfth of the interim supply would be $14.949 

million.  This interim supply Bill is asking for $21.592 million 

which is $6.643 million more than the one-twelfth.  The reason 

for that is because there is 3.8 million that's being asked for the 

rural surface transportation because the majority of the activity 

is performed during the peak period of the summer.  You don't 

build roads in the middle of the winter or maintain roads of this 

kind in the middle of the winter. 

 

And secondly, maintenance of highways and transportation, 

because the majority of the activity is performed during peak 

periods of the summer on the maintenance side.  The answer is 

very simple.  And I hope that now that the member has that, 

that he is satisfied that he has all the information that he's 

wanted and which he's had for three days. 

 

(2000) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm rather sorry that 

you're offended by the fact that I would pursue the critic areas 

that I've been given.  I haven't spoken on this issue yet in this 

House, and the answers that you are giving . . . you are giving 

to me to follow my responsibilities as a member.  And I take 

those responsibilities as a member of the opposition very 

seriously.  And I think that in all fairness that you should 

answer the questions without all of the rhetoric about these 

things. 

 

You brought up school divisions not getting their money.  And 

even though that's not my critic area here, it worries me that 

you have stated that the school divisions are now not going to 

get their money.  I fail to see how that is.  Is this not a fact that 

your special warrants allow you to continue to pay bills until 

the middle of June and that interim supply doesn't take effect 

until the middle of June? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I just hope too 

many people aren't watching because they'd truly be 

disillusioned with the process of this legislature. 

 

I remind the member that the special warrant for April was 

expended in April.  The special warrant for May was expended 

in May.  We now are in the legislative session in interim supply 

voted by this legislature so that the funding could be provided 

for June. 

The fact that the interim supply has been held up for no good 

reason means that school divisions have not been able to get 

paid because the Department of Finance, until an interim 

supply Bill is passed, has no authority to issue any payments 

for anything.  Can't pay pensions, can't pay wages, can't pay 

school division grants, can't pay funding to non-government 

organizations, can't pay funding to our hospitals, can't pay 

funding to our nursing homes. 

 

The legislature has to authorize the interim supply Bill in order 

for that to happen.  Because the members are continuing to 

repeat questions and to delay this House, those payments are 

not being made.  And every day that the members opposite 

delay this House is going to be another day that payments will 

not be made, increasing the costs to school divisions and other 

bodies that rely on provincial funding. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it really surprises me that 

a man of your past experience, as you have pointed out several 

times . . . You've patted yourself quite nicely on the back about 

how you were the minister of Finance back in the '70s.  And I 

have no doubt that you did a good job and that you seem to 

know what you're doing, so if you know what you're doing, 

then obviously if you knew what you were doing, then you 

must have known, better than I, the kind of problems that you 

were going to be facing by this interim supply Bill possibly 

being held up for a couple of days while people inquired of you 

what's going on and where the money is happening to be spent. 

 

And then if you're that knowledgeable about the whole process, 

how come you didn't bring this in two weeks ago?  Why are we 

doing it today?  Why at the last minute?  How come at the 

eleven-thirty hour here?  Why not two weeks ago then, and 

what's the hold-up?  Are you trying to put the opposition on the 

spot so that we get the credit for delaying the payments?  Are 

you trying to make us look foolish in the eyes of the people 

because we ask the questions about your supply, about where 

you're spending the money? 

 

Or were you hoping that you could ram this thing through in a 

couple of minutes time because you knew that we might feel 

sorry for the folks out there not having their money.  And you 

tried to ram this thing through to cover up where you're 

spending some of this money and the way that you're covering 

up on how you transferred debt from last year . . . from this 

year to last year and all those kind of trickery things that we're 

watching.  Is that factor another one of your games that you're 

trying to perform here, is to give the people the impression that 

it's our fault they're not getting paid when in fact you should 

have done this two weeks ago -- what do you think about that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the 

member has a short memory.  This interim supply Bill was 

introduced last Thursday in the month of May.  It is now 

Monday in the month of June.  There was sufficient time.  The 

tradition of this House, Mr. Speaker, is normally to take a few 

hours, at the most a day, to consider interim supply. 

 

Mr. Chairman, 1989-90, there were 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 interim 

supplies, each of them took one day; 1987-88, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 

interim supplies, each of them took one day. 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

Nobody can predict how much time the members opposite 

want to waste in interim supply Bills but that's a choice they 

have to make.  It's not our choice.  I think there has been 

sufficient time to consider this Bill, to provide time for the 

House to consider specific Estimates of specific departments 

which . . . so that the public can scrutinize those departments 

through the work of the opposition.  If the members are that 

anxious to get all that information then they should get on with 

it and let the specific departments come before the House. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I really have to say, Mr. Minister, that I 

couldn't care less how disappointed you are in me.  We'll let the 

voters in my constituency decide that next time around.  I think 

they might probably even expect that I should continue and not 

be embarrassed and continue to try to ask some questions to 

find out what in fact is going on.  Another one of my critic 

responsibilities, as you may recall and may have caught on to 

by now, of course, is the labour area.  It used to have a lot 

longer name but we shortened it right up. 

 

I am told and I understand through the debate that we've had 

over the past few weeks that the new labour Bill will cause and 

effect that contractors will in this province, who do work for 

the government, have to use all unionized labour and that that 

unionized approach to all unionized labour will provide a 

monopoly situation for the unionized contractors.  In effect that 

that gives them the opportunity to charge more money of 

government than would have happened under the old process.  

My figures are that we can expect to pay 20 to 30 per cent 

more for labour contracts done for the government by 

contractors when this Bill becomes law and I'm sure it will 

before very long.  Is, sir, this 20 to 30 per cent increase in costs 

built into the amount of money that you have pointed out here 

for the labour costs, the one-twelfth part? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I really don't want 

to seem unco-operative because I'm quite happy to answer all 

the questions, but really I would ask the Chair to rule on 

whether discussing legislation that's before the legislature is an 

appropriate topic to discuss when we're talking about interim 

supply. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Again, Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, 

the Bills before this very House are going to cost you money.  

They're going to cost taxpayers money are they not?  I mean, if 

you implement the Bills and the Bills require that expenditures 

be made, will you not have to take those expenditures out of 

the 12 per cent of interim supply, just as you would have to do 

for the whole budgetary year?  Is that not a normal process that 

those Bills that cost us money will have to be paid for? 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  The member is raising questions about 

the impact of a Bill which, as I understand, is not yet before the 

House.  The member will have opportunity during discussion 

on the Bill to question the minister as to the impact of those 

Bills.  If those Bills have any monetary implications, the 

member has a further opportunity to ask questions of ministers 

during estimates. 

 

At present we are not dealing with the Estimates.  We are 

debating a resolution as it pertains to an interim supply Bill.  

We are not voting individual department estimates. 

Supply Bills are to issue money required in advance of 

complete parliamentary sanction.  Debate should focus on the 

need to grant, reduce, or refuse supply in respect to the 

resolution before the committee.  I would invite the member to 

discuss departmental policies and details of programs under the 

appropriate departmental Estimates. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I guess we better talk a little bit, Mr. 

Minister, about where exactly some of this money is going to 

be spent and how we can find accountability for it.  Again I 

want to go back, just a minute, to rural development even 

though I know that you have discussed that area quite a bit.  

But it is a major concern to us and we would like you to 

explain how many of these dollars are going to go to new 

programs to create incentives for people to build roads in rural 

Saskatchewan, to provide jobs for the summer for our 

contractors? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, that's a 

detailed question that is better answered by the minister when 

the Department of Rural Affairs is in Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, we've 

been debating interim supply for a few hours now.  Certainly 

the debate on interim supply has taken a little longer than 

probably what some would expect.  And maybe I should accept 

the recommendation made by the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone, and first of all pass my questions across to the 

minister so that I can then pose the question and while I'm 

half-way through the question, the minister can respond such as 

they did in Crown corporations. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the minister indicated that the process of 

addressing interim supply has been taking a bit of time.  It 

seems to me, Mr. Chairman, what we've seen over the past 

number of years -- and certainly we've been going through 

Hansard and looking back at April 1990 -- we see interim 

supply introduced on the sixth, and we're still in interim supply 

on April 9. 

 

And as the minister has even indicated today, we've been all 

over the spectrum.  In fact the minister would reprimand 

members on this side for being somewhat broad in their 

comments and statements, while at the same time standing up 

and just giving us a 25- or a 30-minute lecture as to why the 

government has made a move in this area or why the 

government had to do this, pretty well basically putting the 

blame all at the feet of somebody else rather than accepting the 

fact that they've been government for some better than six 

months now.  And certainly the 1991 budget fiscal year was . . . 

six months of that fiscal year was their responsibility. 

 

We're now three years into 1992 fiscal year.  And believe you 

me, Mr. Chairman, I would just as soon be doing something 

else rather than cooped up in this stone fortress here in Regina 

at this time of the year especially when it's so nice outside. 

 

It would seem to me, Mr. Minister, that possibly we wouldn't 

be quite into this debate if indeed the government of the day 

would have followed up on the promises they made to the 

people of Saskatchewan and 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

brought this House into session much earlier and certainly had 

their budget presented. 

 

And the minister would tell us, well because of the 

complexities and the way they found the books when they were 

elected in October, it was impossible for them to put a budget 

proposal together.  Well it would be easy for me to go back and 

remind the minister of the fact that the process that had been 

taking place the last two years . . . trying to let people across 

Saskatchewan know where indeed the province was financially 

and some of the fiscal responsible decisions that would have to 

be made.  And I think the minister and the government were 

quite well aware of it. 

 

The minister also indicated that he needs the money so that he 

can pay the bills so that people can receive their portions of 

funding for the month of June.  It would see to me, Mr. 

Chairman, that . . . maybe I'm wrong, but I believe most of the 

cheques either go out the middle and the end of the month, and 

we've already had special warrants for April; that's covered.  

May is covered.  And whether or not the Bill passed tonight or 

tomorrow or the next day, the money I believe will be in the 

hands of the third parties in record time anyway. 

 

Mr. Minister, in this interim supply Bill . . . and I have a letter 

that came across my desk which I believe was sent to you, and 

I was cc'd (carbon copy) a copy of the letter from an individual 

in my area who has written and is indicating a number of the 

areas that are of grave concern to him as a farmer and a 

small-business person in our area. 

 

In your interim supply Bill I understand one of the main areas 

of concern . . . in the budget period, is the fact that the 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) program has been 

eliminated.  And I also believe, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, that there are many farmers today that are looking for 

money from the FeedGAP program.  And I'm just wondering, 

Mr. Minister, how much of this one-twelfth of the interim 

supply that you've asked for right now will address the current 

need for funding under the FeedGAP program that is still in 

place, if any? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again the 

interim supply Bill provides one-twelfth of the funding.  There 

are no exceptions here for the Department of Agriculture and 

Food.  If the member wants to get specifics on each specific 

program, he's going to have to ask his question when the 

Department of Agriculture is before the Committee of Finance.  

We're not capable of answering those questions because this is 

interim supply, it's not the Department of Agriculture and 

Food. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well I'll just remind you, Mr. Chairman, and also, 

Mr. Minister, yes the question is related to the Department of 

Agriculture and Food but what we're discussing here is the 

one-twelfth allocation of their funding.  And maybe I could 

word the question this way.  Is there any funding . . . You say 

there's one-twelfth of this funding is going to Agriculture and 

Food.  Is there any part of that one-twelfth going to address the 

FeedGAP program?  Are the cheques going to be rolling out of 

this one-twelfth to address the FeedGAP program as it sits 

today? 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Whatever programs the Department 

of Agriculture is providing this year, we're providing 

one-twelfth of the allocation for those programs.  And the exact 

amounts that are flowing from each of the various programs 

that the Department of Agriculture and Food runs, it has to be 

responded to by the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well we certainly trust, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 

Minister, that . . . and I'm sure this farmer who sent this letter to 

you is hoping that indeed there will be a cheque coming from 

the Department of Finance through the Department of 

Agriculture and Food to address the FeedGAP program and 

certainly the funds that would be coming to him. 

 

Mr. Minister, as well I want to . . . I know we can get into some 

specific questions and it's very difficult when you're addressing 

the one-twelfth and trying to assess where all the funding is 

going, and I can appreciate that.  Here again, another question 

that is somewhat specific, but can the minister kind of indicate 

what kind of funds are available to address the tax . . . or fuel 

tax rebate program out of this portion of funding? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Department of Finance also 

gets one-twelfth of its allocation.  There are no exceptions 

being made here.  Whatever expenditures are being made by 

the department for the period of this year will be made on the 

basis of the programs that are there, and in this interim supply 

we're asking for one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I'm moving off of agriculture for a 

minute to address another concern raised in this letter, and 

certainly a concern raised on the street as I was coming in 

today and talking to a number of constituents. 

 

The letter before me as well raises the concern that a number of 

people across this province have, and it kind of it falls into an 

area of responsibility I have regarding women's issues and 

Women's Secretariat.  The fact that the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan has now been disbanded and the program, Mr. Minister . . 

. I'm sure you've had a number of calls.  Your office has had a 

number of calls because certainly our office has had many 

people calling it, and I know that many of my colleagues have 

indicated that they have had calls about the program. 

 

And no less than half a dozen people that I ran into, that was 

the first question on their mind, Mr. Minister . . . was the fact 

that this program . . . and I want to just read a little bit about the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan as seen through the eyes of an 

individual who was able to take advantage of the plan and 

become involved in setting aside a pension for himself when he 

retired. 

 

Mr. Minister, I read here, quote: 

 

 The Saskatchewan Pension Plan was one of the best ideas 

any Gov't has had since Medicare.  And the statement that it 

only helped the well off is a total false hood as the gov't only 

matched the under $23,000 income (earner) and only to a 

$300 max. 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

And then the individual goes on to ask the minister what his 

income was and how much he paid in making contributions to 

his pension plans.  The member also . . . or this gentleman also 

brings out the fact that his income on the T-4 slip last year, his 

net was only $8,900. 

 

So he wants to bring out the point that the Pension Plan 

certainly was there for a lot of individuals, not just the 45,000 

women that were involved in the program, but farmers like this 

gentleman here who had no other source of setting, 

establishing, a pension plan for himself. 

 

And certainly we have heard a lot about pension plans over the 

last four days, and we know that there are six members in this 

Assembly who are on the old pension plan who have a 

guarantee of what their pension is going to be when they retire 

tomorrow, whereas a number like myself and I guess some of 

the new members on the government side of the House too that 

realize that the pension isn't going to be quite a rosy as what the 

Premier and the Minister of Finance are going to have when 

they retire.  But our pension will be paid out according to our 

contributions and how much it accumulates and the value of 

that fund when the pension is put in place. 

 

Mr. Chairman, why . . . I guess when we look at the Pension 

Plan, and I would have to ask why the department and why the 

government would even consider disbanding a plan that was 

being very helpful, that was going to aid a lot of people, that 

would have indeed, Mr. Minister, taken them off of the 

government payroll.  Certainly had people been able to 

continue at . . . had the Saskatchewan plan continued to be 

implemented, Mr. Minister, down the road when these 

individuals retire -- many of them single parents, single 

mothers, many of them housewives with no other access to a 

pension -- would have had the opportunity of being able to set 

aside funds that would have enabled them to live more 

independently, rather than coming to government once they 

retire. 

 

Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that you've cancelled the plan, 

the one-twelfth allocation that you're asking for today -- and in 

your recent letter indicated you will be sending back or 

forwarding or sending back to people the amount of money 

they put into the plan -- does this allocation at this time cover 

any of that funding or cost? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- No, because the funding that will 

come out of that will come out of the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan.  What the member opposite does not admit to in his 

description of the Pension Plan is that there were people . . . is 

that the Pension Plan never considered family income.  There 

were situations where families were earning 100, $150,000 a 

year, $75,000 a year, $80,000 a year and the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer was expected to supplement the matching grant of 

$300. 

 

The plan was poorly targeted.  It needs a complete review.  The 

government in 1978 addressed the pensions that existed then, 

made sure that anybody entering the public service, including 

MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) after after 1978, 

were on a money purchase plan so they would not be a drain on 

the treasury in the 

future.  The plans are fully funded.  We addressed that at that 

time. 

 

We have had to make a lot of expenditure reductions in this 

budget.  We have had to make a lot of those expenditure 

reductions in this budget because when the member from 

Souris-Cannington sat on the government side of the House, he 

supported every measure of waste and mismanagement that the 

cabinet of that day perpetrated on the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And therefore they have created a debt of $15 

billion.  They have created an interest on the public debt in this 

fiscal year of $760 million.  When the taxpayers, through their 

legislature and their government, have to spend $760 million in 

interest on the debt, it reduces the options for providing 

funding for many, many programs that any government would 

like to provide to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

I think the member from Souris-Cannington should take a deep 

look at himself and ask himself the question, why did he sit 

back, why did he . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 

from Moosomin, I apologize.  I don't want the public to be 

misled -- the member from Moosomin -- especially his public.  

I want the member opposite to examine why he sat back and let 

the government that he was a part of get away with that kind of 

waste of taxpayers' money for 10 years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- I'm glad the member corrected himself because I 

certainly didn't want to be tied into the former member from 

Souris-Cannington.  That, Mr. Minister, we can all and 

certainly we can all, if we want to I suppose we could all raise 

everybody else's dirty linen but I'm not sure we want to really 

get involved and into that. 

 

I think the taxpayers out there and certainly the electorate in 

Saskatchewan, not just Saskatchewan but across Canada and 

across North America, are looking for men and women who are 

entering the political sphere to be more forthright, be more 

upright, and give them a reason as to why they should be 

supporting individuals who would seek political office. 

 

Coming back to the Pension Plan, Mr. Minister, you've given 

us every reason why it should have been scrapped.  I would 

suggest to you though that there were many people out there, 

even if it was individual rather than family income, yes 

probably some people with higher family incomes didn't get in 

on the Pension Plan, but the fact is there were many people, 

Mr. Minister, who didn't have that opportunity even with the 

family income to hit that higher tax bracket.  And therefore . . . 

well even if they did, Mr. Minister, the government wouldn't 

have matched that funding and they would have just made their 

contribution and then the money would have been put into a 

fund or I believe it's in a fund, accumulating whatever it can 

through interest so that it can build on itself. 

 

I think the other argument that has been presented too was the 

fact that there was a minimum pay-out and so individuals who 

maybe were 63 or 64 years of age could have made two 

payments and collected $15 a month for, say, the rest of their 

life and that certainly would put the Pension Plan in a position 

where it would start off not 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

being able to carry itself.  But I think, Mr. Minister, looking at 

the Pension Plan if it would have been allowed to develop over 

the years, in due time . . . in fact I believe it was just last week 

or the week before there was an article in one of the local 

papers, indicated that by I believe the early mid-'90s or 

whatever the Pension Plan could have carried itself. 

 

And so, Mr. Minister, I would again ask you to give due 

consideration to this plan, take a serious look at it because I 

think what you're receiving in your office, many people are 

asking you to look at ways and options of which the plan could 

still be saved and still address the needs of individuals out there 

with no other form of pension plan. 

 

The question, Mr. Minister, regarding funds that will be 

refunded to individuals I understand from some of the 

questions that came forward in the House earlier, that there is a 

process of negotiation regarding the taxation of these funds.  

Mr. Minister, can you inform the House as to whether the 

individuals are going to be facing that challenge of having to 

pay the taxes on these funds as they're allocated now or are 

they going to be able to work it into another form of an annuity 

to at least allow that money to work for them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well I indicated on several 

occasions that that's discussions that are taking place with the 

federal government.  That kind of information will come 

forward when the legislation is brought before the House.  At 

that time we'll be able to explain all that. 

 

As soon as we have an indication from the federal government 

whether people will be able to roll this over into an RRSP 

(registered retirement savings plan) or other such provisions 

without any tax penalty -- I hope that they will agree to do that; 

I have no reason to believe that they won't -- then we'll be able 

to indicate to the member what those provisions are. 

 

I want to remind the member from Moosomin that this pension 

plan which was created by the former government on the eve of 

an election to try to get some votes is going to have an 

unfunded liability in another three years of $80 million -- $80 

million in additional unfunded liability. 

 

So I ask the member opposite . . . I mean we're all open-minded 

here.  We should all be prepared to consider various options.  I 

ask you whether he would favour this.  Would he favour 

continuing the Pension Plan but eliminating the taxpayers' 

matching grant of 300 and doing away with the guaranteed 

minimum income and leave the Pension Plan in place?  Would 

you be prepared to accept that, Mr. Member? 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, and certainly Mr. 

Premier . . . since the Premier seems to be paying attention 

right now.  I think there are lots of people out there, Mr. 

Minister, that have indicated that they recognize there's a debt.  

In fact the letter here indicates . . . and your office may have 

even responded to it.  I'm not sure.  It just came in very 

recently. 

 

The individual says here, I agree with paying off the provincial 

debt.  And he says, I am going to be paying 

more or many other personal costs at my level as well to help 

pay off the provincial debt.  Many people out there agree that 

we should be paying off the debt.  Many people agree that we 

should begin to live within our means.  And certainly it's 

something that I have said over the past number of years, that 

we must all learn to live within our means, Mr. Minister. 

 

But what I want to remind you of, Mr. Minister, is that while 

you told the people of Saskatchewan one thing -- the fact that 

$4.5 billion would be enough to operate the government on -- 

since you've brought down your budget I notice it's well over 

the $5 billion that were going to the expenditures that you 

brought in this present budget. 

 

And the Premier talks about opening the books.  And certainly, 

Mr. Minister, I believe your commission indicated that the 

books were in fact open.  The books have been available to 

anyone who wanted to look at them. 

 

And what the biggest problem we have I guess in government, 

whether it's provincial, whether it's federal, it doesn't matter 

where it is, the fact that I guess, and I guess my own argument 

comes to play here, is that maybe our parliamentary system of 

democracy, it's got some things that could be changed to kind 

of change the system. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, what we have here as well is unfortunately a 

lot of political rhetoric taking place, and it comes from both 

sides of the House.  Of course when you look at the last interim 

supply and I find out, looking at the Hansard from last year, 

Mr. Minister, we were into a lot of rhetoric on interim supply.  

And certainly this isn't going to be held up through the 

summer; I want to be out golfing.  I think I'd like to try some 

golfing especially after my wife just went and spent some 

money on new golf clubs for me, and I think many of your 

officials would like to enjoy that as well. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, the questions we're raising here and that I'd 

like to raise before you tonight are the fact that the questions 

that have come across our desks as well.  Just to make sure the 

government is aware of the concerns out there and as I 

indicated earlier . . . 

 

Your government in your throne speech indicated that there 

will be a broad consultation process working together with 

individuals to help design programs. 

 

(2030) 

 

And coming back to a comment made by a number of 

government members, what was our plan.  Well, Mr. Premier 

and certainly Mr. Finance Minister, we did lay out a plan.  And 

the former minister laid out a plan last spring which I indicated 

to many people in my constituency was not the type of budget 

you would bring in prior to going in to a provincial election.  

You wouldn't tell people that times are tough.  You would want 

to be in fact opening the purse strings. 

 

And I guess, Mr. Minister, what part of the process of our 

whole political system is getting people to begin to 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

understand politics as well.  And if indeed they want the debt to 

be paid off, then the voters out there are going to have to 

realize that they can't have everything handed to them as well.  

We must work together, and I acknowledge that.  And I'm just 

sorry, Mr. Minister, that you weren't as open and forthright and 

honest with people prior to October 23, as you all of a sudden 

appear to be right now. 

 

But at the same time, Mr. Minister, will you take the time to 

consult and at least ask for people's input on the Pension Plan 

so that we could, working together, design something that 

would help those who do not have access to a pension plan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, once again this has 

got very little to do with interim supply, but we have been 

consulting.  We've been listening to what the people have been 

saying on everything that is under the purview of the 

Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

But extensive consultations prior to the budget, I think the 

number of meetings was something like 52 or 55 meetings that 

we had all around Saskatchewan, asking people what some of 

their priorities are.  It was from some of those meetings that the 

idea came forward to us that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

needed a look at. 

 

I ask the member from Moosomin again -- because in the 

consultation I'm quite prepared to consult with even members 

of the opposition; this is the new, open government -- so I ask 

the member from Moosomin: would he favour continuing the 

Pension Plan, but doing away with the $300 matching for the 

time being while we've got this horrendous deficit problem and 

doing away with a guaranteed minimum income which is going 

to create the unfunded liability of $18 million.  Would you be 

helpful and indicate whether that would be of some interest to 

you? 

 

Now I want to make a comment on two things that the member 

said.  He said something about $4.5 billion should be sufficient 

for the Government of Saskatchewan to spend -- I agree.  And 

because I agree that's why this expenditure in the budget this 

year is $4.25 billion and not $4.5 billion.  It is less than the 

expenditure in 1991-1992.  The only thing that we were not 

able to do anything about, because we have no control over it, 

is the interest on the public debt which is $760 million.  That's 

there, we can't just cut that or eliminate it or reduce it.  You 

created it; we have to live with it.  And we're going to manage 

over time until we can begin to cut that back.  We're beginning 

to repay the mortgage which the former government created. 

 

Now I want to say also, finally to the member, that in the 

interests of Saskatchewan people, and in the interests of 

guaranteeing a future for them and their children and my 

children and your children, I'm prepared to give up the odd golf 

game this summer if that's what it takes in order to get that 

accomplished. 

 

The Chair: -- The Chair would like to intervene.  The Chair 

has made a ruling earlier this evening regarding the directing of 

questions to the interim supply Bill.  I've listened carefully, and 

it seems to me the member's question as well as the minister's 

response varied 

substantially beyond the provision of interim supply.  And I'll 

ask both the members, as well as the minister, to keep your 

comments to the provision of interim supply. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I just would like to remind the 

Chair of the broad range in debate that certainly has taken 

place, and I appreciate your ruling . . . 
 

The Chair: -- I simply remind the member that the ruling has 

been stated here earlier this evening and I'll ask the 

co-operation of members on both sides of the House, including 

the minister, to co-operate with the Chair's previous ruling. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Boy the Premier sure has an . . . 
 

The Chair: -- I will ask the member to try to be less 

provocative of others in the House and direct his attention to 

the Bill before us. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Chair, I won't take a lot more time, 

because I think there's an important hockey game . . . I guess 

my responsibility is to be in the House. 
 

Mr. Minister, in light of the ruling of the Chair, a very simple 

question and straightforward question, what is the surplus in 

the Pension Plan as it is today? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not dealing 

here with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  That is not a 

question that has got anything to do with the interim supply.  

There's no money here provided for the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan.  The member can ask that when the Department of 

Finance is here in Estimates.  I'm trying to abide by your ruling 

as best I can. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister of 

Finance is the person we are directing our questions to tonight.  

And possibly the minister would have knowledge of the 

answers or at least to have some answers for the questions 

we've directed. 
 

Mr. Minister, I just want to ask a question regarding the 

harmonization of the education and health tax with the GST 

(goods and services tax).  Mr. Minister, can you inform the 

House what revenues were forfeited by the government of the 

day by not harmonizing that tax? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'd ask, in light of your ruling, to 

determine whether that is an appropriate question since it's 

dealing with revenues and we're dealing with expenditures in 

interim supply. 
 

The Chair: -- The Chair is of the view that the question is out 

of order as it doesn't pertain to the interim supply Bill. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, I would like to, on my point of 

order, relate a short quote from Hansard, May 3, 1991.  And 

this I think deals with the type of question that the member 

from Moosomin is dealing with.  It's the member from 

Riversdale: 

 

 I'm elected to ask those questions on behalf of farmers in 

Norquay and my place is right now -- 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

grievance before supply.  And the farmers have a grievance 

and I want some answers from this Minister of Finance (and I 

want it) right now. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, the debate in question -- if the member 

from Riversdale will listen -- the debate in question was on 

NISA (net income stabilization account) and GRIP. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I will ask all members of the 

House to come to order and allow the member to make his 

point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, previous to this the 

chairman had made the same ruling that you did, sir.  The 

member from Riversdale then proceeded through one, two, 

three, four, five pages of Hansard asking very detailed 

questions on GRIP and NISA.  How much the per capita cost 

was to each taxpayer in the province.  How the 

federal-provincial sharing arrangements on GRIP and NISA 

work. 

 

And I must say that the minister of Finance of the day was very 

forthcoming to the member from Riversdale.  I mean the spirit 

of co-operation of answering questions was there.  And the 

member rightly said, the minister of Finance is here.  This is 

grievance before supply.  And I think it's only appropriate, Mr. 

Chairman, that the member from Moosomin is asking very 

broad questions dealing with the Pension Plan, not the detail 

that the member from Riversdale asked last year. 

 

The Minister of Finance is the minister in charge.  And it is 

grievance before supply. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Chairman, to the point of order. 

 

The Chair: -- On the point of order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member said this was 

something that he found on the debates on May 3, 1991.  It was 

Friday.  Well I followed up on that as well.  And I found out 

that after that the chairman of the committee made a ruling.  

This is May 3, 1991, Friday.  And the chairman said that: 

 

 The purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of government departments and programs on an 

interim basis while reserving to the Legislative Assembly the 

right to complete the detailed review of Estimates as a later 

time.  For this reason members must reserve their detailed 

questions on Estimates and government financial policy for 

the regular review of main Estimates. 

 

That was a ruling that was quite appropriate in May 3, 1991, 

Mr. Chairman.  And that is a ruling that is quite appropriate on 

June 1, 1992. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- If I might, Mr. Chairman, above the hollering 

of the House Leader opposite and the Premier, I would like to 

make my voice heard on this point of order as well and speak 

to it, if I might, sir.  Thank you. 

 

I think, Mr. Chairman, that I'd heard you say that a question 

dealing with revenue was not in order, that 

we're dealing with expenditures only.  Well I submit to you, sir, 

that that cannot be the case.  If we are going to be . . . if the 

government opposite is going to be asking us as members of 

the opposition to approve spending, surely to goodness, sir, we 

have the right then to be able to ascertain whether the revenues 

are going to be there in order to pay for the expenditures that 

the government opposite is asking us to pay. 

 

That's all we want to know, sir, is will the revenues be there in 

order to pay for the bills, since we're all agreed that the deficit 

is something that we don't want.  And that's why we're pursuing 

this line of questioning dealing with the revenue, to make sure 

that the monies will in fact be in place to pay for the bills that 

the government is asking us to spend. 

 

Further, Mr. Chairman, I want to speak to the specific point of 

order raised by the Minister of Finance, and that is this.  Will 

the questions be too detailed? 

 

Now I think you recognize that the premise on which this 

House operates is not only on specific rules as outlined in our 

rules and procedures book, but rather also on tradition and 

exercise; the way things operate.  And I've got quotes galore, 

Mr. Chairman, of a previous . . . one of the chairmen that sits 

right where you're sitting right now, questions that he asked 

during interim supply, detailed questions. 

 

I'll just give you one quick quote here from Mr. Van Mulligen.  

It says, and I quote, from April 9, 1990, and the member from 

Regina Victoria says: 

 

 Well now I really have some questions, Mr. Minister. 

 

And I repeat for your benefit: 

 

 Well now I really have some questions, Mr. Minister.  The 

government last year announced a $100 million capital 

program for municipalities; 25 million of that was to go to 

rural municipalities, 75 million was to go to urban 

municipalities.  It was supposed to be a six-year program of 

approximately $12.5 million annually which, if you multiply 

it, comes to $75 million. 

 

And it goes on and on talking about the capital program, and 

detailed questions.  And the minister, Mr. Chairman, if I might, 

answers it in detail, not as the current minister is doing.  So, 

Mr. Chairman, precedent has it that what we are doing is 

exactly the way the House operates.  And the revenue question 

I have already addressed and I would ask you to take that into 

consideration as well.  Thank you. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  In responding to the point of order 

raised by the member for Thunder Creek, the Chair recognizes 

that the review of the interim finance Bill before the House this 

evening is . . . this is the third day that this consideration is 

before the House and the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It's not as long as it's been. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  And the Chair recognizes that it becomes 

increasingly difficult as time goes by, in review 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

of the interim supply Bill, to avoid asking questions which are 

so specific that they should be more appropriately directed to 

estimate reviews.  And therefore it becomes understandably 

more difficult to keep the questions on line with . . . as 

appropriate to the interim supply. 

 

Further, the Chair holds the view that the interim supply Bill 

does not deal with matters of revenue and that those questions 

are more appropriately directed to the Minister of Finance in 

review of the Department of Finance.  I therefore find that the 

point of order raised by the member from Thunder Creek is not 

well taken. 

 

(2045) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I was 

just going . . . a couple comments here.  First of all the Minister 

of Finance, in his budget or earlier on or early in the month of 

May, came down with a budget increase of 1 per cent on the 

sales tax.  What amount of funding is the Minister expecting to 

derive from the . . . 

 

Mr. Chairman, as has been indicated, certainly the revenues 

must be available for the minister to make the expenditures.  Or 

is the minister just asking this House, asking the people of 

Saskatchewan, to give him a blank cheque and allow him . . . 

He keeps talking about the fact of balancing the budget, but 

how can he balance the budget unless he's able to show that 

he's got the expenditures available to him in order to -- or the 

revenue -- in order to meet the expenditures he's asking in this 

one-twelfth interim supply Bill? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the member 

opposite is out of order again.  But I want just to reassure him 

that no, we're not asking for a blank cheque.  That's why we 

have an interim supply Bill which is detailed expenditures, 

department by department by department on a basis of 

one-twelfth, except where there is a need for additional money 

which has been clearly explained to the House. 

 

Now, Mr. Chairman, this is not a blank cheque.  We're asking 

the legislature to vote on this interim supply.  But this interim 

supply is not considering the revenue side of government.  That 

will be done when each of the Bills comes to this Legislative 

Assembly.  They have been introduced.  They're in the order 

paper.  And that will come when the Department of Finance is 

here as part of the . . . as part of a Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, you just commented or made a 

comment on the fact that the interim supply you asked for is 

detailed, and certainly we're into details on expenditure of the 

interim supply.  And I guess that's some of the . . . many of the 

questions we've been posing, Mr. Minister, have been, yes they 

have been dealing with some detail.  But certainly when you're 

asking for $21 million in the . . . for Highways and 

Transportation for one-twelfth, Mr. Minister . . . 

 

Yes when you talk about detail, I'm wondering what you mean 

by being detailed before us.  Is it just the one page we have in 

front of us that there's X number of dollars for Health or X 

number of dollars for Community Services or X number of 

dollars for Natural Resources?  Is that the 

detail or are we supposed to be getting . . . Like I mean how do 

we find out what you really mean by detail when you're talking 

about a lump sum of money to a department?  We're interested 

in knowing how that lump sum of money is going to be spent 

or used to cover expenditures within each department for 

one-twelfth, for the month, in this case for the month of June. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, if the member 

is really sincere in his question, then he will stop filibustering 

the interim supply Bill along with his colleagues . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- In order that the various 

departments which can provide the detail can be brought before 

this Committee of Finance so that he can ask his questions and 

get the answers.  That's when the detailed expenditures, 

subvote by subvote and program by program, are considered by 

the legislature.  What we're considering here, Mr. Chairman, as 

you have so adequately ruled, is interim supply, which is 

provisions for one month expenditure for each of the 

departments, except in cases where more or advanced funding 

has to be provided, such as revenue sharing, school division 

grants, and some other funding which have been outlined for 

the purposes of the legislature already on a number of 

occasions. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's . . . As I've been sitting 

here and listening to some of the responses and certainly 

perusing through some of Hansard from 1990, it would almost 

be appropriate for the opposition members to take the time to 

maybe put into Hansard some of the comments made by, even 

then Leader of the Opposition, the . . . I don't know whether it 

was 30-minute tirade.  The member went on at great length at 

that time in addressing his questions to the minister of Finance. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Minister, what we have been addressing is 

bringing before you specific questions on different 

departments, because we are very concerned about the fact that 

many people out in rural Saskatchewan are wondering about 

the funding that will be coming to their areas, whether . . . In 

many cases most people just do not feel it's going to meet the 

needs out there, Mr. Minister. 

 

Mr. Minister, I believe in Community Services you have asked 

for $16 million.  And I'm not sure if this . . . It's an increase of 

some 4 million over what the one-twelfth would be.  And I'm 

not sure, Mr. Minister, if you've been asked about that increase.  

I know in a number of cases when the question has been asked, 

certainly you have brought out the fact that there are other 

areas and departments where there have been increases that 

you've had the extra funding available.  What would this 

funding, the extra 4 million, be for in Community Services? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the 

question that was asked last Thursday and the answer was 

provided last Thursday.  But I will provide the information to 

the member opposite because it's within the interim supply, and 

this is the second time I've provided the answer in two days . . . 

in three days. 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

The additional amount over one-twelfth is $4,970,000.  The 

purposes of that additional amount over the interim supply 

provision, Mr. Chairman, is for urban revenue-sharing to 

accommodate the quarterly payment schedule which is an 

additional $3.6 million; northern revenue-sharing, $.7 million 

for the same purpose; and grants to libraries to accommodate 

once again the quarterly payment schedule of $600,000.  That's 

why that provision is there.  I provided that information on 

Thursday and I'm pleased, for the interest of the member, to 

provide it again today. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would you be able to supply us 

with the details of the expenditures on the 316 on the warrant 

and the 360 on the warrant?  Would you be able to supply us 

with the details of the expenditures that you provided for the 

province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I just ask the 

member opposite to check the record.  They were special 

warrants, they were orders in council, they're public 

documents; members of the opposition have them in their 

office.  But if the member has lost his copy, I will undertake to 

provide it to the members opposite.  It's a public document, and 

I don't have it with me today. In fact I'll undertake -- and I'd ask 

my officials to make sure that it's done -- that we'll send it for 

the member to his office tomorrow.  I will personally make 

sure that he gets it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you.  Would you also supply a list of 

the volumes of dollars on the guarantees that we have in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  You've mentioned them as the 

fertilizer plant, the pulp mill, NewGrade, all of the others.  

Would you provide them to us too in a detailed . . . not in total 

like you've got them here but in the detail of each one. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I'm very pleased to let the member 

know that he's got it on his desk.  It was provided to him on 

May 7 in very great detail.  For the first time in the history of 

this legislature that information is part of the new 

accountability, has been provided.  If he looks at the budget 

speech, the supporting documents, all of the detail is provided 

on page 62 and page 63 under "Consolidated Fund . . . 

Guaranteed Debt by Purpose". 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Would you also 

consider providing the difference between what is in CIC 

(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and what is 

in the Consolidated Fund?  Is there any of the debt that is in the 

items that we have listed on page 40 as part of the provincial 

debt, have you got some of that in CIC and have you got some 

of that in the Consolidated Fund? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, there's no other 

information that needs to be provided.  It's all in the budget 

speech plus all of the supplementary tables that are in the back 

of the budget with all of the documents.  All of the debt, detail 

by detail, where it is directed to, where it is held both in the 

Consolidated Fund side and in the Crown corporation side is in 

the budget speech, which the member opposite has had for a 

month now. 

Mr. Martens: -- How much is the total of the volume of 

dollars that you . . . You transferred $875 million worth of debt 

into the Consolidated Fund from CIC (Crown Investments 

Corporation of Saskatchewan).  What is the volume of dollars 

that are there in retained earnings and profits that were there up 

to 1990 . . . 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chair, once again I ask you to 

make a ruling.  I think the member is out of order.  But he also 

has had tabled in the House for several days now, maybe a 

couple of weeks, a copy of the Crown Investments Corporation 

annual report which outlines all of the information he's 

requesting, and all he has to do is look at it. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, in that report, is there the 

volume of revenue in the CIC volume of income for 1990 and 

for the retained earnings? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're not 

considering here the Crown Investments Corporation.  We're 

considering interim supply and I ask you to indicate whether 

that question is in order. 

 

The Chair: -- In response to the minister's request for a ruling, 

that has been ruled out of order previously and continues to be 

out of order on the interim supply. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, on May 28 you agreed that you were here to justify 

the need for interim supply, and yet it would seem that we 

cannot ask detailed questions on how the money is to be spent.  

How can you justify to the Assembly that you need the money 

if you will not answer some detailed questions as to where the 

money is to be spent? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, because as Minister 

of Finance, I provided a very detailed budget, more detailed 

than ever in the history of Saskatchewan, which provides 

information that's never before been provided, and the member 

knows that.  He can get all the information he wants by looking 

at the budget, by taking a look at the Estimates which provides 

all of the detailed expenditures, and on the basis of those 

documents, we are asking for one-twelfth as interim supply.  

Where the money, in detail, is going to be spent is not spent by 

the Department of Finance.  It's spent by the Department of 

Energy and Mines, Rural Affairs, Health, Agriculture. 

 

If the member opposite wants to know the detailed answers to 

those detailed questions, let's pass the interim supply Bill so 

our school divisions can get their money, so that our nursing 

homes can get their money, and give time for these 

departments to come forward as Committee of Finance so that 

they can answer all of the questions that you want about the 

specifics. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, my colleague had a good 

question for you.  You say you're not responsible for how the 

money is spent.  Whose name is on the cheque? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the comptroller's 

name is on the cheque.  The deputy minister's name is on the 

cheque, but how the 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

determination of the expenditure of money is made is 

determined by each of the individual departments responsible. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, the individual departments 

determine where the money is to be allocated to.  But you, sir, 

are the one who decides if the money is going to go to those 

departments.  And you're here asking whether or not you can 

have one-twelfth of that money at this time.  And yet it's your 

department, your deputy minister that does put his name on that 

cheque when it gets spent.  Mr. Minister, I believe you need to 

answer some of those detailed questions here so that we may 

know that you are indeed justified in having that money. 

 

Mr. Minister, you have stated previously that some of the 

budget items are statutory; therefore they're not being funded 

through interim supply.  Could you give us a list of those 

statutory items?  The list you gave us the other day did not 

include the statutory items, only those that were not statutory. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, can you indicate 

whether that's in order? 

 

(2100) 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  The minister has asked for a 

ruling as to whether the question is in order.  The Chair rules 

that questions on statutory items are not in order on the motion 

before us in the interim supply for the . . . Order.  Order on 

both sides of the House please. 

 

I would advise the member as well that he will be able to 

determine which are the statutory items if he reviews the 

Estimates booklet.  And for example, just for the clarification 

of the member, if he would turn to page 66 of the Estimates 

booklet, he would find items no. 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are all 

statutory items and are recognized as such because they're 

noted as such in the book.  The question is therefore ruled out 

of order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, in the Education department interim supply that you 

have requested, does your estimate include any items which 

may have come up after your budget which may not have been 

included in part . . . as part of your budget Estimates, the total 

amount of money that you've requested? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The answer is no. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Mr. Minister, there is a new 

review panel being struck in the Department of Education.  

Will it be funded . . . is it in your budget that you presented in 

beginning of May? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, is part of the interim 

supply going to fund this new review panel? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the review panel has been 

appointed within the context of the Department of Education, 

there will have been one-twelfth provided. 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Minister, I don't know if this 

question is perhaps too detailed for the Chairman, but what is 

the . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I will ask the member to not involve the 

Chair in debate in the Assembly and I'm sure that it was done 

unintentionally.  And I just ask the member to keep that in 

mind. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Now, Mr. 

Minister, what is the mandate of this organizational review 

committee? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, that question has got 

nothing to do with interim supply.  That's a question that the 

department and the Minister of Education will have to answer. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  What 

I'm going to be doing in the next few minutes is pursuing a line 

of questioning initiated by the minister during part of his 

rambling political rampage that he had on in a wide-ranging 

discussion pertaining to the interim supply Bill.  And I would 

like to pursue some of those issues that he was raising during 

his dissertation. 

 

One of them deals with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, which 

I believe is specifically in your purview, and the fact that you 

have simply gutted it, removed it, in spite of protestations by 

many of the people of the Saskatchewan public.  And you 

mentioned, Mr. Minister, during your discussion, that one of 

the reasons why you felt justified in doing away with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was because there were many 

individuals who were earning 60,000 and I believe you said 

$80,000 and more.  And so therefore you felt it inappropriate 

that the Saskatchewan taxpayer should be taking 300-and-some 

dollars and matching that. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, I want to ask you, was that one of the 

prime considerations for you doing away with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan in spite of an extreme amount of 

protestations by the people of Saskatchewan after you had done 

it and they found out, which means of course that there was no 

previous consultation? 

 

And I ask that question quite sincerely because it's entirely 

appropriate for this interim supply since you were the one that 

brought those issues up in your address.  So I want you to 

answer that question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, this interim supply 

addresses none of the questions that the member opposite 

raises.  He will have to ask that question with Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan comes before this House or when the legislation 

comes before the House when we can more appropriately 

answer those questions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Absolutely not.  Absolutely not, Mr. Minister.  

You took political licence by raising that issue and making 

those points.  Therefore you are held accountable for making 

those issues.  Now don't give me that nonsense that I don't have 

a right to ask you questions about statements that you're 

making here tonight.  So therefore, Mr. Minister, I want you to 

back up what you 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

said by answering my question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the interim supply 

Bill does not deal with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  We're 

considering here the interim supply Bill, not the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan and therefore I suggest that the member's question 

is out of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, we did not raise that.  It was 

that member across the way that in the discourse of the debate 

on this interim supply he raised it.  The evidence is there.  And 

this was your response to that and you went further and you 

justified your actions, your blatant political actions in gutting 

and doing away with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan based on 

that issue.  And that was the central issue of your answer. 

 

Now I'm just picking up on what you brought forward.  It's not 

something that I brought forward, you did.  And the Chairman 

agreed that that was in order because he did not make any 

intervention whatsoever.  So therefore I'm just pursuing a 

legitimate line of questioning. 

 

Furthermore, Mr. Minister, you responded by asking our 

member the question, would we support you if you modified . . 

. 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  The Chair will intervene because 

the member is involving the Chair in the debate.  I do remind 

the member that after the debate that you were referring to, a 

ruling was requested and was made.  Still before us is the 

interim supply Bill and the appropriateness of questions is 

determined by the interim supply motion, not whether someone 

has made reference to that topic before or not.  There has been 

wide-ranging debate in the first two and a half days of this 

motion before us and many questions were put to the minister, 

which technically he would not have been required to respond 

to but did.  However, a ruling has been made this evening in 

response to a request for a ruling.  And therefore I will advise 

the member that your question is out of order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I know that you're getting antsy 

about having to face the opposition who is asking questions, 

demanding answers, and you're stonewalling us.  The openness 

of your government is obviously at question here.  And I think 

you're feeling the pressure by now, as supported by your 

Premier sitting beside you a little while ago that was making 

this issue as well. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you asked us the question.  You asked the 

question, would we support you if you would have just 

excluded those $80,000 income.  That's the question that you 

asked this side, if we would support that type of a change. 

 

Then, Mr. Minister, if that's not true, then I want you to put into 

your own words once more what you said a little while ago to 

my colleague.  If you're saying that what I'm saying is not true, 

then you put the truthful words out now.  I want to hear them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I respect your ruling 

and I recognize the member's out of order.  I do not intend to be 

out of order as well. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- We're not getting anywhere, the minister from 

Swift Current says, and I agree with you, member from Swift 

Current, that the minister has clammed up.  The openness of a 

government is just not there.  We, as representatives of the 

Saskatchewan taxpayers, want to know before we take 

460-some-odd millions of dollars of taxpayers' money and just 

give you a blank cheque as to how it's going to be spent, some 

indication, some rationale.  And you refuse to give it.  Why?  

I'm not quite sure.  Whether it's that you're feeling that your 

time would be more appropriately spent somewhere else doing 

some other things, but we do have questions. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, another thing that you said 43 minutes ago, 

according to the time, is when you made the statement of how 

well your consultation process had gone prior to the budget.  

That was what you were saying.  And you were saying you had 

consulted with a great deal of people, great numbers of people.  

And you're getting cocky and you're being all flippant about it.  

I recognize that.  But this consultation process that you referred 

to, that set up the budget of which we are now taking 

one-twelfth in this interim supply, what I would ask you, sir, is 

the consultative process that you're talking about -- who did 

you consult on this?  Did you consult the optometrists?  Would 

you please answer that question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we consulted widely 

across all of the public of Saskatchewan.  We had public 

meetings.  We had meetings of community leaders.  We had 

meetings which involved the various professions.  We had 

meetings which involved, jointly, trade union meetings and 

chamber of commerces and business people.  We consulted 

probably more widely than ever before has there been a 

consultation in the province of Saskatchewan prior to this 

budget. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I welcome the member's 

answer which was broad ranging.  Would you answer this 

question specifically then: did you consult with optometrists? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, respective ministers 

would have consulted with their respective organizations which 

their departments referred to.  And if the member wants to 

know all of the different ministers and who they consulted with 

in the preparation for this budget, he's going to have to ask that 

question when those departments come to Committee of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, a question that is slightly 

different.  And I know that the Minister of Justice, for example, 

has committed himself in this institution here, that there has not 

been one single case of patronage since you folks took over the 

government.  I think he made that commitment -- not one case 

of patronage.  Everybody that was hired, was hired strictly on 

the basis of competence, of ability, and qualifications. 

 

I asked you the other day, sir, a question which you committed 

yourself to answer.  And I'm still waiting for an answer, and I 

haven't got that answer yet.  Specifically, the question was: 

who are your direct staff?  What are their qualifications?  How 

long have they worked for you?  And what is their 

remuneration?  Could you pass that over 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

please. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member did ask the question.  I 

said that I would have it.  I had it the day that he asked the 

question but he left the House when I had it ready, and he 

wasn't here for me to give it to him.  I have it here and I'm quite 

prepared to pass it over to the member opposite, if we have a 

page. 

 

(2115) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Minister, I appreciate you sending this 

over, and I notice that there are two gentlemen here that 

obviously have served in this particular position for a long time 

and have done a commendable job for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I notice however one individual here whose position from 

January to May of 1992 is the associate deputy minister, an 

associate deputy minister, budget analysis division for the 

Saskatchewan Finance department.  I notice that he has 

something, a Master's of Public Administration.  He has a 

Doctorate in History and a Bachelor of Arts in History.  And at 

the same time I notice that he has been special advisor and 

assistant cabinet secretary, Executive Council; director of 

research for the official opposition which of course means, I 

would assume that means the NDP; an executive director, 

development branch, Department of Labour; and budget bureau 

in '75,'78 . . . 1987 . . . pardon me, for $87,000 for the province 

of Saskatchewan.  The point to me is, on what basis did you as 

Minister of Finance see fit to hire an NDP advisor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, on the basis of the 

fact that Mr. Dotson was fully qualified, he had extensive 

experience in the budget bureau in the 1970's.  The member for 

Rosthern points that out.  He's had experience as an executive 

director.  He does indeed have a Master's degree in Public 

Administration which is important in fulfilling the role which 

he now occupies.  He's a qualified individual, does an 

outstanding job.  And if only we could have more people like 

that and if only the members opposite had made a point of 

listening to the advice of people like that we probably wouldn't 

be in the financial mess that we face in Saskatchewan today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Describe his line of work.  What precisely 

does he do for your department? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- This particular branch is 

responsible for tax policy, fiscal policy, and budget analysis for 

the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This afternoon, 

Mr. Chairman, I asked questions to the minister for exactly an 

hour and 50 minutes.  And I went through these questions and 

answers by supper hour, and I feel if he had just answered the 

questions we could have done it in about 35 to 40 minutes, but 

you weren't answering questions. But we finally did . . . we got 

you into a corner and some of these questions you did answer.  

But we lost nearly an hour -- I suppose not quite that long -- 

about three-quarters of an hour, Mr. Minister, just for you to 

admit to the public of Saskatchewan and to the viewers who, 

you or the department, advises the 

personnel that brings in the different credit ratings for the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And you would not . . . you took 10 

minutes and then another 10 and then finally you, after 

three-quarters of an hour, you admit it. 

 

And then finally we got you to admit there was a $3.5 billion 

deficit we took over in 1982.  But you misrepresented all the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan at election time when 

you go out there and said, you've been saying for 10 years, we 

left a balanced budget in 1982, but finally we have it on the 

record from you, Mr. Minister of Finance, that we took over a 

$3.5 billion . . . 

 

So I'm saying that hour and three-quarters I guess wasn't 

wasted because you finally said that it's the department, that it's 

your hundred officials that do the advising, to advise the 

personnel that comes up with the credit rating.  It took a long 

time but you finally did it, Mr. Minister.  And that's quite 

important.  So we did achieve that and we got it on the record 

about the 3.5 billion. 

 

But I'm very disappointed, Mr. Minister, that tonight you're not 

wanting to answer any questions at all.  We could be off the 

interim supply Bill; you're just trying to stand up here and 

stonewall the people of Saskatchewan to make them think that 

the Tories are the ones holding up this Bill.  Well why didn't 

you . . . As one of the members said a while ago, why didn't 

you bring this Bill in about two weeks ago?  You didn't need to 

wait until the last minute. 

 

Mr. Minister, I just can't believe this because I've been here for 

about my 15th budget and I've seen every minister including 

ours on the Tories side, on the government side, and on your 

side say, well these questions aren't applicable, you'll have to 

get the answers from the departments.  But in every single case 

there was some decency among the ministers, in every single 

case, even when you were minister back in 1982.  You gave in, 

because we looked at Hansards and you answered the 

particular questions about the departments. 

 

What's so different about 1992?  Why can't you just answer a 

few questions that we're asking?  It's not out of the ordinary.  

We went through . . . The Premier was sitting here tonight and 

he was chirping from his seat that what's the matter with us 

bunch of goofs over here, and we were reading his questions 

that he asked.  He asked about GRIP and NISA.  And Mr. 

Hepworth, the then minister of Finance says, well I don't think 

I should have to answer these questions about Quebec and 

Ontario, but finally with decency the now Premier got his 

answers.  So I'm going to ask you some precise questions and I 

expect an answer, and so maybe we can yet finish this by 10:30 

tonight . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe, we'll see. 

 

I have these series of questions I'm going to ask you, Mr. 

Minister.  It's about the Conference Board of Canada recently 

did a 3 per cent turnaround on its predictions for the 

Saskatchewan economy.  Before you started your political 

meddling, the Conference Board predicted our economy would 

grow by 2.2 per cent.  Now after they have seen you in action, 

they say we will go into an economic decline for about 1 per 

cent. 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

You try to explain this away by saying the Conference Board is 

using predictions about the farm economy.  But, Mr. Minister, 

they're saying that you're using predictions.  You said this 

afternoon it was predictions is what you're going by.  And 

they've used . . . If you read their own report, Mr. Minister, 

they say they did not make the prediction worse because they 

are assuming higher world prices for grain -- higher, not lower, 

Mr. Minister -- higher prices.  So these are rosy predictions 

really.  The fact is if the world price for grain doesn't make a 

significant jump, the economic decline of the province will be 

worse. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you give us the analysis of your department 

in regard to the farm economy?  Now that's not too much to 

ask.  That's an overall picture and it's not too much to ask the 

Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, we're considering 

interim supply and not economic policies of the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And when the member from Arm River asks 

that question during Committee of Finance we'll, as best we 

can, provide the information that is not internal information for 

the purposes of government decision making.  He will get his 

answers then. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you're the one 

that went for 25 minutes tonight and you covered every 

political department you could and you were as political as you 

could be.  You threw the debate wide open.  Now you did that 

yourself.  And you set your own precedents by Thursday and 

Friday, and for a while this afternoon you were answering 

questions.  Now why won't you answer a few of these 

questions. 

 

If this farming economy in Saskatchewan is not important 

enough, not important enough, Mr. Minister, that you can just 

slough it off in your arrogant way . . . And I'm the one that put 

on the record this afternoon that I feel that you, as an 

individual, are a right and proper man, that I have great respect 

for you as an individual.  I'm not saying anything about your 

philosophy.  We have disagreement there but we both have our 

God-given right for that. 

 

But there's nothing wrong, Mr. Minister, with you standing 

here as the Minister of Finance, which there must have been 

before you talked about the . . . and put this $469 million 

together that you're asking us to approve and you're asking us . 

. . And you can certainly answer a few broad questions and 

you're refusing to do it tonight.  You're just absolutely refusing 

to do it. 

 

Now it's not reasonable, Mr. Minister.  Will you not tell us . . . 

I'll ask you one more time: what projections are they using and 

what assumptions?  Just give me the analysis, and perhaps 

there would be for other members, about the analysis of your 

department in regard to the farm economy.  Surely to goodness 

you can give us an overall thinking of what's going on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't have that 

information here because this is interim supply.  But I can tell 

the member opposite that all of the assumptions that are made 

in this budget are assumptions on the basis of a normal, 

average crop year, not an exceptional year 

like we had last year.  That is the way budgets traditionally 

make their assumptions and that's the way this assumption is 

made. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, surely if they made these 

assumptions on averages, what price did they go by?  You must 

know that.  You must have used some average. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, as previously ruled, 

I think the member's questions are really getting out of order 

and he's trying to kill the time of this House for I don't know 

what good reason.  We're on interim supply and I think we 

should deal with interim supply. 

 

The Chair: -- The minister makes a good point.  At present we 

are not dealing with the Estimates, we are debating a resolution 

as it pertains to an interim supply Bill.  We are not voting 

individual departmental Estimates.  Supply Bills are to issue 

money required in advance of complete parliamentary sanction.  

Debate should focus on the need to grant, reduce, or refuse 

supply in respect to the resolution before the committee. 

 

I would invite the member to discuss departmental policies and 

details of programs under the appropriate departmental 

Estimates. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, it is for sure that your 

department and these hundred officials of your department 

must have discussed very, very clearly among yourselves -- 

you must have -- to come up with the averages of what it is 

going to cost for the GRIP program in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  I'm sure you did.  And so you said you've used 

averages and that's where you got your figures from.  What 

would your average be if we had a 1988 crop?  Now you must 

have that.  You would have to have those figures.  And that's 

not a question that should be out of line to ask in this House. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Both the Department of 

Agriculture, Mr. Chairman, and the Department of Finance will 

be before the Committee of Finance when those questions can 

be answered.  The member opposite knows that's the 

appropriate place to ask those questions.  We're here 

considering a resolution to provide interim supply for one 

month's expenditures based on the overall budget of the 

government.  The overall budget will be considered in 

Committee of Finance when the Department of Finance is here 

answering questions with respect to that budget. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, we can't get any answers out 

of you so maybe we'll just respond to your 25 minutes that you 

spoke about before the supper hour.  And I would naturally 

have to be allowed to respond to that. 

 

We'll take Department of Health, Mr. Minister, the hardships 

you've caused the people in the province of Saskatchewan with 

Department of Health.  I looked at television tonight watching 

the news, Mr. Minister, and I see some people lining up to get 

their eyes tested.  Did that not bother you, Mr. Minister, when 

they said people could not pay?  That you've cut the seniors of 

this province off, that there's . . . I can't believe you've done it.  

I can't believe you've done things like this.  It doesn't seem to 

even bother you.  You're the last people . . . you call 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

yourselves the father of medicare.  I can't believe that you, the 

Tommy Douglas government, that have come in here and 

eroded your own health care department. 

 

What kind of hardships are you causing these people?  Are you 

wanting people to go blind?  They can't afford to get tested.  I 

mean that has got to be . . . where's your heart?  I can't believe 

this. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No heart. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- The Premier, he says they've haven't got a 

heart.  I agree with them.  The now Premier just said that they 

haven't got a heart.  And I'm beginning to believe that.  Now 

haven't you not discussed among yourselves, have you not 

discussed as a seriousness of the deductible on the drug plan? 

 

Yes, the now Premier, Mr. Chairman, he says it wasn't for the 

Tories.  There's that old rhetoric about the Tories.  He wants to 

blame it onto the Tories.  Well I'll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when 

the now Premier was in Outlook, Saskatchewan, election time, 

he was very, very clear where he was going.  He said this 

terrible deficit that the province of Saskatchewan, that the 

Tories got us in.  And he says, here's the figures.  He gave them 

multi billions of dollars but he says, I promise, I promise, that 

I'll balance the budget.  I will lower taxes.  I will create jobs -- 

lower taxes, create jobs, save all the farmers, go to Ottawa, get 

the money. 

 

And then when you sit down, Mr. Premier, you were asked the 

question -- you were asked it very clearly -- that the Tories 

charge too much for central services.  What do you think, Mr. 

Premier?  And you have said it many times throughout the 

province, my promise will be to hold or lower. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I said that? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Yes you did, Mr. Premier.  And I'll tell you, 

that is the worst, blatant break of a political promise that I've 

ever heard.  As I said this afternoon, Mr. Chairman, that when 

the member of Estevan, the premier . . . when he became 

premier in 1982, he promised to take the gas tax off at midnight 

that night.  And he put it back on seven years later -- seven 

years later when the economy of all of North America was 

failing.  But you people didn't wait seven days.  You people 

didn't wait seven days.  You just went right after them. 

 

You promised people that we're going to make sure you have 

no 7 per cent tax on your hamburgers.  You'll never be charged 

a hamburger tax by us.  You had the people, the NDP in my 

towns of Davidson, and Craik, and Outlook, and across the 

water from the Last Mountain-Touchwood, said the PST 

(provincial sales tax) is gone.  We're going to have 7 per cent 

more in our pocket. 

 

(2130) 

 

And were they ever an angry bunch when the E&H (education 

and health tax) came back on.  You didn't even tell them that.  

It came back . . . hah!  That means, Mr. Premier, Mr. 

Chairman, that the Premier is not out with 

the people.  And that's exactly, Mr. Chairman, is why they were 

defeated in 1982 and the now Premier admitted it -- that we 

lost touch with people.  And I can't believe it. 

 

As I said this afternoon, I said it many times before that I 

should be happy politically that you're making these blunders 

because it's only going to leave you another three years, and 

we'll be back over there, and you know that.  There isn't a 

doubt about it.  There isn't a doubt about it. 

 

But I'm not happy about it.  Because I would rather . . . and I 

feel this in my heart that you would do well and make the 

people feel good.  Believe it.  Because who's suffering with 

your blunders and your miscalculations and your tax grabs is 

the people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

When I've got known NDP people in my constituency that 

would absolutely have never voted anything but NDP in their 

life are ashamed of the government that they've elected.  They 

are absolutely ashamed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 

there was at election time.  There was happened to be about 

2,300.  And I believe now that it's a hard . . . just the same as 

the Liberals.  It's hard to get them to admit what they voted. 

 

I was talking to a Liberal yesterday, and I know that he had a 

Liberal sign up against me.  And he says, boy it's the Liberals 

that caused all this problem.  I'm sure glad I stayed with you, 

Gerry.  They're all wanting to pretend they didn't cause you 

people to be over there.  They all wanted to pretend this. 

 

You've caused so many hardships that I can't believe what 

you've done.  You've got farmers out there that had faith in 

you.  You got many members right around, the back-benchers 

around here that come off of farms.  And they believed you.  

They believed you.  The signs are still on No. 11 Highway: 

where's the moratorium?  Where's the moratorium?  Whether 

we believe in a moratorium or not, you promised it.  You 

promised a moratorium, and you broke that promise. 

 

But your people came in, and they made such a commotion 

about this, and they put the . . . (inaudible) . . . to you, and so 

you had a little meeting here in December and says, well let's 

put a 90-day freeze on before we really kick them off.  And 

that's exactly what you did.  You put a 90-day freeze on, and 

then on March 31, 1982, I was down to the press room when 

your Minister of Agriculture had his press conference.  And I'll 

tell you, I was actually reasonably pleased of the some of the 

things he said. 

 

I was pleased because he said we have listened to the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  We've had this here debt review 

panel, and we've listened all over.  So I thought well if this is 

what's coming from the people of Saskatchewan, then I guess 

maybe he's doing his job.  But after I read it and then after I 

talked to people, many people, some from my own riding that 

sent in letters, sent in requests, and you never even paid one bit 

of attention to them. 

 

You had your GRIP meetings.  Mr. Chairman, they had their 

GRIP meetings all over this province, but they had 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

their GRIP meetings after they changed the GRIP.  What kind 

of a government goes asks the people after you change it?  This 

government hasn't got the fortitude to even bring in their farm 

Bill.  You promised these farmers . . . You've got farmers every 

day in the courts of Saskatchewan that are paying money to 

lawyers and even the judges are coming on side and say, well 

we got to wait.  And they're trying to adjourn and do everything 

they can, waiting on this government because they promised to 

save the farmers and there's going to be a six-year leaseback. 

 

Well I can tell you today that you've betrayed everybody in the 

province of Saskatchewan because this morning I met with my 

credit unions -- they asked me to come and meet with them -- 

and I met with the credit unions from Holdfast and 

Chamberlain and they're all going to meet with me and they 

said you've been betrayed.  Because they said they went along 

with your program, they were going to go along with your 

six-year program but you betrayed them because you're not 

going to fund their extra four years. 

 

Because McKnight says we've already got a six-year program.  

They've got a three-year lease program, then they've got a 

three-year equity, and they're going for another three and that 

will be nine.  They have it in place.  And maybe if you had of 

said to them that we'll also fund you for the other four years. 

But what are you doing? Mr. Chairman, what these people are 

doing over here, they're absolutely making a shame . . . a sham 

out of this government because who is the worst creditor in the 

province of Saskatchewan is Agricultural Credit Corporation 

which their own people that work there said the directions . . . 

And I can give the minister, I'll give the minister the names of 

the people that work for ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation 

of Saskatchewan) the directions for this new government. 

 

The direction from them is to clamp down on farmers.  And I'll 

give him the names and you better go and take care of the 

people that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister will get 

the names because they should be dealt with.  A gentleman 

from Watrous and another one, if I call them gentlemen, 

Watrous and Outlook, Rosetown, right out of his own area. 

 

If the members over there can sit and chirp and they can laugh 

away but they should be serious about this because they're 

asking all the lenders in the province of Saskatchewan, 

including Farm Credit Corporation, they're asking the major 

banks, they're asking the credit unions, and they're saying, we 

would like to go along with what the government is asking us 

to do but they're not setting an example.  They're not setting an 

example, they're kicking them off ACS as fast as they can, just 

as fast as you can. 

 

They're down in Frontier, Saskatchewan, the sheriff came in 

and took over a whole farmyard of machinery and didn't even 

give them a chance to know about The Exemptions Act, he 

didn't understand. And they're having a sheriff's sale on this 

guy's farm in a very few days.  Now if you think that's being a 

heart and showing people, well you can at least tell them what 

the law is, you could tell them that there's Exemptions Act out 

there, 

there's protection for them and who put the protection there, 

who made The Exemptions Act the way today, the Tory 

government done it. 
 

Who put the Mediation Board and Farm Land Security Board 

but the Tories.  You bet we did . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

They think it's pretty good now after what you're coming up 

with.  They think it's just great. 
 

Why did you add insult to injury?  You haven't brought in the 

farm Bill.  You're adding insult to injury.  You socked them 

another 60 cents a gallon for gas, fifty-nine point something.  

Mr. Chairman, this is the most disgraceful thing I've ever 

heard.  That a farmer's got to pay more for his power, more for 

his energy bill, more for his SGI . . . for his plates for his 

vehicles, and then he has to pay 60 cents a gallon with no 

rebate for another year. 
 

Now that's got to be a terrible thing to do.  That's not helping 

farmers.  That's exactly the opposite of what you said at 

election time.  If you were going to do these things why didn't 

you say at election time, we are going to put taxes so high that 

you won't be able to afford to farm?  Why didn't you tell them 

the truth? 
 

Why didn't you tell them you were going to put them off the 

land?  Why didn't you say that?  You're not saving them.  You 

promised.  You can't save every farmer but you promised you 

would. 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Who did?  Who did? 
 

Mr. Muirhead: -- You people did.  We're going to save all the 

farmers.  This here rhetoric I have to listen to in this here 

building here for last fall and now that the federal government 

broke their promise on the third line of defence, the $500 

million.  And that's the worst garbage you've ever heard of 

because you people threw it away, because it was very clearly 

said by the Minister of Agriculture that the third line of defence 

will be the GRIP program. 
 

And you said it's too rich so you gutted the GRIP program and 

put your own useless program in that the farmers don't even 

know today what they're covered for. 
 

It's like me going in and buying an insurance policy for a fire 

loss on my house and they said how much do you want to put 

on.  And I say, well let's wait and see till the house burns down 

and see how much the house is worth then.  Then we'll put on 

that. 
 

Let's just be very, very clear about this, that that $500 million 

was never promised.  It was only the Premier and a plane load 

of people that took off to Ottawa and said, backed by the 

Wheat Pool, we want $500 million.  And boy, I wish you could 

have got it.  We need it.  And then we need another 500 

million, and then another. 
 

But don't say they broke a promise because they didn't.  It's 

you.  It's you, Mr. Chairman.  It's the members opposite that 

took the $500 million right away from them by gutting the 

GRIP program.  Because they were covered under the old 

GRIP program.  Last year they were covered for $3.2 billion.  

And what happened on that $3.2 billion?  They didn't have . . . 

they were very lucky.  The federal 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

and provincial crop insurance corporations and the government 

that backed up these payments, they didn't have to do it 

because there was a good crop and the price of wheat went up. 

 

So you paid about $800 million out . . . Well it's going to be 

estimated to be paid out if the price of wheat goes to 2.86 a 

bushel.  If the price of wheat goes to 2.86 a bushel, then you 

will be paying out about this year 7 or $800 million.  So what 

this smart Minister of Finance does to the poor Minister of 

Agriculture is says to him, listen, you got to go out there and 

you got to get those farmers because we can't afford a 1988 

crop, because it would have cost us close to $3 billion, and I'll 

have to break my promise by never going to have a balanced 

budget.  If you have one crop failure in the next four years, 

your balanced budget is washed down the drain.  You know 

that as well as I know it.  You know it.  You know it for sure. 

 

What about the Department of Parks?  What about 

Environment?  What about SaskPower?  What about all these 

cut-backs you've had every place?  You've been asked and 

you've been asked and you've been asked and you've been 

asked and you've been asked.  Did you go out and ask the 

people?  You didn't.  Because I say that the Minister of Finance 

has misled the people in the province of Saskatchewan by 

standing up here saying, we have talked to all the groups of 

people.  We've been all over the province.  And I say you 

haven't been.  Yes, in an aeroplane way above where nobody's 

seen you.  That's the only place you ever communicated in 

Saskatchewan since the election, is in an aeroplane. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Cleve Bennett from Chamberlain says, I sure 

wish that the member from Riversdale hadn't become Premier 

because I used to enjoy his visits when he stopped in to get gas.  

But now he's flying over in a plane and I don't see him no 

more.  He said, I never see him any more.  Gone.  He's gone. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I'm sitting very close to 

the member and I'm having some difficulty hearing him.  And 

while I'm making that point, hard as I try, I'm having difficulty 

in relating the comments of the member to the motion at hand.  

And I know that he will do so, and I would certainly encourage 

him to relate his comments to the motion which is to vote a 

certain sum of money for interim supply. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Every point I've 

made tonight is connected with the $460 million because this 

Minister will not tell us exactly and where the money is going 

to go.  He sent a little paper over here and says, this is what we 

estimate.  And then he won't answer questions how he got his 

estimations.  If he won't talk about the $469 million and where 

it's going . . . You tell me.  I'll ask you a direct question now.  

I'll ask you a direct question.  Tell me, Mr. Minister, how many 

in 1990 and 1991 -- you were reading a little while ago here 

about interim supply Bills -- tell us in 1990 and 1991, how 

many interim supply Bill motions were there in this House?  

How many? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, in 1990-91 there 

were two interim supply Bill motions.  One was introduced 

after the first of April.  It lasted one day.  The 

other was introduced on . . . in fact it was introduced on April 9 

so that parties out there had to wait.  The other interim supply 

Bill was introduced on May 11; it lasted one day. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And when you look at those interim supply 

Bills, which we went through the Hansards, the reason why . . . 

That's exactly the answer I was wanting to get because the 

minister answered the questions.  He answered the questions.  

You have answered just about zero for Thursday, Friday and 

Monday.  And if you're going to answer no questions, it's going 

to take time. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you're under oath.  You're under oath in 

this House.  Will you stand up here and say that if this Bill 

doesn't pass tonight that there will be hardships in this province 

that somebody won't get their cheques tomorrow? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Minister, there already are 

situations where the cheques should have been out, like school 

boards for example.  The cheques should have been out last 

month.  It is now one day past that time.  Yes there is hardship 

because they're going to have to access their line of credit.  

They're going to introduce interest costs which is going to 

become a burden on the taxpayers which the member from 

Arm River represents, among many others. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, I ask you to table exactly what 

you said and show that to be a fact, that that there . . . And each 

and every cheque that has to go out that just doesn't go out 

because this doesn't get passed tonight.  I want that tabled in 

this House.  I want it right now. 

 

You just made a statement that there's going to be hardships.  

There's going to be people not going to have a . . . different 

groups or whatever you said, that they won't get their cheques 

tomorrow.  There should be cheques out.  Tell us who they are 

and exactly how much they are because I don't know whether I 

believe you or not. 

 

(2145) 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- We don't have and nor will we have 

the list of all of the different organizations, but there are 

approximately 200 funded agencies which receive funds from 

the Department of Social Services that usually count on their 

cheques on the first day of the month.  This is the first day of 

the month.  The interim supply Bill has not been passed. 

 

In Education, school boards generally receive their funds on 

the 31st of the previous month.  That should have been on . . . 

if there's 30 days in May or 31 days in May, it should have 

been the last day of that month.  It is now the first day of the 

following month. 

 

That creates some difficulties.  The member opposite may not 

think it creates some difficulties, but I know that it does 

because it's going to increase greater costs for school divisions 

who will have to wait longer and therefore will not have the 

money from the province available for their use. 

 

And I'm especially concerned about the many agencies 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

that are funded from the Department of Social Services because 

they provide some crucial work, and some of them I suspect 

don't have accesses to lines of credit. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- See, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I don't 

believe your statement because you said the cheques should 

have been out on May 31.  You still had interim supply or you 

still had special warrants on May 31.  Now please, Mr. 

Minister, I said you're speaking under oath.  You tell me 

whether you had money to send that . . . Let's not laugh about it 

because when a minister stands up in this House, he's under 

oath. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the Premier says when a minister lies or doesn't 

say something to tell the truth in this House, it's just a bunch of 

boloney.  That's exactly what he says, a bunch of boloney.  

Well, Mr. Minister, I ask you very seriously: was there special 

warrants to pay that money to these groups you said that didn't 

get paid on May 31? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The money . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  Order.  I listen with interest to the 

member for Arm River, and I want to remind him of a ruling 

that was made earlier in the day with respect to the use of 

certain language in the Chamber.  And that his language on a 

previous occasion, although not unparliamentary, was 

inflammatory.  And I encourage the member to exercise 

caution in the choice of terms that he employs. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I didn't realize that my microphone 

had not been on when I gave the response to the member 

opposite.  When the special warrants were provided, everything 

was in place.  Nobody had to wait for the funding from the 

provincial government that they required.  It was provided on 

time.  Only this month it looks like they will not be provided 

on time because the interim supply Bill is being held up by the 

member from Arm River and other members on the other side 

of the House. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Minister, just be very clear.  A little 

while ago you said that there's cheques that didn't go out, 

couldn't go out on May 31.  Now you've changed your mind 

and says yes, they've all went out.  Now this is the first day of 

June, and we could still finish tonight and that's only one day.  

We could still finish tonight, and we have all this rhetoric we 

have to listen about this hold-up. 

 

And we talked on Thursday, and we talked on Friday, and that 

was still in May.  And you have special warrants to carry it to 

the 31st which was last night.  This is the first day of June, and 

this is the only day that . . . And so I ask you, what cheques are 

not going out today?  Don't give me the rhetoric about the 

cheques on the May 31.  I want to know what cheques aren't 

going out today. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The funding for May was provided 

in the early part of May.  All cheques, all payments of the 

government are stalled because the government has no 

authorization to spend any money until the interim supply Bill 

is passed.  If the member from Arm River and the member 

from Rosthern continue to choose to hold up the interim supply 

Bill, no money can be expended by the province. 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And I appreciate that very much, Mr. 

Chairman.  The question I would have to the Minister of 

Finance is a very simple question.  On a couple of occasions 

already I've heard you and your Premier hollering from his seat 

there, indicating that we're holding up interim supply, that bills 

can't be paid.  Not so.  I think we have every legitimate right to 

stand in our place and hold you accountable for expenditures of 

half a billion dollars almost  

_- 470 million. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, if it's so crucial that everything be finished 

today or tomorrow or the day after, why did you not bring it in 

the week before that?  What was preventing you?  It's a very 

simple question.  Why last moment?  Did you not know what 

the figures were going to be?  Did you not know what 

one-twelfth of your budget was going to be? 

 

Why did you wait until the last moment before you brought this 

interim supply before us?  So that we wouldn't be in such a 

panic position, in a rush position.  Where we would have the 

opportunity to ask questions.  Not only the opportunity to ask 

questions, but even give you the opportunity to give some 

answers.  Why did you bring this forth last Friday?  Why not 

bring it forth, let's say a week prior to that?  Or did you not 

know the figures at that time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- First of all, the interim supply Bill 

was not brought forward last Friday, it was brought forward 

last Thursday, so there was sufficient time.  I can ask the 

member opposite when he was on the treasury benches, why in 

'89-90 was the interim supply Bills brought in on April 13, 

May 11, June 14, July 13, and August 15, all for that particular 

month?  Because that is the tradition of the House. 

 

Interim supply Bills are brought in in the last two or three days 

of the month for the previous month.  That is the way this 

legislature has operated since its beginning.  Nothing unusual 

about that.  And we do that, Mr. Chairman, because we expect 

the official opposition to act responsibly, to keep in mind what 

the process is, know what the process is, and make sure that 

those third parties and others out in the province who rely on 

government funding get their funding, and not hold them up 

and punish them for no good reason other than the members 

opposite have not prepared themselves well for this session. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  One thing is 

very clear, Mr. Minister, that when we were in the government 

we did do things right.  We'd do it in the middle of a month.  

We would do it in the middle of the month.  We would do it in 

the right time.  And don't tell me to stand up there and say to 

me and say to the public and to all the viewers out there that 

they always went through it in one day, because I remember 

very clearly . . . and you weren't here the whole nine years 

because you got womped out of here in '82. 

 

So it happened, and it happened by the members opposite when 

there was eight sitting here that you let the 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

bells ring -- you let the bells ring.  And the now Premier wasn't 

here because he was womped out of here too.  He wasn't here.  

There's hardly anybody here that was even there, so how do 

they know what they done?  The eight people sitting here.  

Allan Blakeney's gone with his $87,000 severance pay that this 

government gave him.  Somebody made an awful mistake over 

here, Mr. Chairman.  Somebody started to condemn severance 

pays until one of my colleagues says, yes, Mr. Blakeney got 

$87,000, and they went whoops.  I guess it would be whoops.  

But who's the one . . . who did all the pushing for the severance 

pays?  Who wanted to spend all that money?  It was the then . . 

. the now Minister of Finance that got up here and spoke that 

night on behalf of their party, that I want my bucks. 

 

And also the leader of the Liberal Party.  You wanted a 

severance package.  You wanted it for yourselves.  You're the 

one that done it Mr. Minister of Finance.  You stood right here 

and says, as Minister of . . . as critic for Finance and as a 

person that likes a buck in my pocket when I'm through.  And 

you said how important it was.  And I even agreed with you.  

But it was kind of important . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  The member's comments are not . 

. . are not to the motion, and I encourage the member to speak 

to the motion that's before us. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  But in my true 

feeling I thought maybe this government back in power, that 

there'd be some money for interim supply, that would be going 

to the new severance package that they be bringing in, because 

I'm sure that they will.  Now that they've got this big sweep, 

they're going to think about their pockets.  We know that. 

 

I wonder, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chairman, I wonder when they 

were putting this interim supply together, and they had this 

cut-back, and they had this here deficit, and they were trying to 

balance budgets, I wonder what they thought of the funding 

they did to the hospitals when they cut back on funding in 

hospitals -- the hardships that they've caused to the people in 

the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

What about your long lists.  I remember here when your 

Minister of Health was a critic for Health, sitting here talking 

about . . . that you Tories are letting people die for the lack of 

beds.  You're actually letting them die.  They brought the name 

of a person in here.  And you people cut back on funding and 

laugh about it, and say, oh it's the Tories' fault.  It's the Tories' 

fault. 

 

Well I'll tell you, Mr. Minister, if it comes down to it -- I don't 

want to have to go back to gravelled roads on highways -- but 

if it comes down to it, I'll travel a gravelled highway to take 

care of our ill in this province.  They better come first because 

you're the last people that should be cutting back to funding on 

hospitals.  I can't believe that you've done it and that's why 

you're so unpopular out there. 

 

Chiropractor -- what about the people that have had accidents 

and they need chiropractors and they got no money?  What 

about them?  What about the diabetics?  I've had more calls, 

Mr. Minister, I've had more calls from the 

people on the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and also on the 

people that are diabetic without any money . . . can't believe 

what you've done.  Now why did you not think of the hardships 

you're causing to these people?  Because you caused hardships, 

and then the Premier says the same thing. 

 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, the Premier was not in the 

House this afternoon.  He was not here to be able to hear the 

comments on the choices, and you did have choices. 

 

And we proved. We proved, and we backed your Minister of 

Finance right into a corner when he had to admit that on the 

credit rating of this province of Saskatchewan, it was the 

information that he got from the hundred people in Finance.  

Ninety-nine of them are the same people that are there today.  

And so don't try to kid the people on this side of the House and 

all the people in viewers' land tonight and all the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Don't try to kid them. 

 

Don't try to fool them that it's the Tories that caused the 

problem because we've been through it and over and over 

again.  You've admitted.  You've admitted, and I'm saying it to 

everybody in Saskatchewan that's listening tonight.  The 

hockey game will be over, and there'll be a few turning their 

stations in . . . that you admitted that there was a $3.5 billion 

deficit we took over from you in 1982 and the multiplier effect 

and that runs about 12, $13 billion today. 

 

So don't say that we left this here legacy out there.  Those are 

your own figures, Mr. Minister of Finance.  You put the figures 

out.  You said it.  I didn't say.  I asked you the figures, the total 

deficit of the departments and the liabilities and the Crowns 

and you said $3.5 billion.  Now you've admitted it.  Now that's 

a different story than you would tell the people out there. 

 

And you, Mr. Minister, you said very clearly that Mr. Gass 

never said that you people knew, and you people did know 

every bit.  We've been over and over that again, and I'm sick 

and tired of you people saying it.  And you're not going to get 

away with it. 

 

You had seven or eight months in power now, seven months 

it's on to now, and you can't keep on blaming things on the 

other side.  We did the same thing.  We tried to blame it . . . 

when we took over from you in 1982, we said there's this here 

deficit, but people didn't believe us that that deficit was there.  

We couldn't get people to believe that this holier-than-thou 

government, the NDP, the Tommy Douglas people . . . if 

Tommy Douglas was here today, he'd be ashamed of every one 

of you.  He'd be absolutely, totally ashamed because he would 

not misrepresent the public. 

 

I know him well.  My mother went to school with Tommy 

Douglas.  He was an honourable man . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . yes and when he said there was a deficit there 

would be one.  If it's balanced there would be one.  But you 

people went out, and you convinced the people in the province 

of Saskatchewan that we never took over a deficit, but we did 

take over a deficit from you.  We took over $3.5 billion, and 

then you sit there and laugh.  You sit there and you laugh and 

you joke when we're saying to 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

you . . . ask you questions. 

 

How much money of this interim supply, the $469 million, 

have you saved by cutting back on health care, hospital care, 

chiropractors, ambulance fees?  You've just thrown it right to 

them -- hardships, hardships.  You've done it, and you don't 

want to answer a question.  You've cut the throat of the farmer.  

You've cut the throat of the ill, the seniors.  You've cut back 

even on the $700 that they get.  They used to get it if they had . 

. . a portion if they had $30,000 income.  You've cut that back.  

You cut back on everybody. 

 

All right, maybe that's the right thing to do, but that isn't what 

you promised.  You broke every promise.  The only promise 

you didn't break, the only group of people that you didn't break 

a promise to, is a group that the Premier has never met yet, and 

you know that's a fact. 

 

(2200) 

 

The Premier sits here tonight and he makes jokes of what I'm 

saying.  But he did say -- and I take his word for it because 

that's one thing, I've always taken the word of the member from 

Riversdale, I've always taken his word -- he said he's going to 

go meet the last of these groups tomorrow.  So I want people to 

realize that, that he's going to go out and meet these people and 

meet these groups. 

 

And if you go meet . . . Mr. Chairman, if he would talk and go 

and talk interim supply, about $469 million, and talk to the 

chamber of commerce here in the city of Regina, Moose Jaw, 

Saskatoon, and Prince Albert, Yorkton, the bigger cities in this 

province, and say, do you think what we're doing is right?  You 

won't get a yes from them. 

 

Your Minister of Agriculture stands up here every day and 

talks about agriculture and says, yes the farmers know the 

trouble we're in.  They know we have to balance the budgets, 

they know that.  And you know perfectly well that a good 

politician can walk into any room of people -- you give me 10 

people or 2,000 people and I can say, oh it's motherhood; we've 

got to balance the budgets, and you've got to do this and you've 

got to do that, and they'll applaud you and they'll applaud you.  

But when they're getting in their car to go home they say, who's 

that guy trying to kid.  It better not be on my back. 

 

You people never asked anybody on whose back you want to 

have this here deficit or this budget balanced.  You never asked 

anybody.  You just done it; you just done it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, this minister comes in here and he asked for 

$469 million and he expects us not to talk for a day or two or 

three on it.  I don't know who he was trying to kid.  If he had 

never come in here and broke every broke promise . . . He 

broke all the promises, and if he never came in here and done 

that, we wouldn't be asking you the questions.  We have a right 

to be asking you questions and many, many questions. 

 

Any time that a government breaks every promise, almost 

every promise . . . The only promise you're coming close to 

keeping is trying to balance the budget.  But don't kid me.  

Don't kid the people on this side of the House.  Don't think 

you're fooling the people of Saskatchewan.  You're 

only trying to move money into the right departments and into 

the right Crowns and get it put in the right spot so you can 

build up your war chest to win the election, the next election.  

He's working on his slush fund, that's what the Minister of 

Finance is doing.  And I feel sorry for him because as I said 

before, he's an honourable man, but he's told what he has to do.  

He's exactly what I said to the Premier when he was a minister 

of Justice in 1980 or '81, that when he says, I pull your chain, 

you go this way.  And when I pull it this way, you go that way.  

He's the boss and everybody in Saskatchewan knows he's the 

boss.  He always has been. 

 

And I don't take that away from him -- I don't take that away 

from him.  But let's get the blame where it should be, Mr. 

Chairman.  Let's get the blame . . . why we're talking about this 

here interim supply here tonight and we're going on and on 

because we're not getting answers.  We know what the trouble 

is.  Because the now Premier has said to all his ministers that 

you've got to hold the line.  We have to balance budget 

regardless who we hurt.  And that's exactly, Mr. Chairman, 

what's going on. 

 

It's the now Premier of this province has laid it out. And you, 

Mr. Finance Minister, you have to listen, and so does the 

Minister of Agriculture and so does the member from Swift 

Current.  We have to cut back.  The Minister of Environment, 

Parks, Highways -- they all got to cut back. 

 

Do you think people are happy out there when they're going to 

go back . . . did you hear the story, Mr. Premier, Mr. Chairman 

. . . I wonder if you heard the story from one of his NDP 

supporters from Yorkton that said, I would advise the farmers 

to grow oats this summer because they're going to be back 

driving horses.  They'll have to have oats to feed their horses.  

And that's exactly what's going to be happening with this 

government's going backwards. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've asked no questions tonight so that's why 

I've been coming back . . . I've only talked -- I'm just watching 

the clock -- talking the same 25 minutes.  I'm talking the same 

25 minutes that you did, and I'll soon be finished it.  Because 

you just went and went and said nothing.  But at least I'm 

saying what the people want to hear out there because I've had 

phone calls tonight.  You're right on.  It was in my office when 

I went back and I got them right here.  I got several of them 

right here.  You're right on the money.  Give it to them.  Give it 

to them.  Take this, deliver this to the Minister of Finance and 

then to the Premier. 

 

Now I'm going to ask you a question, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Minister of Finance.  How much money . . . Mr. Minister of 

Finance, of the $469 million, how much money was saved by 

all the cut-backs that you did since October 21.  If we had had 

no cut-backs, what would the interim supply Bill be? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I don't think that 

that had anything to do with interim supply any more than the 

member's comments, but I can say that if the member will care 

to take the time to look at the budget speech, he will find out 

that we announced in the budget speech that the cost savings 

because of the reductions that we brought about in the whole 

budget was $344 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

million. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, what we are discussing here is 

nearly half a billion dollars.  That in conjunction with two 

special warrants of this government will add up to over a 

quarter, closer to a third of the expenditures because of the 

override in certain departments which are more than 

one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Minister, there's some questions that need to be asked that 

haven't come up yet in this particular motion that I think are 

very important.  Prior to the delivery of your budget, prior to 

the delivery of your budget there were a number of leaks that 

had very serious ramifications.  Well they do, sir, because you 

have outlined expenditures by departments to this House. 

 

And I'm saying to you, sir, that some of those budget leaks had 

ramifications as to expenditures.  We are asking you, sir, now 

given the fact that it was well known what the price of 

cigarettes was going to be, what chiropractic services were 

going to cost, what optometric services were going to cost, and 

the fact that you have a 10 per cent surtax, a 10 per cent surtax 

on individual income tax that was well known to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers prior to your budget -- now, I'm saying to you, sir, 

that some of the numbers that you have given us in these 

budgetary Estimates will be wrong because of those budget 

leaks -- but I want now to ask you, Mr. Minister, given that 

you've had a month from the time, approximately a month from 

the time of your budget, and the fact that these leaks occurred, 

have you and your officials done some analysis to see what 

happened in those various areas, what the impact was on the 

Saskatchewan economy because people knew ahead of time, 

the fact that we had people lining up for chiropractic services 

trying to get in under the wire, the fact that we had optometric 

services in the same category, and the fact that some of your 

tax revenue was probably influenced by those leaks. 

 

Mr. Minister, can you now inform this House, a month in time 

later, if you have done the investigation that you should have 

done, and if so what was the results of it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the budget stands as 

it is.  The numbers in the budget are as they were announced.  I 

will stand by them.  And the member will find at the end of the 

fiscal year, they will be -- when they're audited -- as the 

government announced that they would be. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, in some jurisdictions, what 

happened here in Saskatchewan, you would have done the 

honourable thing and resigned.  I mean the potential for people 

out there to take advantage of a situation that well known was 

tremendous.  You can't tell me, sir, that people don't go around 

breaking into stores and stealing cigarettes because they know 

that they can black-market them, that they can find alternate 

ways to sell cigarettes because of the high price of them.  And 

when people know ahead of time that you're going to increase a 

pack of cigarettes by over 75 cents, I would say to you, sir, that 

there were probably people out there taking advantage of that. 

 

And the same goes when you get into health care.  When 

there are people that have to have health care services provided 

to them and they've been getting them for a nominal fee or for 

free before having a budget leak, that means, sir, that people 

are going to take advantage of the system.  And they had lots of 

ability to do that, and the numbers were bang on. 

 

It was very interesting the night of the budget to go through 

your numbers and see that they were exactly the numbers 

provided to the official opposition.  And I say to you, sir, if 

they were provided to the official opposition, they must have 

been provided to other people.  If you weren't going to do the 

proper thing and resign because of those budget leaks, at least 

as a Finance minister who had cared about the integrity of his 

department, I would think you would have instructed your 

officials to do some checking around to see if there was any 

slippage, to see if people did line up. 

 

I'm told that in the city of Moose Jaw, there were about 100 

people tried to take advantage of chiropractic services ahead of 

the deadline.  And I would think that those kinds of rumours, 

Mr. Minister, would have prompted you to do some 

investigation. 

 

And I think it's quite proper in this discussion tonight on the 

numbers that you have presented in interim supply, along with 

your special warrants, because we won't have the budget 

ratified for some time yet, that you would be prepared to tell 

this Assembly that you have done the proper thing, that you 

have gone through some checks, and that you would want to 

provide to this Assembly what they were. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I fail to understand 

or see how interim supply Bill has got anything to do with 

speculation by the media or speculation by the members 

opposite prior to the budget on what might have been in the 

budget. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, it can impact significantly.  

The minister's budget won't be on track if people knew ahead 

of time.  If, for instance, people in this province went out, 

suppliers, that type of thing, and bought 30 or $40 million 

worth of cigarettes at the old figure instead of the numbers that 

were provided to the minister that there would be X number of 

packages of cigarettes bought.  If that kind of slippage 

occurred, then, Mr. Chairman, I say to you that the budget 

numbers, as presented by the minister under this interim supply 

Bill, won't necessarily jibe with the projections that he's made. 

 

He's told us he's made these projections, that he's living by 

them.  We had a very serious situation occur prior to the 

budget, questions raised in this House.  I would think the 

minister would want to be forthcoming with the due diligence 

that he asked his department to take given those budget leaks. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, what we're looking 

here, and what we're considering here, is a request for an 

interim supply for the month of June.  It is a request for 

expenditures.  That is exactly the amount of money that will be 

spent in the month of June, no more, maybe less, depending on 

how the expenditures go, but 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

no more unless there is prior approval of this legislature. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a very serious 

matter.  This is the Minister of Finance.  I can't think of a more 

appropriate situation to discuss budget leaks than the very first 

time that the Minister of Finance comes before this House with 

an Appropriation Bill, an Appropriation Bill asking for nearly 

half a billion dollars. 

 

As I said in my opening remarks, the minister will have spent, 

by the time his budget is passed, probably in the range of half 

of the total expenditures in this budget year.  As the minister 

says, he has a number of areas where costs have to be spent 

now rather than later.  He's identified a number of departments. 

 

What I'm saying to the minister is, does he not consider it 

serious when exact budgetary items in his budget were brought 

up in this Assembly a number of days prior to the delivery of 

his budget?  This is the first time that he has had an opportunity 

to come before this House, before the people in his department, 

and explain to folks what he has done in the way of due 

diligence given the fact that the public knew these numbers, to 

clarify the situation, to assure people that millions of dollars of 

cigarettes were not purchased, that certain aspects of the health 

system were not compromised.  And I would think the minister 

would want to inform the House, as he's talking about spending 

billions and billions of dollars, about that process. 

 

(2215) 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  I find the member's questions to not be 

appropriate.  Members had opportunity during budget debate to 

discuss generally the question of budget leaks.  The members 

will have opportunity during discussion on Estimates for the 

Department of Finance to ask the minister questions with 

respect to that subject. 

 

But at present, at present we are not dealing with the Estimates.  

We are debating a resolution as it pertains to an interim supply.  

We are not voting individual departmental Estimates.  Supply 

Bills are to issue money required in advance of complete 

parliamentary sanction.  Debate should focus on the need to 

grant, reduce, or refuse supply in respect to the resolution 

before the committee.  And I would invite the member that if 

he has questions about the subject of budget leaks to discuss 

these during consideration of Estimates for the Department of 

Finance. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate your 

ruling.  But I think it's important on the tie between what the 

minister on interim supply has brought forward, the very fact 

that, Mr. Chairman, you can appreciate, the minister has said 

that he's asked for more than one-twelfth, more than 

one-twelfth in the Department of Health.  That department has 

asked for more than one-twelfth.  He has been very, very vague 

with what the excess portion of that health budget is all about. 

 

He says, well you'll have to wait till the Minister of Health 

comes forward to give you the details on it.  What I'm saying to 

you, Mr. Chairman, in regard to those budget leaks is that they 

impacted on the Department of Health. 

The minister has asked for more than one-twelfth in the 

Department of Health.  The potential for problems because of 

those budget leaks in that area means that that overage in the 

Department of Health should be of concern to the Minister.  

And the Minister, I would have thought, would have asked his 

staff to investigate problems that may have arose because of 

that.  We have not just one-twelfth; we have more than 

one-twelfth.  And if the chiropractic and optometric services 

portions of the budget which were leaked are impacting in that 

area, then I would think the minister would want to tell the 

House about it. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, when, as you ruled 

so quite appropriately, the Department of Finance comes before 

the Committee of Finance to consider our Estimates, I will be 

quite prepared to discuss a wide-range of issues.  We're here 

tonight discussing interim supply.  What the member is 

addressing here this evening has got nothing to do with interim 

supply. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, would you tell us on loans, 

advances and investments on Agriculture and Food, what 

category they are in? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Just to assist the member in getting 

even further information, he will find that on page 91 of the 

Estimates dealing with Agriculture and Food . . . And all the 

information is provided for you in that page. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  What about 

Economic Development?  You're spending $316,000 in 

Economic Development.  Where would I find that?  And can 

you tell me whether it's on a loan, advance or an investment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I refer the member to page 82, item 

no. 2, Economic Development, loans pursuant to The Industry 

and Commerce Development Act, estimated $3.8 million.  It's a 

loan to Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting arranged by the 

previous government just before they were defeated in October 

1991. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You said, Mr. Minister, that it was 3.8 

million.  Is three point one six seven hundred one-twelfth of 

that . . . is that a loan, an advance or an investment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- As I indicated, I gave you the total 

number of the loan on page 82.  What is being requested in the 

interim supply is one-twelfth. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is the requirement for the $316,000 as a loan 

going to be extended on one-twelfth?  Let's say we have next 

month another interim supply, June and July.  Are we going to 

have the same amount there, or are we going to have the rest of 

the $3.8 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The requirements are determined 

month by month.  It's based on the loan agreements.  And as 

each month comes, the amount that will be provided will be 

determined by those loan agreements and those requirements, 

and the Department of Economic Development and Trade will 

have to cover the Department of Finance and make the 

appropriate request. 



June 1, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, is this to do with the smelter at 

Flin Flon? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Yes it does. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- On the page 91 of the Estimates, this is the 

advance for the Agriculture and Food on the gross revenue 

insurance program.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's correct, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And is that a loan, an advance, or an 

investment? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- If the member will read the page, it 

says advances.  They are advances to The Agricultural Safety 

Net Act for the purposes of gross revenue insurance plan 

agreement.  They're advances. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is that an advance on the premium paid or is 

that an advance on the return that the farmers are paying as a 

part of their portion of premium?  Is this a matching 

contribution?  And is that sufficient to be equal to the 

contribution of the federal government and the farmers' shares? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I am informed that it's an advance 

on the deficiency of the fund but if the member wants any other 

information other than that general information he should be 

asking that of the Minister of Agriculture during Committee of 

Finance, consideration of the Department of Agriculture and 

Food. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay.  A question on the Education of $3.750 

million.  Education under loans, and advances, and 

investments.  What is that $3.75 million? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That's one-twelfth of what is 

provided in the budget.  And if the member looks at the book 

he will see that it says student assistance and student aid fund. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Would the Minister give me the page? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- I thought I had -- page 92. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Which . . . Mr. Minister, to the student aid 

fund, is that that the . . . Okay. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Okay.  On page 92, Education, vote 

141, item 1, $45 million. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Could you give me 

the 20,000 on Rural Development as well? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Page 93, Rural Development, vote 

144, budgeted $250,000.  The interim supply is asking for 

one-twelfth of that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, the last one there is the Gaming 

Commission for $583,000.  Could you give me an outline of 

where that is? 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The member opposite will find this 

on page 94, Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, in the middle 

of the page, loans and advances pursuant to 

The Saskatchewan Gaming Commission, $7 million.  This 

interim supply asks for one-twelfth of that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Are there any of the other commissions in the 

regular budgetary expenditures, for example, the Horse Racing 

Commission.  Is that expenditure out of the Department of 

Agriculture and Food? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- That would be budgeted in the 

Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Then my question is: why is the Gaming 

Commission separate as it is identified here? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- It's a Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission.  It has always been separate.  Nothing has 

changed there.  It remains just as it was. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is it an allocation through the Department of 

Justice or through the Department of Finance? 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- The Saskatchewan Gaming 

Commission is a self-standing entity whose purpose is to 

regulate gaming activity in the province of Saskatchewan 

except for the Horse Racing Commission which is within the 

purview of the Department of Agriculture and Food. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to point 

out a couple of things that I think are significant as a 

conclusion here this evening.  There are some things that I find 

interesting about what you've done and I really think it's 

different. 

 

One of the things is that you through the campaign said you 

were not going to have any patronage.  And as I view the 

discussion in your throne speech, you said you had 580 

positions already established through boards and commissions 

that you had set up in the way of patronage.  And I think that 

that's clearly, Mr. Minister, a problem that we have in dealing 

with the kinds of things that we have been confronted with here 

today.  We have a whole host of these kinds of items -- pages 

and pages of patronage that I think are really interesting. 

 

And it says, Mr. Minister and Mr. Chairman, that you said you 

weren't going to do it and yet, in your throne speech in a part of 

this Assembly, you said you had 580 positions in boards and 

commissions that you had already changed and that that's 

exactly what it says in your throne speech -- not in your budget 

speech, Mr. Minister, in your throne speech.  That's what it 

said.  I point out that that's a very strange way of handling 

patronage.  You said you would never do it and I say that you 

should be seriously concerned about how you handle that 

because you said you weren't going to do it. 

 

You have hosts of people.  I could give you lists of them.  In 

fact, Mr. Minister, when we were coming in here tonight, we 

had our caucus staff print them out, over 150 of them spread 

throughout government in Crown corporations and all over the 

place.  And that's only the beginning.  Plus you said in the 

throne speech that you already had 580 of them. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is the kind of thing you said you'd 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard June 1, 1992 

never do.  You weren't prepared to do that; you weren't going 

to be a part of doing anything like that.  You also said you 

weren't going to increase the taxes -- 1 per cent on E&H, up it 

went.  Mr. Chairman, 10 per cent on the surtax on income tax. 

 

I had a visit from a gentleman on Saturday, stopped by my 

place.  He works for Majestic pipelines.  They're building a 

brand new section on a loop for the TransCanada Pipelines.  

And he said, I'm moving out.  I don't have to live in 

Saskatchewan.  I'm moving out.  Why?  Because -- this is 

exactly what he said to me, Mr. Premier -- he said no, sir; he 

said, I voted for the . . . He lives in Saskatoon and he voted for 

us, Mr. Premier.  And he voted for us because we were fair to 

the oil patch. 

 

And what you're doing now, Mr. Premier, you're saying to the 

people of Saskatchewan . . . the high income people are going 

to start leaving.  In fact, he said, the three people over me in 

Majestic are . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order, order.  It being 10:30 p.m., the 

Committee will rise and report progress. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10:31 p.m. 

 


