




















































Hansard: August 20, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2785 

 August 20, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have a 

number of petitions to present today concerned with the 

chiropractors.  I would like to read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in your duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions come from the Saskatoon area and from the 

constituency of Prince Albert, anywhere. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions to 

present today from everywhere.  And they are to do with the 

chiropractic problem.  I will read the paragraph: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from the government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients by 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

I also have petitions on another issue, Mr. Speaker.  And I will 

read the: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop funding for 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

And it's about 150 people have signed these.  And there's, I 

think, seven or eight pages on the other petition which I'll now 

present, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two petitions . . . 

one petition, Mr. Speaker, dealing with another topic, so I'll 

read the prayer: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That Saskatchewan Producers are undergoing extremely 

trying financial times due to drought, grain prices and 

international trade wars and that they are being pressed 

further financially by the 

NDP government's decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program and its coloured fuel policy; and, that to 

implement the government's fuel policy will cost Co-ops and 

small independent fuel service stations thousands of dollars, 

leading to the loss of jobs and businesses in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, are signed by individuals from 

Eatonia, Eston, Glidden, Mantario, Kindersley, and Flaxcombe. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I have a number of petitions here with a 

number of names.  Just reading the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Signatures from Sedley, Francis, Lajord, and Saskatoon and 

other communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have about 10 

pages of petitions pertaining to the abortion question, Mr. 

Speaker.  I will just read the last portion of the prayer.  It says: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these come from a wide variety of districts -- 

Melville, Wadena, Regina, Delisle, a few of the names that 

come to my notice, Cut Knife, which is up in my country, 

Rockhaven, Saskatoon. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have another petition I would like to 

present on another subject.  So with your indulgence, sir, I will 

read the whole prayer: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That the provincial Livestock Cash Advance program was 

vital in putting the Saskatchewan Livestock industry on an 

equal footing with the national grains sector, enabling 

Saskatchewan grain to be efficiently used in local industry, 

thereby supporting the entire agricultural backbone of the 

province, and that the provincial 



2786 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

NDP publicly acknowledged the need for cash advance 

programs when they demanded the federal government 

restore the grains based program, and that the provincial 

government is taking a variety of actions in addition to 

eliminating the Livestock Cash Advance such as imposing 

taxes on farm fuels, increasing utility rates and imposing 

other hardships such that the additional loss of the Livestock 

Cash Advance will destroy many family operations and 

further cripple the provincial economy; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to restore the Livestock Cash Advance program. 

 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners will humbly pray. 

 

I would like to table that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have petitions concerning 

the chiropractic care.  I have them here from Regina, Avonlea, 

North Battleford, Wilkie, Mervin, Unity, Smiley, Hoosier, 

Luseland, Kindersley, Dodsland, Eston, Canora, Creelman, and 

Weyburn.  I have also, Mr. Speaker, petitions here that relate to 

the question of abortion, and they are coming from Warman, 

Martensville, Osler, Saskatoon, Rocanville, Regina, Pilot 

Butte, North Battleford, Lake Lenore, Naicam, Marysburg, and 

Humboldt. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions with 

respect to the chiropractic care in the province.  These petitions 

come from Saskatoon, Young, Saskatoon, Wilkie, Landis, 

Unity, Senlac; generally the north-west of the province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And the second petition I have to present today is to do with 

the gross revenue insurance program: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to: 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 

 2.) start working with the Federal government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of the calendar year, and 

 

 3.) ensure that the new revenue insurance program be set up 

on an individual cost-of-production to return ratio instead of 

risk area formula. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from the Brock, Kindersley, 

Netherhill, Marengo, Loverna, Eston, Coleville, Kerrobert area, 

Mr. Speaker.  I present those now. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have 

petitions today to present.  Mine are to do with the 

situation the chiropractors find themselves in as being a service 

that has fees charged against it where other people in the 

medical profession don't. 

 

Today I have petitions from Yorkton, Langenburg, Saskatoon, 

Moose Jaw, Saskatoon -- lots of Saskatoon; Regina, Lashburn, 

Turtleford, Paradise Hill, Weyburn, Tribune, Creelman, Yellow 

Grass, Balgonie, Francis, Ponteix, Waldeck, Swift Current.  

Mr. Speaker, there are people here obviously from all over the 

province of Saskatchewan and I won't read any more names, 

but there are many, many sheets. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too would like to 

add my list of names that petitioners have had to present to the 

Honourable Assembly here.  I also have petitions that 

expressed the concerns of chiropractors, but more importantly, 

Mr. Speaker, the concerns of the citizens of this province.  And 

I add this list from across the province to the names, to the 

11,000 petitioners already to the chiropractic situation. 

 

And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I also have names on a petition 

which states: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I add these names to the 36,000 petitioners already on this 

particular issue.  And these names also include the areas 

throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions of two different natures to present today.  This one is 

about the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) program, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to restore the FeedGAP program or to establish 

another equally effective program as is its duty to the 

province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are from Eston, Kindersley, Kerrobert, 

Kindersley.  It is my pleasure to petition these . . . table those. 

 

The other petition, Mr. Speaker, is regarding . . . it's been read 

out; it's regarding the funding of abortions in Saskatchewan.  

And these, Mr. Speaker, come from various parts.  Mostly this 

page is all Regina, maybe Waldeck, Melfort-Naicam country, 

Prince Albert.  These seem to be mostly Pleasantdale, Melfort, 

Kinistino.  And this is also Melfort, Kinistino, Carrot River. 

 

It's a pleasure to table these today, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, certain petitions regarding 

chiropractic treatment presented on August 19 have been 

reviewed pursuant to rule 6 and 7, and are found to be 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2787 

irregular, and therefore cannot be read and received. 

 

According to order, the following petitions have been 

reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the farm fuel 

rebate program. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the 

funding of abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 Of citizens of the province humbly praying that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, it's a great pleasure to introduce to you and through 

you to other members of the Assembly, Peter Prebble, a former 

MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), an eight-year 

veteran of the legislature, a long-time champion for social 

justice. 

 

Mr. Prebble is behind the bar here.  I look forward to meeting 

him after about social services issues.  I would ask everyone to 

give him a warm welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koskie: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it gives 

me a great deal of pleasure to introduce through you and to 

you, a special guest seated in the west gallery, Mr. Gerald 

McGrath from the Leroy area.  Mr. McGrath farms extensively 

with his sons in the Leroy area.  And I think there's no doubt 

that throughout the years he's provided tremendous leadership 

to the community. 

 

And I want to add further to that, Mr. McGrath also served as 

president of the New Democratic Party, and throughout the 

years has contributed a great deal. 

 

I'd ask you all to join in welcoming him. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Carlson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce 

to you and to the r 

est of the members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, a friend of 

mine from Melville, Dean Almasi who used to work for the 

Melville Advance and is now doing some free-lance, I believe, 

for the Leader-Post.  His grandparents were friends of my dad's 

and lived and farmed in the area, and long-time friends of the 

family.  Thank you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm pleased to rise 

today and introduce two people that are related to me 

and certainly didn't tell me that they were coming this 

afternoon so it was a big surprise when I turned around and 

noticed my brother and sister-in-law, Eugene and Anna 

Owchar from Lacombe, Alberta.  So I would ask the members 

of the Assembly to join and welcome my brother and 

sister-in-law to this Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 

a friend and constituent from Regina Elphinstone.  Fred 

Dulmage is with us here today.  I want all members to join with 

me in welcoming Fred here, and I'm sure that he'll enjoy the 

procedures while he's in the House. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

too like, through you, to introduce to the members of the 

Assembly . . . And before I do that I'd also like to say hello to 

Peter and welcome him here this afternoon. 
 

But he will understand when I say more importantly, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like to introduce some special guests in the 

opposition gallery.  My wife Alma is here with us this 

afternoon; and seated to her right is my daughter Cindy; and to 

her right, my sister-in-law and Alma's sister, the wife of my 

late brother, Marie is here as well. 
 

And I'm very glad that they were here.  I have been able to 

meet with them from time to time over the course of the 

summer, but I'm looking forward of course for a more extended 

relationship in the future. 
 

They are here, Mr. Speaker, to, in their words, paint the town 

blue, and I'm sure that all of us are welcoming them in order to 

do that. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Bail Conditions and Early Release Program 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in light of 

a recent incident that took place in the Whitewood area -- 

actually just outside of Regina -- a concern that has been raised 

with our caucus and I'm sure the acting minister or Minister of 

Finance is aware of, the brutal murder of a 73-year-old 

Whitewood man by an individual that the system had allowed 

out on bail. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is this.  I want to 

know if the prosecution opposed bail for one Hubert Acoose on 

the charges of armed robbery and possession of a weapon.  Did 

the lawyers oppose bail or not? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Minister of Justice, I'll take notice of this question and we will 

bring back at the first opportunity a response. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, I would also ask the minister if 



2788 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

he would also take notice of a couple of other . . . or pass a 

couple of other questions on so that we can receive the 

response on. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have a situation here where people accused 

with extremely serious offences involving weapons were 

released on bail, and we need to know how strongly the 

prosecution tried to prevent these people from being put back 

on the street.  Will the minister as well carefully agree to 

examine the conduct of the prosecution in these bail hearings 

and make a full report to the Assembly? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I want to say to the member 

opposite that obviously this is a decision of the courts, but I 

will have the Minister of Justice and the department review it 

and bring a response back to the House. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Mr. Speaker, as well to 

the same minister.  Mr. Minister, I have been receiving phone 

calls from concerned people about this tragic incident, and it is 

certainly frightening to our senior citizens who cannot even 

walk the streets because they know that the government is 

unable to keep dangerous individuals locked up long enough to 

at least put them on trial. 

 

Will the minister restate the government's position on the early 

release program that lets convicted criminals out of jail early? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I really would like to 

take notice of this whole area of questioning and prepare a 

response, take time to prepare a response and bring it back to 

the House at the earliest opportunity. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, one further question for the minister 

to be aware of.  Just reflecting back to December, 1991, a 

convict who was let out on the early release program, killed 

someone else.  He was let out early and took the life of an 

individual. 

 

The Minister of Justice at that time said he was sorry about that 

but that the NDP still supports the early release of criminals.  

And I'd like to quote from the December issue of the Leader-

Post: Mr. Mitchell said he realizes the public is deeply 

concerned when a convict on early release commits a violent 

crime, but the initiative works well.  End quote. 

 

Now we have a situation where easy bail has caused another 

murder.  Mr. Minister, will the government agree to a full 

review of both proceedings and the early release program? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding 

that this is a federal program and falls under the federal 

Criminal Code; has been in place for many years under their 

administration, under our administration. 

 

I think that what we should do here is obviously review 

the situation as to circumstances, and obviously members 

opposite had 10 years to look at and make application to the 

federal government.  And I want to make it clear that we will 

review this and come . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I don't know what the member from 

Wilkie is complaining about, but I didn't hear the member 

taking notice of this particular question.  So I wish he'd let the 

minister answer the question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He 

didn't take notice of that . . . Is the member from Wilkie 

challenging the Speaker?  Well he'd better not. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Just in conclusion on the issue of 

this federal program, that I think as well the members opposite 

would be wise in joining with us in asking of the federal 

minister, Ms. Campbell, for the federal government's response.  

And I'm sure that they will be writing the appropriate minister 

in Ottawa to find out the status of the federal program and 

letting their views be known there as well. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, one further question in response to 

the minister's comments.  I certainly appreciate the fact that 

yes, the federal government does have jurisdiction in this area.  

But what we're asking, Mr. Minister, is that the provincial 

government take the ability and the authority they have to 

review this matter and to discuss it with federal officials so that 

the circumstances don't happen again.  Will the minister give 

his assurances to do that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- So that the member opposite and 

the public and the members of the press get this straight, is that 

we have no authority.  The authority lies solely with the federal 

government, your colleagues in Ottawa.  But I want to make it 

clear that we will look at the issue and bring back a report on 

the incidents that you mentioned to the Assembly. 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Minister.  Mr. 

Speaker, I was going to ask the Minister of Health a question, 

but in her absence I would direct it to the Acting Minister of 

Health. 

 

Madam Minister, earlier this week I told the Minister of Health 

about an hour after she came out with her wellness program, 

that it had more to do with politics than with improving health 

care in this province. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, today's paper confirms that where we 

have interesting responses from individuals as more and more 

individuals and groups begin to speak out . . . as they begin to 

understand the implications of your plan.  And I'm going to 

quote today's Star-Phoenix, where health economist Glen Beck 

says, and I quote: 

 

 The government's move is simply "political flim-flam" in 

order to find a palatable way to close hospital beds . . .  

 

Madam Minister, we all know here that the issue is funding.  

And the Minister of Health the other day confirmed that in this 

House.  Now, Madam Minister, will 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2789 

you please confirm today that this whole wellness model is all 

about closing hospitals in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I too would like to comment on the article.  It speaks 

about a professor at the university.  And as a former professor 

at the university, let me say we have no corner on wisdom or 

knowledge.  We can be dead wrong too.  And I would like to 

also quote what this man says:  He says, what are the local 

health boards going to be comprised of?  He says we're going 

to stack them with NDP partisans.  He says these people are 

going to be servants of the Department of Health. 

 

Let's look at Saskatoon.  Let's look at who we put on that 

board.  Cliff Wright heads the board.  Is this an NDP partisan?  

Is this a person who is going to be a servant to anybody, never 

mind the Department of Health?  I think some of the comments 

made in this article are ludicrous.  And I stick to the point that 

what we're interested in is a better health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You say that Dr. 

Beck is ludicrous.  Well you can say that Dr. Beck is ludicrous 

and that he's dead wrong.  But what we want to assure you, 

Madam Minister, that there won't be dead people.  That's what 

we're concerned about. 

 

Now you can go on pretending to be giving local control to 

local boards.  You can continue to do that.  But Mr. Beck goes 

on to say: 

 

 Although Health Minister Louise Simard is talking about the 

benefits of local control, it's the government that will be 

calling the shots . . .  

 

 In spite of the emphasis the government is putting on local 

control, Beck says the boards "will be the servants of the 

Department of Health, in the same sense local boards were. 

 

There's no change, Madam Minister.  It said that if your 

government's control about . . . talking about local control rings 

hollow since larger health districts will mean much less local 

input that the other local boards were previous to that. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I ask you, these local folks, these local 

boards will be chosen by the minister, funded by the minister, 

and every decision that is going to be made must be approved 

by the minister.  Where, Madam Minister, is the non-partisan, 

local governance that your government has promised?  Can you 

answer that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again 

fears are being raised.  Don't worry about fears.  Look at our 

actions.  Have we appointed NDP partisans to head these 

boards?  Have we appointed lackeys?  Of course we haven't.  

Look at the qualifications of Mr. Cliff Wright in Saskatoon.  

Nobody would insult that man by saying he was a lackey to 

anybody, and I am certain he is not an NDP partisan.  Judge us 

by our actions, not by your fears. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

now I think we're getting somewhere.  That's precisely the 

point.  We and the people of Saskatchewan are judging you by 

your actions, and they don't like what they see.  That's the 

problem, Madam Minister. 

 

Now I want to say to you that your comments, or Mr. Beck's 

comments coming on your white paper, the white paper that 

you did this time was a political document as opposed to the 

previous bureaucratic document.  This document is purposely 

vague.  This white paper is very, very vague.  It sounds good.  

It looks good, but when you get down to implementing it, 

everyone knows that in a way it is a way out.  It's a way out for 

the Minister of Health to close rural hospitals and place the 

blame elsewhere.  That's the bottom line, Madam Minister, to 

place the blame elsewhere. 

 

Madam Minister, when is your government going to stop 

down-loading, off-loading, side-loading, putting the blame 

somewhere else, on local municipalities?  And when are you 

going to come up with some concrete solutions to the problems 

that are facing the people of this province?  When are you 

going to do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to that I 

would say, does it make any sense to have in this province 

some 400 health boards -- one health board for every 2,000 

people in the province -- and to have services that are 

fragmented and uncoordinated?  Is that what the people of 

Saskatchewan want? 

 

What they want, is they want services that are integrated and 

they want more local control of decision making so they can 

decide what health care services they need in their area.  This is 

what we mean by better health care, and we're committed to 

making it a fact. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, the people want reform, 

they do not want political sham.  That's what they're saying and 

that's what they're seeing.  They want local control.  They want 

local control but, Madam Minister, in spite of what you say, the 

local control is not there.  The Minister of Finance sitting in 

front of you is the fellow that controls the purse-strings. 

 

Now what are you telling us, Madam Minister?  That when 

these local boards make a decision and this is what they want -- 

this is the doctor that they want to keep -- are you now saying 

to these people: you will have your way because the Minister 

of Finance will open the purse-strings so that, indeed, they can 

implement the decisions that they are making?  Is that what 

you're telling the people of the province, Madam Minister?  If 

you are, I applaud you and we will support you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, let me explain.  I think 

that this is going to mean a better health care system because 

one thing the people of Saskatchewan are very good at is 

co-operating.  They know that by working 



2790 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

together a series of communities can achieve something that 

one individual community cannot achieve. 

 

And I would quote Dr. Kendal from the College of Physicians 

and Surgeons who says: the new health care reform will lead to 

more doctors in rural Saskatchewan, not fewer.  And this will 

mean an improvement in our health care system. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Taxing Powers of Health Boards 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday the 

Acting Minister of Health directly misled this Assembly in 

regards to property taxes for health boards.  I want you to take 

note, and I want the media to note, that my question is directed 

to the Minister of Rural Development who will know the facts. 

 

To the Minister of Rural Development: do you, sir, agree with 

your colleague's statement yesterday that it is foolish to suggest 

that property taxes are being used to pay for health care in rural 

municipalities?  Do you agree with her statement that she made 

yesterday, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I said yesterday 

is there is no capacity for off-loading of taxes onto 

municipalities because district health boards have no taxing 

powers, so that again it's a matter of raising fears rather than 

dealing with the reality as it exists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, we have health boards in 

the province and . . .  Mr. Minister, perhaps you will indulge us 

with an answer to the next question.  You know full well that 

your colleague who has just spoken is not telling the truth when 

she says that property taxes do not now and will never be paid 

for health care boards.  That was the way she worded it 

yesterday.  You know that. 

 

In the RM (rural municipality) of Carmichael the mill rate 

levies for the Shaunavon Hospital Board this year is 7.1 mills; 

in the RM of Carmichael the levy for the Gull Lake Hospital 

Board is 4.7 mills, to cover their requisitions for this year.  I 

stand here as a reeve and I tell you that even now property 

taxes are being forced to carry the province's responsibility for 

funding health care. 

 

Now I ask you, Mr. Minister of Rural Development, have you 

personally discussed this matter with your Minister of Health 

or not?  Do you know anything about this matter? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, what I'm trying to say 

to the member is this: there is simply no change.  There is no 

change in the tax structure as it exists in Saskatchewan.  The 

creation of the health district boards will make no change 

because they will not have taxing powers.  So any fears of 

off-loading are simply that, raising unnecessary fears. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Speaker, yesterday we have the minister 

on record as telling an outright falsehood.  As a reeve . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order.  The member is 

getting very, very close to using unparliamentary language.  

That's the third time today.  When he accused the minister of 

directly making a falsehood, I let that one go because it was 

very close.  Now he's accusing her again of making a false 

statement to the Assembly.  And I'm asking the member to 

please refrain from using language which will cause a disorder 

in the House, and which is on the verge of being 

unparliamentary. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- But it isn't.  That's the point. 

 

The Speaker: -- I wasn't speaking to the member from 

Rosthern.  If he would just let me speak to the member from 

Maple Creek. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As a reeve who is 

forced to levy property taxes, I am telling you that RMs are 

levying property taxes for health care.  And that is a simple fact 

for anyone who chooses to check a rural municipal tax notice. 

 

Now to the Minister of Rural Development, are you aware, Mr. 

Minister, of any proposal by the Minister of Health that would 

force RM councils to further increase the property tax level for 

health care? 

 

And to prove my point to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and to 

the media, I will table the Saskatchewan Health form 

requisition for union hospital taxes that is distributed regularly 

to municipalities.  And I will table that for anyone who wants 

to see it at this time, and ask the Minister of Rural 

Development to answer the questions. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could go over the 

second part of my answer yesterday.  It was that there is a 

problem out there because money is going into the health care 

system from the municipal level into hospitals, into public 

health facilities, into ambulance facilities.  That's why, in the 

long term, we're striking a working group of people from 

Health, Finance, and community organizations, like SARM 

(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), to say, 

does this make sense? 

 

And what should we change, if we should make changes?  And 

because our aim is to make the system more effective and to 

create a better health care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

believe that you are seeing a slow but gradual build-up of 

resistance to your proposals as people become aware of what is 

happening.  This will mushroom through the days to come.  

And it will become an absolute and total commitment by rural 

people to oppose your plan. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2791 

Every community, both rural and urban, will be forced by this 

government and its plans to increase the burden of property 

taxes.  Mr. Speaker, they will do it in a sneaky way.  That is 

why they will not even admit the truth of the existing situation 

as it is today.  That's why they won't admit the way it happens 

now is what's happening. 

 

And my question to the Acting Minister of Health: if you insist 

on continuing in your statements that we're not forthright and 

absolutely correct, will you commit that whatever form your 

plan takes, that they will have zero impact on property taxes?  

Will you make that absolute commitment here in this Assembly 

today? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to respond to 

the allegation that wellness does not have the support of rural 

people.  I'd like to quote Mr. Bernard Kirwan, president of the 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities: I'm 

optimistic about this proposal, wellness.  It's pretty much what 

rural people have been saying all along. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- We're glad it's not being forced upon 

us.  It will cause people to co-operate and use their 

imagination. 

 

What we're going to do when we look at the future of revenue 

generation in Saskatchewan is work with local groups, seek 

their input.  They will make the recommendations to the 

government.  Then we will take the best decision in the interest 

of an improved health care system in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you choose to quote from the appropriate document out of a 

news article that suits your needs, the initial response to 

changes. 

 

The second response, which I don't have a copy of today, what 

was totally and completely different.  It expressed extreme 

concern over the possibility of down-loading of taxation onto 

rural property.  And that same person, the president of SARM, 

stated in those articles that he was opposed to any of that kind 

of action.  And my question was and is again: will you commit 

that whatever your plans take, they will have zero impact on 

property taxes?  Will you make that commitment here today? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, this government is 

committed to a democratic process of decision making.  That 

is, we're committed to striking working groups or task forces 

and giving them a real, serious mandate -- not prejudging.  So 

of course I'm not about to commit to what the end result of a 

task force review is going to be.  We are giving them the 

mandate.  And a big part of their mandate is going to be to go 

out and talk to the local people out there and to say, does the 

system work well now?  Do you like it?  Or is there something 

better?  Because what we're after is an improved, better system 

of health care. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Telephone Rate Increases 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

continue where I left off yesterday with the minister for 

SaskTel.  Madam Minister, you indicated that the massive rate 

increases for telephone installations were necessary because of 

SaskTel's shortage of money.  Madam Minister, if SaskTel was 

so short of money, how is it that you found almost $12 million 

to buy a .4 per cent interest in a space satellite? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I think the member 

opposite could be referring to -- I'm not sure -- could be 

referring to SaskTel's participation in Stentor, formerly 

Telecom Canada, which is a consortium of all the Canadian 

telephone companies.  And we do, through Stentor, participate 

in satellite technology which relates to international 

communications.  And normally Saskatchewan, or SaskTel, 

participates approximately on a pro rata basis to the same 

extent that we share in the long-distance toll revenues. 

 

But with respect to the financial situation, I would remind the 

members opposite that it was their administration that 

double-dipped the dividends from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, the space 

minister, your government backed out on the Lloydminster 

upgrader.  You could have done the same with SaskTel. 

 

Madam Minister, you had $12 million to launch into orbit.  

How do you justify these far-out rate increases to small 

businesses, farmers, cottages, and every telephone user in this 

province? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, the members opposite 

should know that telecommunications in this day and age are 

not terrestrial based and they're not all . . . all 

telecommunications don't cross the country through wires that 

are buried in the ground.  It's satellite technology that is used. 

 

The $12 million that represented the pro rata share of 

SaskTel's investment in the Stentor purchase would represent a 

very small percentage of the share of the long-distance toll 

revenue that SaskTel receives every year from that very same 

arrangement. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, you got an itty-bitty 

share of a satellite.  This comes after you've spent $7 million on 

a small piece of a cable corporation.  So far you've spent about 

$20 million of the taxpayers' money. 

 

Madam Minister, the last time the NDP got into the cable 

business was when it bought a thing called Cablecom.  Can you 

tell us what happened to Cablecom? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm very surprised that 

the members opposite would criticize the activities of 



2792 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

one of the economic engines of activity and job creation in this 

province. 

 

I am reminded by my colleague that we've advanced beyond 

the string and the tin can in the telecommunications industry.  

And if we want to remain on the leading edge, we have to 

make this kind of investment, and I certainly don't feel that we 

have to defend it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

POINT OF ORDER 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, just a point of order or point of 

clarification, referring back to a decision that was just made by 

the Speaker this afternoon.  And going to Parliamentary 

Rules and Forms, Beauchesne's, 147, there is a number of 

expressions that are ruled . . . as have been ruled parliamentary 

over the period from 1958.  And certainly, Mr. Speaker, false 

and falsehoods, unscrupulous, untrue, and untruthful have been 

part of what has been ruled parliamentary.  And we can 

certainly argue at times what is or what isn't.  But I believe it 

would be appropriate just to have a clarification on that. 

 

(1445) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would like to draw members' 

attention to 6th Edition of Beauchesne's.  I think Beauchesne is 

very clear.  He says an expression which is deemed to be 

unparliamentary today does not necessarily have to be deemed 

unparliamentary next week.  It depends on the condition and 

the circumstances in which a word is used. 

 

Let me draw members' attention however to any dictionary and 

look up the word falsehood.  Falsehood simply means to tell a 

lie.  And therefore in some circumstances . . . And Beauchesne 

makes it very clear that it depends on how it is being used.  

And if it is used in order to create disorder, Speakers have ruled 

it unparliamentary.  And therefore in this particular 

circumstances, I've ruled it . . . I didn't say it was 

unparliamentary; I said it was getting very close to be 

unparliamentary, and I asked him to use another word and he 

did so.  And I thank the member for that. 

 

But members have to be very careful.  The words that are put 

in Beauchesne, as you will well know, sometimes they are 

unparliamentary; other times they are ruled parliamentary.  It 

depends on the circumstances and in the circumstances the 

Speaker has to rule, and I therefore ruled. 

 

Order, order. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

The Speaker: -- Pursuant to a special order of the day, the 

Assembly will now go into Committee of the Whole and I 

therefore do leave the chair. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Clause 1 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, at the end of this morning's 

session, the member from Kindersley had raised a number of 

points that I want to respond to now -- not exactly in the same 

order.  And if I've forgotten any of them, I'd ask him to raise 

them again so I may respond and continue this dialogue. 

 

With respect to the . . . one of the points the member raised was 

the question of program change and the inference that there 

may have been something illegal about changing the program.  

The fact is that the contract, the federal-provincial agreement, 

provides for changes in the program.  If the change is 

significant, then the provision for . . . the federal-provincial 

agreement allows that farmers who have committed themselves 

to a program for a term have the right to opt out of that 

program. 

 

The result of the process was in this case, that as a result of the 

changes, farmers were offered not only the provision that was 

in the federal-provincial agreement, but an enhanced provision 

in the event that they felt it was advantageous to them to opt 

out of the program. 

 

The interesting thing, the other inference the members opposite 

made, was that there was something difficult around the change 

in the legislation which has provided that there is no longer a 

specific time of notice.  Well the dilemma with the specific 

notice time was that it was inconsistent with the 

federal-provincial agreement.  It was also inconsistent with the 

practice of the previous government for a number of years. 

 

It's interesting and curious to me that the members opposite, 

who ignored the deadline that they themselves say is very, very 

strict and required, that they ignored it for five years and now 

have held up the House since June 10 on the pretence that it 

was of such importance that it essentially is the essence of the 

program. 

 

The fact is that the notice provision was a provision that was in 

crop insurance arrangements so that farmers could receive their 

new information on crop insurance and respond by March 30.  

They had 15 days in which to respond.  The members opposite 

have chosen to make a rather large point out of this, to the 

point of holding the legislature and the proceedings of 

government up for a significant length of time on a matter that 

they themselves found so inconsequential that they ignored it 

for five years. 

 

The fact is that the new legislation indicates that farmers 

should be given notice that they can understand the changes 

that are being proposed.  That is in fact what was done this 

year; it was in fact done in other years, that farmers were 

notified of changes, that they had time to consider them, and 

then they had time to choose their participation in the program. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2793 

The subsequent question that the member asked that followed 

on the legalities of the change was, why not send this to the 

Appeal court.  Well it's only appropriate to send something to 

the Appeal court if there is some doubt about its 

constitutionality.  Well the Attorney General does not have 

doubt about the constitutionality of this Bill, and therefore it's 

inappropriate to send it to the Appeal court and to consume its 

time by such an activity. 

 

The fact is as well, Mr. Chairman, that the members have 

spoken often about the March 15 deadline which we observed 

in announcing the program on March 13.  They've spoken often 

about it, and yet they have repeatedly since then requested that 

we in fact make program changes -- in April and in May and in 

June and in July, and now even in August when farmers are on 

the verge of taking their crops off. 

 

So on one day they say, respect the deadline, which we did 

when we announced the program on March 13.  On the other 

hand they say, disrespect the deadline.  Make changes in April 

and May and June and July and August.  It's an interesting 

inconsistency that the members continue to bring forward. 

 

The fact is that this legislation brings together and clarifies the 

law with respect to notice for the GRIP program.  It clarifies 

very hastily constructed, only partially consistent provisions 

made by the members opposite last year.  And it will now be 

clear in the law of Saskatchewan what the farmers can expect 

with respect to program changes. 

 

Another point the member from Kindersley made was when he 

backed away, I believe, from the contention that the 

government had actually told the committee that they must 

come in within certain financial guidelines.  I think when 

challenged, they accepted that that wasn't true. 

 

But then he came back to say later, when we had said that there 

was the risk in the old program of deficits to the province 

annually of 100 to $300 million, he said, aha, you did pay some 

attention to the finances. 

 

Well interestingly, those are two very disconnected comments.  

The province clearly did not direct the committee with respect 

to the nature of the design and the review of the program.  The 

province asked the committee to review the program and to 

indicate what a desirable program would be for the province. 

 

The province then took the report and identified that in fact the 

committee identified some major improvements.  The 

improvements they've identified in fact do not leave the 

province at risk for a deficit at the end of the year of 100 or 200 

or $300 million. 

 

The fact that the committee brought forward recommendations 

that happen to be financially sound recommendations should 

not be construed as them having been given direction to do so.  

The fact that they have a good, logical sense of financial 

management, that they have a good sense of how programs 

should be constructed, ought not to be construed as them 

having been directed to do so. 

This committee independently chose to design a program that 

was financially better for the program in the long haul, one that 

could be sustainable, one that in fact would not bankrupt itself 

and the farmers and the province by year-after-year deficits that 

no one could pay for. 

 

The member then went on to talk about the nature of the 

support under the two programs.  He talked about the difficulty 

for farmers who might find themselves in a drought or in 

another circumstance where conditions not created by them can 

result in shortfalls in incomes. 

 

The fact is that in that regard, the programs cannot be 

compared exactly feature for feature.  The program feature that 

the committee identified about the old program which was 

unacceptable, was that it didn't matter whether a farmer grew a 

five-bushel crop or a 40-bushel crop, under most circumstances 

they had the same level of return. 

 

So that a farmer who chose to put extra costs into his operation 

in order to get an extra benefit, couldn't hope to get a return for 

that cost under the old program because every bushel above the 

average was taken away from his program payment.  So that 

while the guarantee was at a higher level than the minimum 

into the new program, it was also virtually a cap. 

 

Well the farmers said that was unacceptable.  So they created a 

program by dividing the crop insurance off from the revenue 

insurance.  They created a program where revenue insurance 

covers the shortfall in price between the guaranteed price, the 

indexed moving average price, and the market price for the 

farmers' long-term individual yield. 

 

It guarantees that when there is a price shortfall, farmers get a 

certain amount of money to bring it up to the guaranteed price, 

however inadequate that guaranteed price is.  That is the same 

whether one has a crop failure or whether one has a good crop.  

That ought to be.  The farmer has a record of production.  The 

farmer has a yield record that goes on for as long as he can 

present it or 10 years, in order to establish that average.  Or if 

he doesn't want to use the area yield, he can establish that 

record and on the basis of his production or her production, 

they receive a guaranteed price, the indexed moving average 

price -- again however inadequate that may be -- but they 

receive that on their long-term production. 

 

Now the members opposite say that's wrong.  Well I don't 

know why that's wrong.  If a farmer has demonstrated that on 

average they can produce 28 bushels per acre, the fact that they 

only produce 5 or that they produce 50 ought not to take away 

from them the fact that on those 28 bushels to the acre they 

should be able to be guaranteed a minimum price, a minimum 

price hopefully that would reflect their cost of production but, 

if not, at least some kind of minimum price. 

 

The members opposite say that's not so.  The members opposite 

say that if they have a better-than-average crop, they should 

somehow lose some of that; they should somehow lose some of 

the price protection that they have for the yield averages that 

they have produced over the long term.  Well the committee 

disagrees with the 



2794 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

members opposite, and the committee made the 

recommendation to do it this way. 

 

(1500) 

 

The other part of the program was the crop insurance program 

-- returning to a separate crop insurance program.  Yes, this 

leaves farmers in a situation where in a yield-loss situation they 

can have incomes as low in a particular circumstance as 80 per 

cent of what they had before.  Under this year's program that 80 

per cent isn't really 80 per cent, because had we not changed 

the program, Saskatchewan would not have been able to afford 

raising the minimum guaranteed price for wheat from 3.86 to 

4.07. 

 

Saskatchewan this year, because of the efficiency of this 

program, had the 20 or $25 million available to raise the 

guarantee from 3.86 -- which is what the 1991 program would 

have had for us in 1992 had the members opposite had their 

way -- we had the money to raise that price to the 4.07 level.  

So that that is already a gain across the board for everyone. 

 

Yes, that still leaves some potential loss for the farmer who has 

an income shortfall.  And we recognize that, and we have asked 

the federal government to make available their savings from 

this program.  The federal government is spending $154 

million less in Saskatchewan in 1992 than they spent in 1991.  

And we've said to the federal government, you make that 

money available and we can cover off those costs for farmers 

who have an income shortfall as a result of no fault of their 

own. 

 

The fact is that the Saskatchewan program recognizes the 

features that were identified by the committee and recognizes 

that the changes were necessary in order for the stability . . . 

long-term stability of the program. 

 

As I said before, does that mean farmers do no longer have an 

income shortfall in Saskatchewan?  It certainly does not.  The 

members opposite know only too well, in spite of the fact that 

they will not support this government and the people of 

Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan in demanding 

from the federal government that they keep their agreement, 

that they provide the third line of defence funding that was 

promised when the provinces put up their money. 

 

Saskatchewan farmers clearly have an income shortfall.  In the 

period 1983 to 1988, the average Saskatchewan farm income 

collectively was about $800 million.  In 1990 that fell to 

something under or around $300 million.  In 1991 that climbed, 

but to something in the vicinity of $400 million.  The federal 

government's own committee identified that the shortfall for 

Saskatchewan farmers for 1991 . . . or 1990 was $1.3 billion.  

The federal government's response to that after a great deal of 

energy expended by farmers last fall was an $800 million 

package -- not a 1.3 billion as their committee identified, but an 

$800 million package.  There is still $500 million of income 

shortfall for Saskatchewan farmers from 1990.  There is still an 

amount of hundreds of millions of dollars shortfall from 1991. 

 

So is it a surprise that farmers in Saskatchewan, who have 

been strung out by several years of the federal government not 

putting forward their money that they committed for third line 

of defence, is it a surprise that farmers strung out by this 

inadequate income situation are then stressed by the income 

shortfall when they have a less than average crop?  Of course 

it's no surprise.  The question is: whose responsibility is it to 

meet that income shortfall? 

 

Well the federal government, when they designed their farm 

programming philosophy, described them as three pillars, the 

three lines of defence, the first line of defence being the 

farmers and their production strategies.  Well I can tell you that 

farmers in Saskatchewan are better than all with respect to their 

innovativeness, their willingness to commit their resources and 

their energy to producing a good crop.  So the first line of 

defence is well in hand. 

 

The second line of defence was GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) and NISA (net income stabilization account).  While 

the provinces have paid for two years for the GRIP and NISA 

programs, according to the federal-provincial agreement, and 

the Saskatchewan program that's being introduced to this 

legislation will be in keeping with the federal-provincial 

agreement, and the Saskatchewan government will fund our 

commitment in that second line of defence as required, so the 

province has kept their commitment with respect to the second 

line of defence, the federal government's third line of defence 

description was when there were disasters or unforeseen events 

of significant proportion, that then the third line of defence 

should come into play, and that should be paid for by the 

federal government. 

 

Well Saskatchewan farmers are still waiting for that third line 

of defence and we hope the members opposite would join us 

instead of supporting their federal government and saying, no, 

no.  Those monies should come to Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, there's a letter that you got back 

from the one that you sent out that says:  Berny, maybe you 

should have kept the old GRIP format and we wouldn't need to 

be begging from the federal government.  Just because you're 

too cheap to pay up doesn't mean farmers should do your dirty 

work and write to the federal government.  Do your job, sir. 

 

And that was written back by Don and Vern Steger, from 

Marcelin, Saskatchewan.  That's what they have to say about it. 

 

And I want to point out something else.  You know, there's the 

old story about the lady watching her son in the army, and there 

was one guy walking out of step, and she said: isn't it nice to 

see your son in the army and my goodness sakes, what are all 

the other guys doing walking out of time?  And you, sir, are 

walking out of time with all of the other people . . . have said 

over and over again, you're out of order.  You're out of order, 

sir.  Agriweek says . . . It's called "Bigger brother". 

 

 Saskatchewan's GRIP legislation may be as unconstitutional 

as it is heavy-handed. 

 

 By the end of this week a bill amending 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2795 

Saskatchewan's GRIP legislation should be law, rammed past 

determined opposition by closure. 

 

Now I'll just skip a part because it talks about closure.  And I 

don't want to get into that. 

 

 The bill is supposed to legalize the government's clear breach 

of the 1992 contracts between the provincial crop insurance 

corporation and GRIP participants, which required written 

notice by March 15 of any material makes legal the failure to 

give such notice last spring, but also withdraws the 

requirement forever in the future. 

 

Mr. Minister, I want to talk about that.  You are going to void 

all of the provisions in the regulation-making powers.  You're 

going to void all of those terms and conditions.  And you're 

going to set down and say, now these are the terms and 

conditions that existed from 1991 on. 

 

You are going to tell the world, sir.  You were never there.  

You were never there in any of the discussions.  So you're 

going to determine what took place, what happened, in that 

period of time.  You, sir, weren't there.  And that's why you 

can't talk about those kinds of things in a court of law.  That's 

why you go around with your heavy hand and saying, I'm 

going to extinguish all the rights of an individual in a court of 

law.  Extinguish them.  You void all of the discussion.  And it 

says it here.  I don't have to tell you.  Why don't you read your 

own . . . the papers that go around the province.  They're telling 

you you're out of order. 

 

 Thus the bill allows the government to make literally any 

change at any time without notice to a program whose main 

attribute was supposed to be its predictability. 

 

Now I had last spring a gentleman come into my office.  And 

he's phoned to the people in the branch -- the economics 

branch.  And they know him well.  I won't mention his name.  

But he's phoned over and over.  And when he came to me do 

you know what he said the real moral hazard was?  You, sir.  

You're the moral hazard. 

 

That's the kind of thing that people say over and over again.  

You want to void all the terms and conditions that exist to this 

point.  You want to void all of the things that happen.  No 

action shall lie against the Crown or a Crown agent.  Mr. 

Minister, can you describe for us what would have happened if 

you had met the March 15 date? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to identify the 

difficulties that were caused for the program by the fact that the 

members opposite never prescribed in a legal form what in fact 

the commitment to farmers was when they designed the 

program. 

 

The fact that the commitment of the government could have 

been something that one of the politicians on their trip around 

Saskatchewan in their 65 meetings in seven different locations 

at once, could have been saying.  A farmer could have 

understood from a commitment they believed to be made by 

one of you folks, that that was a commitment of the crop 

insurance contract. 

They could have believed that a statement made to them by a 

crop insurance agent was a commitment of the crop insurance 

contract.  The carelessness with which the members opposite 

constructed the program when it was constructed, left it unclear 

about what the provisions of the contract were. 

 

I should say to the member opposite, it should be noted that the 

contract of revenue insurance is a very short document 

resembling a pamphlet and dealing mainly with administrative 

procedures and matters.  It does not spell out the details of the 

revenue insurance program, probably out of necessity, since 

full details were not known when the contract was drafted in 

early 1991.  Nor does it say what the premiums are, how and 

when the indemnities will be calculated and paid, and so on. 

 

These are all arguably critical components of the contract 

between the parties, yet they are absent from the pro forma 

contract. Nor were they prescribed by regulation or statute.  

Instead, these critical details of the insurance contract between 

the parties was left to various other means including public 

meetings, individual meetings between farmers and their crop 

insurance agents, advertisements, brochures, and so on. 

 

From a legal viewpoint then, the contract was not solely what 

was contained between the covers of the so-called contract of 

revenue insurance, the pamphlet.  The entire contact between 

any individual farmer and the corporation could probably only 

be ascertained from a variety of sources.  Moreover, the precise 

details of the contract would likely vary from farmer to farmer 

depending on what representations may have been made to him 

or her. 

 

It is not possible, therefore, to state the precise terms and 

conditions of the 1991 contract between every farmer and the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation.  That's why there's 

a clause in Bill 87 which deals with this problem by stating that 

the GRIP '91 contract is deemed in law to consist only of the 

terms and conditions prescribed in the regulations.  This was 

made necessary by a serious flaw which was created by you in 

1991. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- You didn't answer the question, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Oh yes I did. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, you didn't.  What would you have done if 

you had met the date of March 15 on letting the farmers know 

by a formal means, like any other insurance corporation is 

supposed to do in the province of Saskatchewan, by signed 

letter, changes to the contract, in a registered letter as a matter 

of fact?  Under laws dealing with any other contract in an 

insurance business, it has to be by registered mail to that 

individual.  What would you have done in that case, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the question the member 

opposite asks follows on the explanation that I gave with 

respect to the absolute shemozzle that was created with respect 

to what it might be constituted as a contract last year by the 

members opposite.  In fact there 



2796 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

was no definition.  It therefore becomes very difficult to define 

what notice would be seen to be appropriate.  And we gave 

notice on March 13. 

 

As I've already pointed out, it is likely that at the present time, 

that is, before the Bill becomes law, many different versions of 

the 1991 revenue insurance contract exist.  How then would it 

be possible for the corporation to give notice of each change to 

the contract?  Because we don't know what the contract is. 

 

We don't know what the contract is between any given farmer 

and the corporation.  Because it could have been anything that 

was said by you when you were on the hustings.  It could have 

been anything that one of your crop insurance agents said.  It 

could have been anything interpreted from a statement made on 

your behalf. 

 

So to give notice with respect to things that were ill-defined 

and not defined at all is a virtual impossibility in law.  In fact it 

would have been virtually impossible for the corporation to 

give notice of each change for each contract since it is not 

possible to say with certainty what the precise terms and 

conditions of your contract were.  It is not possible to give 

notice that something will be changed unless you know what 

something is originally. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, if you want to get 

technical in legal jargon, we can talk about that.  Your deputy 

minister signed an affidavit that you would present in this 

House deeming a letter to have been sent out.  Is that the truth 

of what's happening here today, or is that a falsehood?  Is that 

the truth or a falsehood? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it was the intent, when that 

affidavit was signed, to follow that until further legal advice 

found the difficulty with respect to a contract to find in fact 

what it was.  And it was then that the contract notice provision 

was voided because it was something that was impossible to 

meet so that they have now put into legislation a different 

notice provision, but one that is not specific. 

 

The difficulty with trying to meet the specifics of the notice 

provision as given previously was that it was -- and the 

members opposite will be aware of this -- that the 

federal-provincial agreement on last year's GRIP program 

wasn't signed till September 18 or September 19.  Well how 

can you give notice of something that isn't yet? 

 

And the same difficulty exists when there are two mechanisms 

within the same legislation to provide for change.  And so the 

legislation has not been clarified to define what a contract is 

and to define a notice provision that is reasonable within the 

context of the other processes within the Act. 

 

And farmers will, when this Act is passed, for the first time 

have defined in law accurately, the nature of the commitment 

between themselves and the government. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, you have come to the 

point, I believe, where we were talking about earlier, that the 

context of why you're doing this is not even a legal 

matter; it's a financial matter.  You are saying and you said 

earlier that because of fiscal responsibility and accountability 

that you thought that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan wanted to have their contracts reneged on to 

provide a better opportunity for you to meet your fiscal . . . 

what you claim to be a fiscal responsible drive.  And I think 

that that's where the problem lies. 

 

What does the word deem mean in legalese? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it should be recorded and 

the member opposite should know it once again, that there has 

been . . . that the original legal process indicated in the affidavit 

was not followed and that the legislation has removed the 

notice requirement that was originally in place, voided it 

because of the circumstances I already described. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well as I understand, deemed means to be 

legal fiction.  And if that's what we've got here, then we've got 

legal fiction in section 5.4, Mr. Minister, legal fiction. 

 

So you voided legal fiction.  I want to point out another thing 

that you indicated earlier -- and you'll try and skirt that one too.  

You said you left $154 million on the table.  On Monday when 

you go to Melfort, why don't you tell them that?  When you go 

to Melfort on Monday, you tell them you left $154 million on 

the table, that the federal government were prepared to provide 

if you'd have stuck with '91 GRIP. 

 

I've raised it here earlier.  We didn't know exactly how much 

you were leaving on the table.  But you said it here this 

afternoon -- 154 million.  Now you cannot trigger that unless 

you make a substantial contribution.  We understand that. 

 

Alberta did it; Manitoba did it.  Their farmers aren't taking 

them to court for this problem, and yet Saskatchewan farmers 

are.  And then you say, okay . . . The affidavit that you required 

of your deputy minister said that we will deem it never to have 

happened -- legally fiction.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly 

what you're trying to do by voiding all of the things that are 

going on. 

 

The farmers in the province were satisfied with the '91 GRIP.  

You say they weren't. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They weren't. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well you tell me, from Lloydminster, you tell 

me anywhere in the province of Saskatchewan where you had 

one person come back to you and tell you, I want '92 GRIP, 

after the fact.  After you explained it all to them they said, my 

goodness sakes.  They did just like the member from 

Kindersley did with his farm, exactly like that.  They went to 

their agent and said, what was '91, and what was '92?  And they 

said, I don't want '92; I don't want '92 at all.  It's worse, Mr. 

Minister, than '91 -- worse.  And if '91 became the bench-mark, 

'92 is worse. 

 

You're leaving $154 million on the table, Mr. Minister.  And 

your Minister of Finance can't access any of that money to 

bring it into Saskatchewan, but you could.  You could change it 

to '91 and subsequently get it into the 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2797 

hands of the farmers in the province.  You could do that.  But 

you aren't prepared to do that, are you? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, no I definitely am not, and 

for very good reason.  The members opposite sit here having 

signed away Saskatchewan's future through a thousand 

circumstances, through careless management, through absolute 

reprehensible management practices . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Now the member can't sit and listen to hear the truth in 

response to the question he asks. 

 

The members opposite sit here and they talk about changes to 

circumstances in Saskatchewan.  Well the most profound 

changes in circumstances in Saskatchewan have happened 

since between 1982 and last year when this province was 

virtually bankrupted.  That, Mr. Member from Morse, had . . . 

there was no direction as a result of that to the review 

committee when they designed the new program. 

 

So that if the member opposite is charging the organizations 

that placed on this committee, which is virtually every farm 

organization in Saskatchewan, with all of the accusations that 

he is laying out here today, then let him do so.  Let him have 

the courage to go to SARM and go to Sask Wheat Pool and go 

the United Grain Growers, and to the cattle feeders, and go tell 

them how stupid they are, how you believe that they've made a 

stupid judgement.  Let him go tell them that. 

 

It's my belief that these members who represented these 

organizations on this committee took seriously the question of 

the concerns farmers had expressed by the thousands last fall in 

terms of the nature of this program, and designed a program 

that would address many of the shortcomings. 

 

In terms of . . . show me a person you say . . . in the time since 

June 10 when you began to hold up this Legislative Assembly 

on this point of notice that you yourself ignored for five years 

running, the count a few days ago, that you had received 288 

signatures to your petition -- 288.  And you had held up all of 

the proceedings of the legislature of Saskatchewan on behalf of 

that many signatures. 

 

Well I want to tell you that there are over 1,000 new contracts 

in the new program, people who did not join your program.  

There are over 1,000 new contracts to people who have chosen 

this program because for them it was appropriate when the old 

one was not. 

 

The changes to the 1991 program were program changes that 

were recommended by the producer committee.  They were 

program changes that addressed the very serious shortfalls the 

member opposite created when they designed the program 

hurriedly.  The legislation addresses the legal shambles the 

members opposite left the program in when they designed it, 

and we now have stated clearly in the new law what the 

provisions of the contract are. 

 

The member opposite continues to talk about the financial 

circumstances of farmers and how somehow the $154 million 

that the federal government will not spend on Saskatchewan 

has something to do with our design. 

The fact is, Mr. Member opposite, that the federal government 

has still neglected to pay in excess of $900 million shortfall to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The fact is that the provinces collectively raised the guaranteed 

price, something that should have been third line of defence 

money coverage last spring. The fact that the federal 

government, if they believe what their Prime Minister says, that 

in fact provinces like Saskatchewan are in special 

circumstances as a result of the grain trade wars, if the member 

opposite recognizes that Canada is uniquely . . . Canadian 

farmers are uniquely disadvantaged by the grain trade wars -- 

uniquely disadvantaged because our federal treasury requires 

us as farmers and as provincial taxpayers to pay the cost of that 

-- then he would not make these statements. 

 

Because if the federal government believed that they had $154 

million to spend on Saskatchewan farmers, why would they not 

use it to meet the income shortfall which is consistent with 

their own third line of defence philosophy and consistent with 

the needs of the province, and would recognize that the new 

program in Saskatchewan is a better design than the flawed 

design brought forward hurriedly last year. 

 

If the members opposite are prepared to accept the kind of 

blackmail that has resulted in the off-loading to Saskatchewan 

of about $200 million of farm support over the last couple of 

years, go ahead and believe in it.  But Saskatchewan farmers 

don't believe in it.  And the Saskatchewan government doesn't 

believe in it. 

 

The off-loading that began when you were in office, when you 

took on the responsibility for $100 million in drought relief, 

that followed the next year by taking on half of the federal 

government's commitments to crop insurance, and with a final 

nail in Saskatchewan's financial coffin when you took on 

significant funding for other programming when you bought 

into the GRIP design of the federal government, when we went 

from the western grain stabilization program, in which the 

provinces had no contribution, to the GRIP program, where the 

provinces pay . . . in Saskatchewan's case 120 to $150 million.  

That's the kind of thing that has resulted in the financial pain in 

Saskatchewan.  And it's the kind of thing that we have to 

demand stops. 

 

Saskatchewan is not the cause of the international trade wars.  

And it's not in any other country where the province and the 

farmers pay for that cost.  And it ought not to be here.  And we 

ask you to join us in getting the money from the federal 

government that is legitimately the money that belongs to 

Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Does the minister have the regulations in 

place that compile all of the detail that are necessary to be 

brought forward from January 1, 1991 until today?  Do you 

have that available to show us what happened? 

 

(1530) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the regulations have not 

been finalized.  They are in the later end of the draft process.  

In final form, they are not at this moment available. 



2798 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

Mr. Martens: -- You were saying that all of the actions taken 

by the former administration were somehow less than adequate 

to provide, because we didn't have all of the necessary tools 

together in legislative form to provide it.  Now you, sir, are 

going to go back and decide what happened in January 1, '91 

and '90 on.  And then you're going to tell us what happened. 

 

Where, sir, do you think people should understand what they 

got in '92 crop protection?  Should they feel any different about 

that than you are feeling about what was perceived to be from 

January 1 of 1991 till the time you took office?  Isn't it the 

same kind of a concern that you should have about the farmers 

not seeing what's going on in the program that you put 

forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it's my understanding that 

the regulations cannot come into force until the Act is passed.  

And it's also my understanding that at that time the regulations 

will be in position to be . . . to fulfil the contract and the details 

of it. 

 

Just to say in general terms what will be in regulations, the 

regulations . . . I believe the regulations will describe this as the 

1991 contract so that it is clear.  So that it is clear that it does 

not . . . that the 1991 contract does not include anything that 

was said by a variety of people in a variety of circumstances, 

and therefore cannot be interpreted to be the contract. 

 

And it will, with respect to the 1992 contract, add the details of 

the premium calculations, and much of the detail that has not 

ever been made available to farmers with respect to the nature 

of the contract that they have engaged in.  So it will be . . . The 

regulations will contain a relatively full description of all the 

features of the contract and the calculations where necessary. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, it will all be in there except 

March 15, section 49, I suppose. 

 

I want to point out another thing.  In this Bill, under section 8, 

you say: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown or a Crown agent based on any 

cause of action arising from . . . or incidental to . . . (a 

number of items.  And it says here:) 

 

 Every cause of action against the Crown or a Crown agent 

arising from, resulting from, or incidental to anything 

mentioned in clauses (1)(a) to (d) is extinguished. 

 

Mr. Minister, if you were an ordinary citizen in the province of 

Saskatchewan and you were taking away the opportunity for an 

individual to go to court, this is what the penalty is, sir:  every 

person . . . obstructing justice . . . every person who wilfully 

attempts in any manner to obstruct, pervert, or defeat the 

course of justice in a judicial proceeding . . . 

 

And it's got a list of them, identifies them.  And then:  everyone 

who wilfully attempts in any manner other than 

a manner described in subsection (1) to obstruct, pervert, or 

defeat the course of justice, is guilty of an indictable offence 

and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years. 

 

Mr. Minister, there is a serious offence in dealing with not 

allowing people access to the court.  And you, sir, are doing 

that.  You are taking away individuals' rights to access to the 

court.  I want to read something else that is of significance, I 

believe:  the idea of law was clearly strong enough in medieval 

England to compel the monarch to govern with the consent of 

the most powerful of his subjects to whom he was bound by the 

same feudal contract that made them his vassals.  In 1215 the 

weak King John, aspiring to despotism was forced by his 

rebellious barons to put his seal on the Magna Carta.  Almost 

800 years later this parchment remains the single most 

significant legal document in the history of the West. 

 

And I'll just go on:  until Magna Carta, English monarchs were 

the law and were the law, above it, beside it, indistinguishable 

from it.  After Magna Carta they were subject to it.  The two 

seedlings of democracy Mr. Minister, the access of all to 

law-making and the subjection of all, monarch and commoner 

alike, to the law. 

 

That was what was established in the Magna Carta in 1215 -- 

two points: the access of all to law-making and the subjection 

of all, monarch and commoner alike, to the law -- 1215, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

And now you are putting into place: 

 

 No action or proceeding lies or shall be instituted or 

continued against the Crown or a Crown agent . . . 

 

You, sir, are doing that.  What the people in 1215 got from 

King John in the parliamentary system: access of all to 

law-making and subjection of all, monarch and commoner 

alike, to the law.  And, Mr. Minister, I think that is the reason 

why we're here today . . . is you think you're above the law.  

You make the law, and then you want to live above the law.  

And, Mr. Minister, I think that that's wrong.  It's wrong in this 

legislature, and it's wrong everywhere. 

 

The Magna Carta is a document that marked a decisive step 

forward in the development of constitutional government in 

England.  Why?  Because it gave commoners the right to make 

the law and be subject to the law.  And now we have the 

Constitution of Canada says, in the charter of rights, in section 

7, says, ". . . life, liberty and (the) security of the person . . ." 

under the law. 

 

And you, sir, are saying 50,000 people in the province of 

Saskatchewan do not have that right because they have a 

contract.  Now a contract is a law.  A contract is a law that is 

just as significant as this law is, sir.  A contract between you 

and another person is a law. 

 

And it goes on to say in the obstruction of justice and perjury 

that if you, sir, know and understand what the law to be -- and 

you, sir, understand and know what the law to be without 

interference from the member from 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2799 

Churchill Downs -- if you know what it is to be and you decide 

to contravene the law, you are committing an obstruction to 

justice.  And that, sir, is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's nonsense. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the member from 

Churchill Downs wants to get into the discussion.  And I would 

suggest that his legal counsel should have been provided free 

of charge to the Minister of Agriculture to provide him an 

opportunity to understand what the law is all about and what 

he's doing to the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Fifty thousand contracts and you're going to say, no I don't 

want to have anything to do . . . In fact, Mr. Minister, in order 

to protect yourself from taking them to court, you're going to 

obstruct their access to court.  You, sir, are obstructing their 

access to the court.  Can you tell us why you would be doing 

that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite is not 

a lawyer and I am not a lawyer, and I gather from those who 

have studied law that the member opposite may be some 

distance from the appropriate analysis with respect to the law.  

And I won't try to get into that. 

 

Just to reaffirm that what has been in done in this case is to 

take a very large, confused collection of pieces that could have 

been described as a contract last year -- no one knowing what 

in fact the contract was because it was never defined in any 

place -- and what we have done in this legislation is clarify it to 

say this was the contract in 1991 and this is going to be the 

contract in 1992. 

 

We have also, because of the difficulties with the specific 

notice provision . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The province 

did give notice.  The province gave notice on March 13, but 

there is no one on the face of the earth that could tell you what 

kind of legal notice provision might be required, because no 

one knows what the contract was. 

 

So the member opposite ought to recognize that unless one 

wants to spend the rest of one's life in court trying to describe 

whether it was the member from Morse, standing in a meeting 

in Plunkett, talking to a particular group of 150 farmers when 

he may have said something about a spot-loss hail provision, 

whether that in fact is the contract; or whether in fact it was the 

crop insurance agent from Sedley speaking with a farmer from 

Yorkton across the coffee table and describing a provision 

relative to lentil coverage; or if it was the Crop Insurance office 

in Rosetown speaking with a farmer from Herschel about what 

the IMAPs (indexed moving average price) would be -- no one 

knows what the contract was. 

 

And if one wants to spend the rest of one's life in court trying 

to define what in fact that wide variety of options might have 

been, one could do that, but it would be an entirely wasted 

effort.  It would be a wasted effort for the farmers, a wasted 

effort for the government. 

 

The fact is that we have set the direction for the program, we 

have clarified an enormous confusion that the members 

opposite have created, and we have set the 

direction for a better farm policy for this year.  The fact is that 

now the members opposite ought to recognize that what the 

real problem for SaskatchewanaAgriculture in the grains and 

oilseed sector is, is the income protection that farmers have, the 

income guarantees. 
 

And may I repeat that the farmers have done their share.  

They're good producers.  And the province has done its share, 

the farmers and the province together, in cost sharing the 

second line of defence.  And now, in order to meet the . . . to at 

least bring the farmers up to a minimal standard of income, you 

and we ought to collectively work with the federal government 

to ask them to deliver the third line of defence, their part of this 

commitment, so that the income problem that is really the 

problem can be resolved. 
 

(1545) 
 

Mr. Martens: -- Would you be prepared to let this go as a 

reference to the Appeal court? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it would be inappropriate 

for this to be sent by us to the Appeal court because for that 

action to be taken . . . the Attorney General can only take the 

step of a reference on the constitutionality if he genuinely 

believes there's some doubt about the constitutionality.  The 

Attorney General does not have such doubt. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I understand that, sir.  But you are taking the 

opportunity away for 50,000 people to make an application to 

the court.  They have no reference of any opportunity to take 

you to court, sir.  You have taken that away from them.  You 

have taken that away. 

 

As a matter of fact, you instructed not only to put . . . the 

affidavit signed by the deputy minister on your behalf, you not 

only did that, but you obstructed justice by asking the court . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . We want to welcome back the 

member from Quill Lakes. 

 

I want to say, you obstructed justice in the fact that you said 

they will have to post a $750,000 bond besides.  Obstructing 

justice in the court.  Why?  Not to protect the corporation.  It's 

to protect the inadequacy of your decision.  And this article 

goes on to say . . . And the conclusion of it says it better than 

anything that I have been able to say so far.  It says that you've 

bungled it. 

 

No provincial regime . . . For the member of Quill Lakes, just 

so that he understands that I'm not here by myself.  No 

provincial regime in memory has pulled as many farm policy 

blunders in as short a time.  What the NDP fail to grasp about 

GRIP is that many farmers, probably the majority, see it as the 

source of additional crop income, not mere insurance.  Cutting 

such support in a tough year would be unpopular even if it 

were done right. 

 

And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly what we're talking about.  

And you can have all the legal counsel barking at your heels 

over on the other side, but they aren't prepared to stand in 

court, Mr. Minister, none of them, to perjure themselves about 

what went on and what was discussed in a matter of essence 

before a court.  You're not prepared to do that.  You will deem 

it. What is deeming, in legalese? 



2800 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

It's legal fiction.  You're going to void all of the incidents that 

occurred -- make empty. 

 

As a matter of fact by doing that, sir, you could make it so that 

nobody would receive anything.  Because you've said in the 

Bill that I'm going to extinguish your right in a court, to this 

day and on.  You're not going to have anybody able to take you 

to court. 

 

And I contend to you, sir, that if you'd have kept '91 program, 

and if there would have been one farmer who was misusing it 

in a matter of fraud, you would have been able to take him to 

court based on this.  You would have been able to take him to 

court based on this.  And that, Mr. Minister, is exactly the 

point.  What's good for the goose is good for the gander.  And 

that's exactly what you need to realize, sir. 

 

And I say that you haven't the courage to take this to court 

because you've instructed the Minister of Justice to protect your 

backside.  That's what you've done. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I said earlier in the day that the members 

opposite stray some distance from truth in asking questions and 

making statements around questions.  The fact is that it is not I.  

I have never talked to the Minister of Justice, the Attorney 

General, Mr. Member from Morse, about this question.  I have 

never asked him about the constitutionality.  That's something 

the officials deal with.  I have never suggested that he make 

any kind of judgement on that matter. 

 

The fact is that the officials say the Attorney General believes 

these measures to be constitutional, and therefore the point you 

make about reference is inappropriate.  And any allegation by 

you that somehow he was instructed, bears as much 

resemblance to the truth as the contention by you and your 

colleagues that somehow this committee was instructed by us 

about what kind of report they should bring forward.  Well, sir, 

that is such a distance from the truth that it is reprehensible that 

you would think of saying it.  It's absolutely false, is what it is. 

 

And again, when you start talking about a $700,000 bond -- 

$750,000 bond.  There is no truth in that statement.  There is no 

$700,000 bond.  There is no provision for a $700,000 bond.  

What it is that the member opposite refers to ought to be made 

clear by him because it has been repeatedly referred to, and it 

does not exist. 

 

I don't know if there are other matters that the member wants to 

discuss, but let's discuss things that are based in fact if we want 

to discuss them. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well if the 750,000 doesn't exist, then why 

did your lawyers talk about it at the Appeal court hearings?  

They talked about two items that they wanted to bring forward; 

one was the Bill and the second one was the . . . No, they 

wanted the opt-out clause dealt with, and they wanted the 

$750,000 bond lifted. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm given to understand 

that in cases where injunctions are requested that it's a standard 

matter of law that provision for losses be put into place in the 

event that an injunction is not 

upheld and someone has suffered losses as a result. 

 

My understanding is that in the Fair Share lawsuit, in fact such 

a provision was granted in order to provide for those kinds of 

losses in the event that things did not turn out appropriately.  

Such a provision was not granted here.  It was simply drawn to 

the attention of the court that it was a standard practice even 

though it was not followed by the judge in this case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when you haven't got any 

facts you become flippant, and I think that the member from 

Quill Lakes and Churchill Downs have demonstrated that. 

 

I want to ask you this, Mr. Minister: when did you think that 

you became above the law in your relationship to this Bill?  

Because in my view it says there's two seedlings of democracy 

that the Magna Carta provided in 1215.  One was the access of 

all to law making and all to be under the law.  Two of them.  

And it says in the margin:  it has come to symbolize the 

triumph of law over tyranny. 

 

Now when is the next thing going to happen, sir?  This is the 

second.  This isn't the first, Mr. Minister.  This isn't the first 

time this has happened.  You did the same sort of thing back in 

December when everybody didn't agree with you.  But then it 

was just two or three people, or half a dozen people.  But what 

is it today?  Fifty thousand contracts -- 50,000 contracts.  And 

you are saying that you're above the law. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, that might be good for you to say.  I think 

you, sir, are hesitant to go to court because you would have to 

swear under oath, the points that were made to be correct were 

incorrect.  And I think that that's where your problem is and 

that's why you have this horrendous Bill before us today. 

 

There isn't anyone that I have talked to except yourself and the 

55 people spread around this Assembly who believe like you 

do.  And the majority of them would tell me that I'm not only 

right in saying what I'm doing, in fact your leader said we're 

right in what we're doing.  In fact you even said you should be 

able to take this to court. 

 

But, Mr. Minister, which court is going to hear this?  Which 

court?  Is it the Queen's Bench court where it's filed in Melville 

today?  No it isn't, because you take those rights away.  You 

take them away for everyone.  Anyone who wants to enter a 

contract with you, sir, is no longer going to be able to do it. 

And I think that that's wrong.  I've said it's wrong; I believe it's 

wrong. And I believe it's wrong since I entered this debate, and 

I believe it wrong right from the very essence of the things that 

you're doing in this Assembly.  They're wrong.  They're totally 

wrong. 

 

The law was established in principle in democracy that the law 

would be made by commoners and that the commoners would 

have to live under it.  And now, sir, you make yourself a little 

uncommon and then you become above the law. And that's 

wrong.  The person that makes the law has to live by the law, 

and that's in our constitutional right.  And you, sir, I don't think 

are doing that. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2801 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I will say again that the 

member opposite is not a lawyer and I am not a lawyer.  I am 

given to understand that provisions are regularly enacted that 

provide for protection.  And the bottom line on this legislation, 

as I believe I've explained several times, is that the program as 

originally constituted was so undefined and ill-defined and 

indeterminate, that one could not contemplate what the variety 

of circumstances might be that defined the contract that was set 

in place in 1991 by the members opposite, because there is no 

single document which defines the contract that the members 

opposite describe. 

 

There is a series of documents, a series of meetings of people, a 

series of explanations from different people -- any one of 

which could be interpreted by the client or the government to 

constitute the contract.  And that kind of lack of clarity is not 

something that a government can leave itself exposed to. 

 

The fact is that what we have done in this Bill is instituted for 

the first time clarity in the definition of the program, 

established a notice provision that says that when amendments 

are made farmers should be notified, which is the exact practice 

the members opposite followed for the whole time they were, 

at least in recent years, involved with the program. 

 

We have put in legislation the actual practice, something that 

can practically be carried out relative to the federal-provincial 

agreement.  And we have instituted the recommendations of 

the GRIP review committee, a committee first struck by the 

members opposite and hopefully still respected; a committee 

whose recommendations were implemented substantially, 

consistently with the recommendations that were brought 

forward.  And I believe the members opposite have been trying 

to make a very large issue out of an issue that they themselves 

ignored for five years while in government. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I've 

been listening with some interest to the debate, mostly on the 

television, I must say, in other locales today.  But you are very 

singular in your attempts to sort of evade any specific 

questions, and want to be very broad in your application to the 

questions that my colleagues have asked. 

 

Once thing I would like, Mr. Minister -- and the Minister of 

Justice in his Estimates made the commitment that you would 

have a legal people available to you during your deliberation of 

this Bill -- that when we get into the area of constitutionality of 

this one, that you and I will not determine, but that is done by 

very learned legal people in other areas . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well it's like the member from Churchill 

Downs.  If he was such a learned legal person, I suppose he 

would've got up in question period today when legal questions 

were posed instead of yapping from his seat now.  But that's the 

type of colleague that you have unfortunately, Mr. Minister. 

 

Anyway, because we're dealing with clause 1, I would 

appreciate and am told by people in the legal profession 

that everyone of the whereas's that you have at the beginning of 

this Bill have some significance to what you're attempting to do 

in the clause-by-clause section; that you are setting various and 

quoting various precedents, other actions of government, in 

order to legitimize the sections of your Bill. 

 

And I would like you to provide for this Assembly -- and I 

know you have people, legal people here with you today -- 

exactly what those precedents were or the arguments presented 

by each of the whereas's in the beginning of this Bill, so that 

we might have people in the legal community review them.  

And I think that's a legitimate question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it wouldn't be my intent to 

here pretend that I was a lawyer in a court setting to make 

arguments point by point on whereas's.  But if the member 

opposite wishes to discuss each of the issues in the language 

with which I'm familiar, with respect to government 

programming and the realities we find ourselves in as the result 

of the legislation that was introduced by the members opposite 

last year, I would be prepared to discuss each of the whereas's.  

We've made it part way through the first one, I think so far, in 

the last five or six hours. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the preamble to any Bill 

will set precedents that have occurred in the past.  Obviously 

you have sought a number here -- more than I have seen in any 

other piece of legislation -- in order to bring this Bill forward. 

 

An example: 

 

 WHEREAS, in accordance with the precedent set in 1991, 

the Government of Saskatchewan in 1992 extended the time 

for producers to make decisions . . . 

 

Now you must have had a number of precedents in 1991 that 

allowed you to say, I can do that in 1992 without being taken to 

court.  Now that, I believe, Mr. Minister, will be germane to 

every one of the whereas's that you have in the preamble to 

your Bill.  And you will have that information that sets out the 

various technical arguments in your favour to say that I don't 

have to appear in a court of law in the province of 

Saskatchewan before a judge and 12 of my peers in order to 

defend what I am doing in the legislature of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there must be something, Mr. Minister, in each one of 

those areas, in the preamble to your Bill, that says that; that 

gives you the authority to not have to appear before a judge and 

your own peers in this particular circumstances.  And that's 

what I want, Mr. Minister.  I want that information provided to 

me, in each one of those sections, to tell me that you don't have 

to go to court.  Okay?  And I would suspect that you probably 

have that somewhere from your drafting people. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I had said earlier, this 

legislation for the first time describes for farmers in a clear and 

comprehensive way, with the regulations when they are passed, 

the nature of their contract, their program that they are 

participating in.  It is only with the intent of 



2802 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

clarifying what in fact the environment into which this falls, to 

help clarify what happens within the description of the 

program, that the whereas's are there. 

 

And I think the member opposite has -- forgetting about the 

legal processes for the moment -- participated I'm sure in 

political conventions where the framework for a final 

resolution is described sometimes in pages of whereas's.  And I 

don't know if the member opposite's federal convention, where 

they decided that the Canadian Wheat Board ought to go, used 

whereas's in preparing that resolution; whether that was used or 

not.  But it's common in resolutions, in coming to describe 

what one intends to do, to describe the framework within which 

that occurs.  And that's also the case in this law. 

 

And whether we want to . . . if there are specific questions, if 

the member opposite wants to know what some of the specific 

changes that occurred previously after March 15, if he wants to 

be aware of that, I can give him that which I have with me in 

that regard.  But to ask me to give some kind of long, legal 

treatise on each one of these is something that is beyond my 

capacity to do. 

 

And if the member wants to discuss these matters in court, the 

contention that he makes that this is somehow meant to keep 

people out of court, isn't true.  The access to the court is as 

access to court always was.  The fact is that this simply lays out 

as clearly as possible the terms and conditions of the new 

contract and the context into which it falls. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's not the question I 

asked.  And I don't expect that you would have that legal 

opinion, and I wouldn't expect you to deliver it because I 

suspect something would get lost in the delivery. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, the Minister of Justice has spent the 

taxpayers' money getting an opinion from MacPherson, Leslie.  

I don't suspect it came cheap.  And they wouldn't have sought 

the opinion unless the minister's backside wasn't on the line on 

this particular issue. 

 

Now you are paying in through the Department of Justice 

individuals to give you legal opinions.  You have identified in 

three separate sections of your Bill . . . three separate sections 

of your Bill identify that the minister does not have to go and 

defend himself in a court of law; that a court is to simply 

disregard any allegations made against the minister or his 

government. 

 

Now the fact that we've spent the taxpayers' money, that we 

have 10 whereas's in front of this Bill -- that I'm told by good 

legal counsel mean certain things to the way that you are trying 

to define this Bill -- what I asked you was to give me the 

various precedents.  You keep saying that our government did 

this or our government did this or there is something else that 

occurred that allows you to do this. 

 

It's very interesting, Mr. Minister, in looking at the charter 

arguments that have gone before the courts, just as a lay person 

going and looking through section 7, some of the things that 

are happening today in Canada in regards to people's rights and 

how they are treated with our constitution and their day in 

court. 

And one . . . There seems to be an ever-occurring theme that is 

getting stronger and stronger as we go along in that regard.  

And I would refer . . . and it's only for your interest, if someone 

wants to look at it, but it's the theme that I find, 1991 a case in 

Manitoba.  And it was fairly narrow.  It didn't have anything to 

do with agriculture, Mr. Minister. 

 

But I think it's important that you understand the judgement 

because that's what we're talking about here, about fairness and 

about the ability of people to hold you accountable, beyond this 

Legislative Assembly, for actions that are going to, I am sure, 

affect people very severely.  That there is the potential in your 

Bill, Mr. Minister, to wreak havoc with farm families.  And I 

just want to read this decision to you. 

 

The principles -- and this would be Pearlman versus the 

Manitoba Law Society Judicial Committee, 1991 -- the 

principles of fundamental justice to which this section refers 

include but are not limited to the rules of natural justice and the 

duty to act fairly.  They therefore include the requirement of a 

procedurally fair hearing before an impartial decision maker. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I don't consider you to be particularly 

impartial in this instance.  That as a decision maker, you are 

not the impartial one.  And I don't see anybody around this 

Assembly here, Mr. Minister, that's the impartial one.  

Certainly we all have our biases here.  We have political biases.  

That's what we're elected for, and that's why we're here -- on 

the basis of those political biases. 

 

But I want to know where in your Bill, I want to know what 

section . . . I want you to point out to me where the impartial 

decision maker is in your Bill.  I want you to define for me, as 

judges have under section 7 of the charter, where the impartial 

decision maker in Bill 87 is.  Can you please tell me which 

section it is so that I can read it and understand where that 

impartiality is? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That the member opposite is falling prey 

to the temptations that those of us who are lay people ought not 

to fall prey to, that is to begin to try to read law and believe we 

know what it means. 

 

We were engaged in this curious endeavour in the examination, 

if one could call it that -- if it wasn't too comical to be called 

examination -- of The Highway Traffic Act yesterday.  And we 

are engaged in it again.  We are not lawyers and we should not 

pretend at it. 

 

The principles of law the member opposite is referring to, have 

to do with the administrative law and the application to 

quasi-judicial bodies, and they have nothing to do with the 

legislative procedures of our legislature.  The practice . . . the 

fact that we have described before that we have in fact here put 

clarity to a contractual nightmare in terms of how one might 

begin to think one describes last year's contract, is surely an 

interest that all of us have in the interests of the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1615) 

 

To have contracts with 50,000 farmers, no one being able 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2803 

to say what any one of them is, and thereby leaving the whole 

question of what an individual contract is and whether they 

wanted to spend the rest of their lives doing challenges around 

it, what it might be, saying that on February 11 Joe Schmo told 

me as a crop insurance agent such and such, and therefore that's 

a contract, and you not being able to define differently that that 

in fact is not the contract because what the contract was was 

never defined, is surely in the interests of the public that that 

kind of carelessness created by the members opposite ought to 

be clarified. 

 

You say that we shouldn't seek legal opinions.  Well I would 

suggest to you that if you'd sought some legal opinions last 

year, you might have put some clarity to a mess that never 

would have had to have been considered later.  It's obviously 

the responsibility of legislators to seek legal opinions.  It's 

obviously our responsibility to make sure that legislation we 

bring forward has clarity and has soundness and has 

constitutionality.  That's our job. 

 

And if it means we must seek a legal opinion to make sure that 

we haven't erred somewhere in a clause in bringing forward 

such legislation, then that's what we ought to do. 

 

In my experience, in my short experience in government, this is 

at least the second matter on which we've sought that kind of 

advice because it's important.  With respect to our farm debt 

legislation, we've had that similar kind of an examination done, 

because we again have used the results of the recommendations 

of an advisory group to say this is the kind of program that's 

appropriate for Saskatchewan. 

 

And then in putting those recommendations forward, we have 

sought legal opinions about them to make sure that the 

provisions are accurate.  And I'm surprised that the member 

opposite would challenge that, having been in government for 

the length of time that he was. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I expected as much from 

you in your answer.  I would not have stood in the House and 

pretended to say that the question of the lawyer and his right in 

Manitoba to have an impartial decision maker was what we 

were determining here.  I said I was talking about a theme. 

 

And if one does take the time and does read a lot of the case 

law coming out of the charter, you'll see that that theme is ever 

present there, that the right of individuals to have that 

impartiality through all sorts of different circumstances is there.  

And what I asked you was: where in your Bill was the 

opportunity for that impartial decision maker to come into 

play? 

 

And I guess what you're telling me is that there isn't one; you 

don't want one; that this Legislative Assembly is all it takes; 

that I, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, backed by 54 of my 

colleagues, are simply all that anyone ever needs in order to 

have that impartiality; that farmers need not worry. 

 

Mr. Minister, I'll ask you another question: if you can't point 

out in this Bill where that impartial decision maker is in regards 

to your legislation, tell me how many court cases the 

government was involved in over the 1991 

GRIP program.  Maybe we can start from there.  How many 

court cases had you gone through examination for discovery 

over the 1991 program? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are at this point, three 

actions that have been begun.  None have advanced to the point 

of examination for discovery.  Two are against the Crop 

Insurance Corporation and the government jointly and one is 

against the Crop Insurance Corporation. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And do they, Mr. Minister, refer to issues tied 

to revenue insurance, or are they tied to issues that have been 

Crop Insurance jurisdictional issues for a long time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- All three are related to the revenue 

insurance program. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And they, Mr. Minister, have all been filed in 

Queen's Bench? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And those actions are going to go forward? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There is no reason to assume that they will 

not continue at this point. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, that's strange that the 

former government, for all its criticism that you heap upon it, 

felt that at the end of the day there was an impartial decision 

maker available to people with 1991 GRIP.  This program that 

they signed up for overwhelmingly, that they all basically paid 

their premiums to, all took money from, but at the end of the 

day there was an impartial decision maker available.  That's a 

court of law. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what is there about 1992 that's different?  

What is there about 1992?  Is it because the government has a 

bigger majority?  Is it because the government's NDP?  Is it 

because the minister is smarter? 

 

What is it about 1992, Mr. Minister, in your Bill that says that 

people don't have the right of impartiality through a judge and a 

jury that they do under 1991?  What is it, Mr. Minister, that 

puts you better than that and above that?  Would you point out 

which section of the Bill, Mr. Minister, gives us that 

impartiality that people can file in Queen's Bench court and 

have their day in court?  Would you show that to me, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, what is provided in our 

courts is the right to challenge.  The understanding I have is 

that when the existing actions proceed to court further, that the 

government will use the legislation when it's passed as a 

defence on those matters. 

 

The legislation does not remove the right of a farmer, relative 

to their contract.  What it does is provide that with respect to 

changes made to the program, that in that area actions are 

limited.  And that the farmer, if I believe I've not been paid, if I 

believe I've not been paid by the program in which I have 

engaged, and I've met my obligations, then I still have the right 

to sue the 



2804 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

corporation for payment with respect to the application of the 

agreement. 

 

So what has been done in this legislation, as I have said several 

times already, is to clarify the absolute lack of clarity that was 

created last year by the fact that in legislation there was no 

description of a contract.  And therefore it would be very 

difficult to define what a change to such a contract was when 

no one knew what the contract was.  Nor would it be 

appropriate to know what appropriate . . . would it be possible 

to know what appropriate notice was for changing when in fact 

no one knew what it was you might be changing. 

 

So that with the legal meanderings that have been going on 

around this hastily constructed, ill-defined program that was 

entered into last year by the members opposite, we are now 

creating that kind of clarity.  And we are now creating a 

circumstance where farmers know what the program is, and 

within the program that they know they still do have the right 

of using the courts for that purpose. 

 

They also, as the member opposite I'm sure knows, have the 

right to constitutionally challenge the Bill as it's constructed 

and the program as it is.  The courts are the final arbiter of legal 

matters in Canada and will continue to be so. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I read in one of the 

sections here: 

 

 In any action or proceeding against the Crown or a Crown 

agent, a court shall not consider any principle of law or 

inequity that would require adequate, reasonable or any 

notice with respect to any amendments or changes to a 

revenue insurance contract to be provided by the corporation 

to any party to the contract. 

 

Any party to the contract.  What that says, Mr. Minister, is that 

people, people out there have thought that they did have a 

legally binding contract.  And by that contract, Mr. Minister, 

they went out and they did things.  They spent money, they 

rented land, they bought machinery.  They entered into other 

legally binding contracts -- contracts subject to section 178 of 

The Bank Act, contracts subject to courts of law.  And they 

entered into them by the dozens and by the hundreds, and I 

would suggest to you, probably by the thousands, because they 

said they had a contract.   And your Bill says: "provided by the 

corporation to any party to the contract." 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you come into this legislature and say there 

were no contracts; I'm going to change the law; I'm going to 

re-create history; and you cannot use my re-creation against me 

in a court of law.  You cannot have any impartial decision 

maker because I, the member from Rosetown-Elrose, are 

smarter than everyone else, or something to that effect. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, I don't accept that.  The preamble in your 

Bills, the whereas's in Bill 87, in my view, simply try . . . and I 

think the lawyer words that they use is demonstrably justify the 

limits of Bill 87 and the guarantees on legal rights.  I think 

that's the words they use. 

And I think a preamble like that means that your government 

anticipated charter problems and that you're demonstrably 

justifying the extinguishment of legal rights.  That's what 

you're doing with that.  You're demonstrably justifying the 

extinguishment of legal rights.  That's what that preamble's all 

about, Mr. Minister.  Your own Bill, your own Bill shows it in 

that section, that the court cannot use any of that against you, 

even though they had a contract with the corporation 

previously. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, what do you say?  What do you say to 

those people out there that made those contracts with others?  

What do you say to those people that have a contract that has 

178 against it under The Bank Act?  And they took on 

obligations because of the contract that they had, and now you 

change that contract and they don't have any recourse through 

the court to come back on that, just as they don't have the 

recourse under 178.  What are you going to do about those, Mr. 

Minister? 

 

(1630) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm going to ask those 

people to pay very little attention to the ramblings of the 

members opposite on this topic.  That's what I'm going to ask 

them to do, because the members opposite repeatedly, 

repeatedly ignore fact and ignore truth and ignore everything 

that there is about trying to explain to people what in fact 

commitments exist and what commitments do not. 

 

If I can read to you from the legislation . . . I said earlier this 

legislation in fact defines the contract.  It does not extinguish 

the contract; it defines the contract.  It says: 

 

 Every producer who submits a completed revenue insurance 

application to the corporation for revenue insurance coverage 

beginning with the 1991 

_92 crop year and whose application is accepted by the corporation 

is deemed, on and from April 1, 1991, to have entered into a 

revenue insurance contract that, subject to section 5.4, is in 

the form and contains only the terms and conditions 

prescribed in the regulations. 

 

We define the contract differently because last year you did not 

define the contract, so no one knows what their contracts were. 

 

The member opposite confuses the argument by suggesting that 

somehow his contention that March 13 falls after March 15 has 

somehow breached the contract.  The fact is that in the 

federal-provincial agreement there is provision for change.  

That is not a breach of a contract.  It's following the contract.  

It's following the federal-provincial agreement which is part of 

that array of things which defines the obligation of the 

government to farmers and farmers to the government. 

 

It is the federal-provincial agreement that says the program can 

be changed, and when the program is changed, that the farmers' 

recourse, if they are not happy with the changes, is to not 

participate in the program.  That is not a breach of contract.  

That's a following of the contract.  It is the government's right 

and obligation to 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2805 

make changes from time to time. 

 

The member opposite ought to be aware of that.  They made 

repeated changes to the program in the years they were there.  

With respect to one of their whereas's, I could give you a list of 

the things that were changed on a variety of days well beyond 

the March 15 deadline.  The yield averages on Canadian prairie 

spring wheat, the five-year averages for irrigation producers, 

the separate insurance on irrigated and dry land averages, and 

the offset buy back option. And the list goes on of things that 

were changed, things that were changed that the member would 

somehow describe as a breach of contract, because they were 

legitimately done after the March 15 deadline he so often refers 

to. 

 

Mr. Chairman, in the announcement of our program, we 

announced the changes on March 13.  We announced the 

changes consistent with the recommendations of the committee 

that was struck to examine the program.  And any contention 

by the member opposite that somehow our attempt to clarify 

both the law and the contract that was ill-clarified and 

unclarified last year, that somehow that is wrong is a very, very 

confusing statement to me.  It seems to me that it is the 

responsibility of government to clarify that kind of confusion. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, any contract can be changed 

when there's mutual agreement.  Any contract can be changed, 

and you know that.  What you're trying to do here is change a 

contract that Saskatchewan producers had with the Government 

of Saskatchewan and the Government of Canada.  And you 

know full well that that was a contract. 

 

There is not a bank or a credit union in this province that didn't 

believe that that was a contract, and that there were certain 

notification provisions in it.  And I notice the minister, further 

on in this particular Bill, has even gone further, that the 

minister now can prescribe things about crop eligibility, 

products, categories, all of that sort of thing, even through the 

middle of the contract year. 

 

Now this is fairly Draconian and I don't think any bank 

manager or credit union, given what he sees today, would have 

treated farmers the same as they did in 1991.  They felt what 

they had in 1991 was bankable; it was predictable.  And on that 

basis they would lend money, mortgage money which farmers 

and their families put up guarantees for, put their land up for, 

their machinery up for, perhaps even the very residence that 

they live in, on the basis of a contract signed that said, for the 

next three years this is what I can predict, that this contract is 

subject to mutual agreement and change, that there are 

notification procedures in place, and that those notification 

procedures will give me the time to do what I deem necessary. 

 

Instead we have a minister that comes along and says, well I'm 

going to deem you right out of business.  I'm going to deem 

you to have been void last year.  I'm going to deem everything 

back to January of 1991.  Your farming operation didn't exist 

last year.  That contract you signed with the bank or the 178 

that he's got on my farm doesn't exist any more.  Well, Mr. 

Minister, go to a court of law and try that.  See how far you get. 

I challenge you to walk downtown and sign a mortgage on your 

land and then try and get out of it.  How many people out there 

in Saskatchewan did that?  How many people went out and 

rented their neighbour's land on a one-, two-, three 

_year lease?  How many people made a decision to go to Farm 

Credit and give it that extra try and take on that three-year lease 

because they had their GRIP contract?  How many people were 

dealing with ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan)?  How many people were going in and 

negotiating on their production loan and saying, on the basis of 

this I can make some payments over this period of time, and 

accept the interest penalty, and I'll keep my farm, I'll keep my 

hog barn.  How many people did that, Mr. Minister?  And 

instead what you've done is you've come along and you've said, 

you are void.  Everything that you did last year is void.  It 

didn't happen. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Minister, that's not acceptable.  That isn't 

acceptable to me, it isn't acceptable to the people I represent.  

And I don't think if you went out and asked them, it's 

acceptable to the people you're suppose to represent -- if you'd 

bothered to ask them once in a while. 

 

So you just can't void people's lives.  You can't void those 

contracts they signed with their neighbours, with banking 

institutions, with others in the farming community.  You can't 

void those because the courts of law will not allow you to void 

them.  And I dare you to try. 

 

So, Mr. Minister, if you don't have the power to void those, 

what makes you think that you should have the authority to use 

your majority in this legislature to bring forward a piece of 

legislation that says someone who has been put in a precarious 

position because of what you've done, does not have the right 

to an impartial decision maker saying yes, this individual 

signed contracts pertaining to his farming operation because of 

1991's GRIP program. And now because the minister has 

changed it, and he isn't going to get the same amount of 

revenue . . . maybe he's up at Melfort or in the north-west and 

he's dried right out this year, he's dried right out.  There's no 

crop. 

 

And because there's no crop his creditors are saying to him, 

well what about your GRIP contract?  And he says, well I'm 

sorry but the way I understand it I'm down about 30 bucks an 

acre and that $30 an acre was sort of my profit this year, and I 

don't have that to give you any more. 

 

And the bank is going to say, well I think we've got a problem. 

 

And the farmer will say, well I guess I'm going to have to go to 

court because I don't have the money; I'm not going to have the 

money.  Crop Insurance only pay me 80 per cent instead of 

100, and I won't get as much out of revenue insurance.  So I 

don't have the money.  And under this new legislation, I can't 

go to court with the government to try and recoup those losses 

because they've designed their legislation to make sure that I 

can't.  And I don't know what I'm going to do with you, Mr. 

Banker, but I guess we'll have to go to court because that's the 

only way I think I can save my farm maybe.  Maybe I 



2806 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

can go to the Farm Debt Review Board, and they'll give me a 

way to save my farm because I can't sue the government for the 

changes they did to me because of the contract I signed with 

you. 

 

So I want to know, Mr. Minister, in this Bill of yours, where's 

that impartial decision maker that lets that guy and his family 

off the hook.  You show me. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the misrepresentations of 

the member opposite continue to grow.  The fact is that the 

federal-provincial agreement signed by the members opposite 

provides that changes to the program can be made.  The 

changes were made in Saskatchewan this year as a result of the 

recommendations of the same committee the members opposite 

appointed. 

 

The theatrics the member opposite engages in, with respect to 

the impact of an income crisis in Saskatchewan, is well known 

-- the income crisis in Saskatchewan which began when the 

members opposite began to let the federal government off the 

hook for farm support in Saskatchewan. 

 

Clearly there is financial stress in Saskatchewan as a result of 

the international grain trade wars, and the impact of those on 

Saskatchewan farmers where we produce half of Canada's 

export grains and where we are impacted to the tune of 

one-half of the impact -- the total Canadian impact right here 

on Saskatchewan -- that impact on Saskatchewan which has 4 

per cent of the taxing capacity. 

 

If the member opposite is trying to somehow construct the 

financial crisis in Saskatchewan and pretend that changes in a 

program are the source of the financial crisis, the member 

opposite has not been out of this legislature for too long, and 

better get out there and start talking and finding out what the 

problem really is. 

 

The fact is that farmers are short in excess of around a billion 

dollars just from the federal commitment that's not been met.  

And the member opposite sits there and ignores those facts 

repeatedly. 

 

The province of Saskatchewan and farmers are short an 

additional $200 million annually because of agreements that 

you made with the federal government, if you want to talk 

about agreements -- agreements you made with the federal 

government, saying, go ahead, off-load on us.  We'll happily 

bankrupt Saskatchewan farmers, and we'll happily bankrupt 

Saskatchewan citizens in order to pay for these programs. 

 

In 1988 we didn't have financial commitments to these farm 

support programs.  In 1988 you members opposite took on a 

hundred million dollars of cost-sharing.  The next year you 

took on another 60 million.  And two years hence, you took on 

$150 million.  That's not just for the province of Saskatchewan 

that you sat here and comfortably accepted.  It was also for the 

farmers of Saskatchewan that you took on that load that has to 

be paid.  You ought to be ashamed of yourselves for that 

misconstruction of management. 

That having been said, the review of the farm program has 

been described.  It's followed the procedures laid out in the Act 

passed by the members opposite.  It's followed the introduction 

mechanisms of the legislature.  And while the members 

opposite have had a great deal of sport playing games with it, 

the fact is that the Bill has been brought forward to implement 

the results of the GRIP review committee, and to put clear the 

question of notice, and to put clear the terms and conditions of 

the contract, not only for this year which the GRIP review 

committee had to identify, but to make clear the mass 

confusion that was constructed by you not identifying what the 

contract was when you first constructed the program.  You 

ought to be ashamed of yourselves. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, when in trouble . . . 

when in trouble, this weak-kneed minister always finds 

someone else to blame it on.  You notice we weren't, Mr. 

Minister, talking about that particular area.  We were talking 

about the rights of individuals who've gone and signed 

contracts.  But this minister, you know, when he gets in a tight 

spot, as always, we blame somebody else.  Rather than just 

simply pointing to his right at the Minister of Finance and 

saying, well the problem was that I got orders to do something, 

and by doing it, I've taken away people's rights, their day in 

court; rather than coming forward with the answer that we all 

know to be the truth, we always go looking for somebody else 

to blame it on. 

 

Well I say to you, Mr. Chairman, and to this minister, last year 

when farmers were signing up in droves, when they were going 

and making contractual arrangements beyond the one that they 

had with the government, they didn't expect a Minister of 

Agriculture who wouldn't accept his responsibility and a 

Minister of Agriculture who wasn't prepared as the previous 

one was obviously.  Because you said you've got three cases 

going to Queen's Bench court, and you fully expect them to go 

the limit.  And people under that program are going to get their 

day in court.  And if they find . . . if they are found that they 

have some justification, the government will have to pay 

restitution. 

 

But in 1992, that's not the case because the minister has set out 

to take a whole bunch of money out of rural Saskatchewan.  

You know what, Mr. Minister?  You didn't listen close enough 

the other night in Humboldt when that young fellow was 

talking to you about what you had done.  I mean, your little sop 

that you've come back with isn't going to take the anger out of 

that young man. 

 

(1645) 

 

He said, Mr. Wiens, -- and I shouldn't do that, Mr. Chairman, I 

realize -- Mr. Member from Rosetown-Elrose, he said: before 

the election, I heard you promise over and over and over again 

that there'd be more money for agriculture, that you were going 

to Ottawa to get more money, that there would be a stronger 

agriculture budget in this province.  And now what he's found 

is just the opposite, Mr. Minister. 

 

He's saying you've broken every single contract that I've signed 

with you.  You broke 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2807 

my GRIP contract.  You broke my feed grain assistance 

contract.  You're breaking my cash advance contract.  I mean, 

you're going all across the list, and you're breaking them all.  

Now maybe, Mr. Minister, on some of those other ones he 

might even get the chance to take you to court; I don't know. 

 

But you still haven't answered my question.  I want to know, 

Mr. Minister, given the fact that in 1991, in 1991, three 

individuals so far have chosen to take the government to court.  

And they've said we expect an impartial decision maker.  And 

they're going to get one I suspect in Queen's Bench. 

 

Now somebody's already taken you to Queen's Bench, and so 

you come along with a piece of legislation, that's probably cost 

you a fortune to put together in legal advice, with a preamble 

that will just demonstrably justify stripping people's rights 

under the charter.  That's the legal opinion of the preamble to 

this Bill.  The only reason that you've done it is so you can 

demonstrably justify a challenge under the charter.  That's the 

only reason you've done it.  Maybe the question we should ask 

you, Mr. Minister, is: how much did it cost to put the 10 

whereas's in front here so that you can demonstrably justify 

taking away legal rights? 

 

Mr. Minister, you still haven't answered the question.  Where in 

this Bill?  You show me the section that gives people in this 

province the impartial decision maker like they had in 1991 

and they had right back to 1905 when this province joined 

Confederation.  You show me the clause in here, Mr. Minister, 

that gives them that right, the impartial decision maker who 

will judge you.  You show me where that is, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, again I'm not expert 

in law, and I don't think . . . I'm not sure where this all leads 

back to.  I think the members opposite began with the Magna 

Carta and have moved slightly forward since then. 

 

I don't understand the evolution of law or the application of it, 

but I know that in our legal system, the courts . . . you do not 

have to define in each piece of legislation what the recourse to 

justice is.  It is a given in our country that the recourse to 

justice is through the courts.  And the courts continue to be the 

instrument that measures the appropriateness of legislation and 

provisions in it; and the courts, I'm sure, will continue to 

measure it. 

 

The question that the members opposite ought to be dealing 

with is political responsibility -- the responsibility for taking 

actions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, the 

responsibility that the member opposite is elected to do.  The 

member opposite ought not to play at being a lawyer because 

he inadequately understands the provisions of law.  And I will 

not pretend that I adequately understand the provisions of law.  

We rely on legal experts to provide that information for us. 

 

The fact is, what is the political truth about the management of 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Let's accept, let's talk later 

about the financial management of the province.  Let's begin by 

talking about this process, about the process of the 

establishment of the GRIP program. 

Let's begin a little earlier, as we did a few minutes ago.  Let's 

begin with 1987, before we had our major drought payment 

program in 1988.  At that time the Saskatchewan Department 

of Agriculture and Food provided only administrative dollars 

for several programs.  In 1988 the members opposite, whose 

job was to protect Saskatchewan's interests, the members 

opposite decided to spend $100 million on behalf of the federal 

government to save the federal government $100 million in a 

drought assistance program -- the first time a major provincial 

involvement had been engaged in like that.  A hundred million 

dollar commitment by you, you who were elected to represent 

the people of Saskatchewan and to protect the financial and the 

social interests of the province of Saskatchewan.  You said to 

your federal brothers, sure we'll pay; sure our people will pay 

$100 million. 

 

In 1988 . . . the year after 1988, in 1989 the members opposite 

took one-half of the federal government's share of the crop 

insurance program, an amount of money that varies from year 

to year between 40 and $60 million.  You said sure we'll pay. 

 

By then the members ought to have known.  Had they done 

their books . . . that the province of Saskatchewan was virtually 

bankrupt because they had been bankrupting it for eight years 

then.  The members opposite ought to have known it.  But that 

was of no concern to the members opposite.  They said sure 

we'll take it on; sure we'll pay another 40 to $60 million.  Sure 

the working people in Saskatchewan will pay.  It doesn't matter 

much to us.  We get our salaries as members here.  We'll agree 

to it.  We like our brothers in Ottawa. 

 

So then what happens two years later?  Then comes the whole 

question of GRIP.  The western grain stabilization program had 

no contribution from the province.  But what do the members 

opposite say to their federal brothers?  They say sure, we'll take 

on another $157 million.  Sure we will.  We'll take on 40 to $60 

million for crop insurance.  We'll take on $157 million for 

GRIP.  We'll take on a hundred million dollars for the drought 

assistance.  Not only that, but we'll cuddle you and pat your 

backs and say what nice guys you are as you unload 400 to 

$500 million in social services and education expenses to the 

people of Saskatchewan. 

 

All of that in the period of time that the members opposite so 

often spoke about the crisis in Saskatchewan, about the crisis in 

agriculture in Saskatchewan -- a crisis that those of us who 

were not in the legislature certainly lived through and lived day 

by day as we suffered the income crises. 

 

And the working people of Saskatchewan, they suffered those 

income crises day after day, as you were giving away 

Saskatchewan's money, first to the federal government and then 

to your friends and then in absolutely wasteful exercises that 

Saskatchewan will never forgive -- in wasteful exercises 

building structures that will never fill with water, in engaging 

in economic development activities that resulted in absolutely 

nothing but a loss.  That has been the record of the members 

opposite. 



2808 Saskatchewan Hansard August 20, 1992 

Now let's come to spring of 1991.  With that kind of a record 

for management, the members opposite began the GRIP 

process.  They said okay, let's do it.  Well they started talking 

about it, and they started putting forth ideas.  Now in the last 

year they've been talking about how important a certain March 

15 deadline was to the integrity of farmers in Saskatchewan. 

 

But what did they do?  They brought forward proposals.  Then 

they went out and had political meetings, and then they began 

to make changes -- change after change after change because, 

as they went out on their first 60 meetings, farmers were angry.  

Farmers said, what kind of a crock is this?  Farmers were 

angry, so they made some changes.  Day by day, month by 

month, they made changes.  As I said earlier, they had made 94 

or 95 changes by the time I got to the meeting I went to. 

 

That was the record of the members opposite as they quickly 

constructed a farm support program that would suit their 

election schedule.  They believed they needed to have an 

election last spring.  So they constructed this thing hastily.  

They constructed it hastily.  They constructed it in a fashion 

that was undefined. 

 

And I challenge any member opposite to define what each of 

their GRIP contracts says because the member from Arm River 

will interpret his contract differently than the member from 

Thunder Creek who will interpret his contract differently than 

the member from Rosthern who will interpret his contract 

differently than the member from Kindersley who will interpret 

his contract differently from the member from Morse. 

 

That was the kind of confusion the members opposite created 

last year:  extended over a large period of time, a variety of 

changes, a variety of ways of describing it, nowhere defined in 

legislation, nowhere defined in regulation.  That was the 

contract the members opposite talked so much about.  And with 

respect to dates, following March 15, the changes just rolled 

right along the way they had rolled on from the beginning of 

the discussion process. 

 

There was no pride and no consistency and no discipline with 

respect to that process.  There was none at all.  It was a 

political exercise. 

 

Well, unfortunately the members opposite believed they 

couldn't win an election in spring, so all that haste had been in 

vain.  But not only was it in vain; it resulted in a serious 

circumstance later on as we begin to look at what did this 

contract say. 

 

If someone were asking me, what were my liabilities under this 

contract or what were my rights, no one could tell you.  It was 

impossible to define what the terms of that contract was, so that 

we took over.  The members opposite in their legislation did 

define something.  They defined that there should be a review 

process go on.  They defined that the review process should 

take place, and it should take place after the first year in the 

federal-provincial agreement. 

 

And they not only did that -- the members opposite.  In 

their legislation we're the only province that provided for a 

review committee.  And that review committee was put into 

place in July last year.  And that review committee began its 

work then after we took over in the fall after the election. 

 

In the mean time farmers had expressed their concern by the 

thousands across Saskatchewan saying, these programs are 

inadequate.  We are broke.  We cannot live on the amount of 

money provided for by the programs as the members opposite 

had agreed with their federal counterparts.  Not only were the 

farmers broke, the province was broke.  And the people of 

Saskatchewan said, we have had enough.  And they threw out 

those members who'd created that mess.  And they said, please 

take over this broken and battered ship. 

 

Well the fact is that we have taken over this broken and 

battered ship.  And we are determined to put order to it.  And 

we are determined to put order to it first by righting the 

financial difficulties that are here.  And I make no apologies for 

that. 

 

But the contention of the member opposite that somehow the 

committee that redesigned the farm program was given 

direction that they had certain financial limits within which 

they had to live is absolutely false.  It was not so.  It's our 

responsibility to put right the financial wrongs of the members 

opposite.  People elected us to do it. 

 

What the committee did was an accurate analysis describing 

the serious problems with the program designed by the 

members opposite.  The committee identified that the province 

and the farmers would see increasing premiums because of the 

way the program was designed.  They knew that there were 

costs that could be not borne in administration.  They said that 

the program gave all the wrong signals and they said, change it. 

 

And the government, taking the report of this committee 

established by the members opposite, said okay.  These are the 

observations of the farm organizations.  These are the 

observations of people who have farmed and experienced this 

program.  This is the response to the difficulty that's been 

created by a hastily constructed mess that was put together last 

spring by the members opposite.  And we first put the program 

together in the context of a budget for the whole province of 

Saskatchewan that creates difficulty for . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 

 

The Chair: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Could you, Mr. Chairman, ask the Minister 

of Agriculture if he'd please make a little sense in what he's 

saying. 

 

The Chair: -- The member's point of order is out of order.  

Order, order.  Order, order.  If all members will be patient, in 

about 120 seconds we'll be able to go for supper break and then 

come back and continue the debate this evening.  I'll ask all 

members to allow the minister to make his point, and there will 

be plenty of opportunity this evening for questions to be asked. 



August 20, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2809 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite talks 

about the questions that are asked.  The members opposite, day 

after day, have not only asked the same questions, they've 

made the same erroneous comments day after day after day. 

 

The member who asked the last question made the comment 

that says on orders from the Minister of Finance, the Minister 

of Agriculture designed this program.  Well that is so much in 

error the members opposite ought to be ashamed of saying 

those kinds of things in public.  The members opposite know 

that's not true.  The members opposite know that that 

committee went to work on their own, and the members 

opposite that say those kinds of things don't recognize the truth.  

The fact . . . that does not say that we are not willing to take the 

financial responsibility for the province.  But to put that kind of 

absence of truth on the record is absolutely ridiculous. 

 

The fact is that yes we did, and that's the point that I'm 

answering.  We as a government did take the financial matters 

of the province to heart, and we have made the tough decisions, 

and we know that people across the province in every walk of 

life -- including farmers and rural people, including urban 

people -- have been hurt by the mismanagement of members 

opposite and . . . 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  It being 5 o'clock, the Committee 

of the Whole stands recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 


