




















































Hansard: August 05, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1995 

 August 5, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

present the following petitions to the Assembly: 

 

To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to 

the Canadian economy; 

 

that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy 

for such disorders; 

 

that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low 

cost, conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent 

with the true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

that the government publicly asserts it remains committed 

to the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in 

patient disability. 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent 

from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed 

for any other medical treatment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have four such petitions, Mr. Speaker, to present to the 

House.  They are from around the province, various places -- 

Regina, Edenwold, Regina Beach, Milestone.  I present these to 

the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the petitions I have here today are 

also petitions with respect to chiropractic treatment in the 

province. 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full 

coverage and universal access to chiropractic treatment, 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent 

from any government proposal to discriminate against 

chiropractic patients by charging them fees not assessed 

for any other medical treatment. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are . . . I have 11 petitions here from various 

parts of the province -- Yorkton, Kennedy, Lanigan, Yorkton 

again, Margo, Saskatchewan; Coleville, The Battlefords, 

Wilkie, Maidstone, North Battleford -- quite a few from North 

Battleford here.  These are basically from all over the province, 

Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have several 

petitions numbering six or seven, I would say, and the prayer . . 

. I'll just read the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from all over the province, I 

would say.  I can see Ituna, Wishart, Esterhazy, Yorkton, 

Melville -- a lot of Melville, Yorkton -- Broadview, 

Broadacres, Summerberry, Grenfell.  And it goes on and on, 

and it pretty well covers the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two sets of 

petitions again today, Mr. Speaker.  I have GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) petitions, and I won't go through 

the entire preamble because we've heard it many times, but I 

will read out the points here: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to: 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year; 

 

 2.) start working with the federal government and farmers 

to design a program that will be a true "revenue 

insurance" program by the end of this calendar year, 

and 

 

 3.) make sure that this new insurance program is based on 

cost-of-production and return ratio instead of the risk 

area formula. 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

And I have petitioners here from Humboldt, Canwood, Prince 

Albert, Spruce Home, Henribourg, P.A. (Prince Albert), 

Paddockwood, all over northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also today also have petitions from the chiropractic 

people complaining to the government, and I'll only read the 

prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And here we have people from Regina, Pilot Butte -- mostly 

Regina people in these particular petitions today, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I too 

have some petitions to present to the Assembly.  And I have 

more than normal because of the flood of petitions coming in. 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will not, since my colleague read the prayer 

before, I will dispense with that, other than to note that many of 

these petitioners come from such diverse places in 

Saskatchewan as Melville, Yorkton, Langenburg, Norquay, 

Sturgis, many more from Yorkton, Langenburg.  And to show 

the concern that is really around, one even from Russell, 

Manitoba. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to read the 

following petitions and enter them today: 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in the 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That impaired vision is a highly prevalent disorder, costing 

millions of dollars and causing distress to thousands of 

Saskatchewan people; 

 

 That early detection of eye disease and related medical 

conditions by optometrists is a highly cost-effective, painless 

and effective part of our health care system; 

 That quality optometric care is vital to the working poor and 

that there is a direct correlation between workplace safety 

and good vision; 

 

 That the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

accessibility, comprehensiveness, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 That the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to optometric patients; 

 

 And that the government's proposed deinsurance of 

optometric care will clearly cost more both in dollars and 

patient harm, 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to deinsure optometry and 

that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against optometric 

patients by refusing them coverage under medicare equal to 

other patients. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

I have 44 pages of petitions today, and they come from all over 

the province.  I see Val Marie, Swift Current, Moose Jaw -- 

well, they're all over -- Wymark.  It's just from all over the 

province.  And I would enter these now. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to too 

provide to the Assembly some petitions.  It says here: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And I have here, Mr. Speaker, people from White City, Indian 

Head, around Regina, and other places around the province.  

And I want to submit them here for the Assembly today. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed pursuant to rule 11(7) and they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this 

year. 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage and universal 

access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I wanted to introduce 

to you, and through you to the members of the Assembly, my 

two sons: my oldest son Matthew, my younger son Travis.  

Matthew is seven and Travis is five.  They're here with us 

today to watch the proceedings, so I'm sure that all members 

will be very well behaved, including the House leaders. 

 

But I seriously want to welcome them here, and I want to ask 

all members to join with me in welcoming them to the House 

today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to other members 

of the Assembly, a group of seniors from the Sturgis READ 

Club.  READ stands for retired elderly active doers. 

 

The group, which is in the Speaker's gallery, is on an 

educational and fact-finding tour here in Regina.  I had the 

pleasure of joining them for lunch, and they've just finished a 

tour of the Legislative Building.  I invite all members to help 

me welcome these very special guests from Sturgis. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- In addition, Mr. Speaker, among the 

members from the Sturgis club is a very distinguished guest.  

Reverend Edwin Wright is the president of the Saskatchewan 

Seniors Association Inc. which is the largest seniors' 

organization in the province. 

 

Reverend Wright was elected president at the organization's 

annual meeting in Humboldt in June.  I invite all members to 

join with me in welcoming Reverend Wright and 

congratulating him on his election. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I also would like to 

welcome the READ Club to Regina and hope they have a good 

tour, and a progressive one.  And I'm going to be meeting with 

them after question period and I'm looking forward to the 

meeting.  I ask the members to welcome them again. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Many 

members in this House will have heard me speak in the past 

about the fact that I was born and raised in the Sturgis district.  

And our guests today from Sturgis are people that I have 

known all my life. 

 

Included in the group is my uncle, Hugh Mitchell and my Aunt 

Olga, as well as lifelong neighbours, Elmer and Lena Sjolie, as 

well as all the rest, who as I say I grew up with.  And I'm just 

terribly pleased that they're here today and 

that the Assembly has welcomed them as they have. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Langford: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To you and 

through you, I'd like to introduce the second vice-president 

from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool here sitting in the east 

gallery.  I'd like everybody to welcome you. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I also want to welcome 

Leroy Larsen.  But additionally, I want to introduce to you and 

through you to the other members of the Assembly here some 

people fairly important in my life, my wife and four children 

and a niece and a nephew.  They have come to join us here in 

the city for a few days. And I would ask the members opposite 

not to say anything my children may use against me in the 

future for the time that they are here.  My wife, Cheralyn; my 

daughters, Teresa, Stacey, and Nicole; my son, Lauren, who 

just turned 15 yesterday; my nephew, Jason, and my niece, 

Susanna from Winnipeg.  I ask you to welcome them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My first 

question is not to the Minister of Agriculture so he and his 

family can relax for the next few moments. 

 

But my question is to the Minister of Health.  Mr. Speaker, 

Madam Minister, over the past few weeks we've been asking 

you a number of questions, looking and searching for some 

concrete answers for rural Saskatchewan hospitals and we have 

yet to get anything other than fluff. 

 

People believed you when you said and you promised to 

increase funding to health care.  Now they know, instead you 

will be closing some rural hospitals and eliminating jobs.  

Would you table today, for everyone to see, the studies of the 

effects your decisions will have on small towns and villages, 

Madam Minister?  Or are you simply afraid for people to know 

the truth? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

the members opposite, while they were in government, had no 

long-term, strategic plan for the development and improvement 

of health care services in this province -- none whatsoever.  

And they had nine years to put one together and they didn't 

have the courage to do it. 

 

This government, however, Mr. Speaker, will be going out to 

rural communities where there are small rural hospitals, and to 

regional centres.  And we will be talking with the people of 

Saskatchewan to get their input and their ideas about how we 

can reform the health care system. 

 

We have some ideas that we will be presenting to 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

communities.  And we will be asking them to engage in the 

discussions with respect to their hospitals and other health care 

services, and how we can improve programming for health care 

services for Saskatchewan people. 

 

It's time, Mr. Speaker, for the people of Saskatchewan to look 

at reforming their health care system, not only to improve the 

quality of health care services but also with a view to cost 

efficiency in the health care system.  Because the members 

opposite, as a result of their mismanagement and 

incompetence, have drummed up a $15 billion deficit in this . . 

. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Toward the end of 

her remarks the minister was beginning to show a little bit of 

the arrogance that your government is becoming very, very 

popular for.  And I want to pursue that just a step further, 

Madam Minister. 

 

While you're busy anticipating the closure of many rural 

hospitals, you are also opening up some hospitals.  Tomorrow, 

on our initiative and on the initiative of the member from 

Kindersley while he was in that area helping to get the support 

for this hospital, in Eatonia, there will be a hospital opening 

tomorrow.  But now he has been told by the board, whose 

instructions were followed, by your officials when you said the 

member from Kindersley may not speak at that because we 

don't want it to get political. 

 

And then to be politically correct, Madam Minister, you are 

now . . . and you have asked your member from Biggar, the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly) from Biggar to speak at this opening of 

the Eatonia hospital.  How do you equate that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think that if there are MLAs who wish 

to speak at that opening, then by all means they should speak at 

the opening, Mr. Speaker.  I think that this . . . who speaks at 

openings with respect to hospitals is up to the people in the 

area and the boards of those communities to make those 

requests of people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that there are a number of facilities 

that are opening in the province, and there will be government 

representatives and government speakers at these openings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

am very glad now that you are able to change your mind.  The 

board is telling us that their officials on your . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I want to ask the 

government members, please not to interrupt, okay?  Let the 

member ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- The board was told by your officials on 

your instructions not to allow the member from Kindersley to 

speak.  That is what the board is saying; that's not what I am 

saying. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, over the last couple of weeks we have 

seen what your wellness model means to rural Saskatchewan -- 

simply put, devastation, devastation for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Madam Minister, the contract with the college of dental 

physicians . . . pardon me, dental surgeons must be renewed by 

August 31, 1992.  Now it's quite obvious that the people will 

once again be forced to accept a unilateral decision on your 

part about the dental plan.  Time is running out, Madam 

Minister; August 31 is approaching. 

 

Will you tell today what your plans are so that the people of 

rural Saskatchewan can be prepared? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member from 

Kindersley wants to speak at the opening, that's his business.  

It's up to the board to invite him, Mr. Speaker.  And these red 

herrings that they throw out are absolutely ridiculous and very 

petty, I might say. 

 

But on the other hand, with respect to the dental situation, the 

Government of Saskatchewan is reviewing the various options.  

Because what the members opposite did when they were in 

government is they removed dental services out of 330 

communities by eliminating over 400 dental workers in 

Saskatchewan -- over 400 dental workers. 

 

We are looking at ways within the fiscal situation -- which is 

horrendous in this province because they virtually bankrupt the 

province -- within the ambit of this fiscal situation, we are 

looking at ways in which we can bring services back to our 

schools in rural Saskatchewan.  And that research and 

development is taking place right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, a very simple question.  Are 

you going to reinstate the old dental program as you promised 

before the last election?  You went around the countryside 

complaining, as you were just two minutes ago, about what we 

did with the dental plan, that you were going to reinstate the 

old dental plan as it was.  Are you going to live up to your 

promise, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite did 

away with the old school-based children's dental plan and they 

fired some 400 dental workers as a result of a very poor 

decision, taking dental services out of rural Saskatchewan and 

making it very difficult for young children in rural 

Saskatchewan to even get the most basic dental services.  

That's what they did. 

 

And what we promised the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, was to take a look at reintroducing more school-based 

services.  The members opposite, when they say we said we 

were going to reinstitute the plan 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

exactly as it is, are misleading the public and they know it.  

Because that's not what we said and that's not what we wrote to 

the dental workers.  They are misleading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Perhaps we can get 

Madam Minister to dispense with the political rhetoric and 

simply answer a simple question.  Madam Minister, here it is.  

Is it true that your new dental plan includes de-insuring dental 

work for children? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the 

members opposite, the hypocrisy they engage in . . . where they 

virtually decimated the school-based children's dental plan and 

prevented many people in remote areas in rural Saskatchewan 

from accessing these services.  This is their hypocrisy.  Today 

they stand up here and talk about de-insuring. 

 

What we are going to look at, Mr. Speaker, is a way of getting 

fundamental, basic, preventive, services back to people in 

remote communities and rural Saskatchewan.  That's what this 

government is looking at, and I'm waiting to hear the 

recommendations from the task force that's taking a look at the 

issue. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you're skipping around the issue, but I will assume that if the 

plan does not include de-insuring dental work for children, will 

you prove it by tabling your working paper?  Because surely, 

Madam Minister, with August 31 approaching, your working 

paper is probably complete.  Will you table that so that the 

public can know so that they don't have to sit back wondering 

what is going to happen to the dental plan after they have 

recognized what you have done with chiropractic services, 

optometry, diabetes, and all these other kinds of things? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I wonder, Mr. Speaker, when the member 

opposite saw the light with respect to the children's dental plan 

and when he changed his mind and his group of MLAs' minds 

with respect to the children's dental plan and the validity of 

many of those preventive services that are provided to people 

throughout Saskatchewan.  I'm wondering when he changed his 

mind, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is people will not go without dental 

services until we have had . . . we've received a report with 

respect to the new direction we'll be taking in children's dental 

services.  Services will continue for the public in the mean time 

while this report is being prepared. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, being that your 

wellness program only works if people are well, it would 

follow that your school-based dental program will only 

work if children have no dental problems.  If your new 

school-based dental program consists of more than just handing 

out tooth-brushes in schools, then tell us.  Because obviously a 

tooth-brush is not going to make a toothache go away. 

 

Will parents, Madam Minister, will parents have to pick up the 

costs for taking their children to dentists?  Will you tell us that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, right now rural 

Saskatchewan parents are picking up the cost of travelling to 

the cities and staying in the cities, meals and hotel rooms with 

respect to getting dental services for their children because you 

virtually decimated the school-based children's dental plan -- 

well you did -- with respect to the school-based aspect.  And 

you made services in rural Saskatchewan -- and fired some 400 

dental workers -- you made services virtually inaccessible. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is that's what they 

did when they were in government.  We are looking at 

developing a plan that will bring fundamental, preventive 

services back to rural Saskatchewan children in their schools 

and hopefully . . .  And it isn't a question of simply 

tooth-brushes.  The members opposite are simply silly in their 

question . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you know full well that there are many more qualified dentists 

in Saskatchewan now than there have ever been.  And these 

dental services are available to all people in rural 

Saskatchewan.  That is a bunch of huff that you were just 

disposing of there, Madam Minister. 

 

Now seeing that you will not table any information today, will 

you give us a date when you will be announcing this new, 

super -- so-called super -- dental program of yours?  And will 

you, Madam Minister, commit today that you will allow for 

appropriate consultation process to take place before this is 

imposed on the people of Saskatchewan?  Or will the 

opposition, or will the opposition have to release it, as we did 

with the wellness model? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite first say: produce 

your document; what are you going to do; show it to us.  And 

now they're saying, will you allow appropriate consultation?  

Well, Mr. Speaker, they can't have it both ways.  The fact of 

the matter is, is the government is consulting.  And when we 

have undergone that consultation, we will make the new 

direction available for the public to provide more input and 

information with respect to. 

 

There will be consultation, Mr. Speaker.  There is no question 

about it.  And consultation is taking place now.  The members 

opposite, however, they want to have it both ways.  First they 

demand to know what we're doing, 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

and then they say they want consultation.  And they're totally 

inconsistent in their approach.  First they destroy the childrens' 

dental plan, and then they try to defend it.  I wish they would 

tell us where they were coming from, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Okay, Madam Minister, you want to talk 

about consultation, let's talk about consultation.  You can talk 

about all these meetings and all of these consultations, but let 

me tell you, Madam Minister, that I have met with the 

chiropractors, I have met with the optometrists, I have met with 

dentists, and do you know what they're telling me?  They are 

telling me that you did not consult, you did not consult with 

them about anything until it was a done deal, Madam Minister.  

And your hasty decisions are reaping their rewards now in 

those fields. 

 

The people, Madam Minister, are getting used to that kind of 

treatment from the NDP -- unilateral decisions made with no 

consultations.  Now, Madam Minister, will you give the 

dentists of Saskatchewan your word today?  Before their 

contract runs out, will you promise to consult with them before 

making yet another unilateral medicare decision and imposing 

it on the people?  Will you give them your word? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, this is another example of 

Tory misleading the public, of Tories misleading the public.  

The fact of the matter is, is on the committee that's taking a 

look at it, there is representation from dentists.  But this is the 

way they operate. 

 

Now, with respect to consultation, I would like to ask the 

member opposite how much consultation he had with the 

dental therapists and the dental workers -- the some 400 across 

this province -- before they fired them.  And how much dental 

therapists did you . . . how much consultation did you have 

with the rural communities in Saskatchewan before you wiped 

out the school-based childrens' dental plan?  How much 

consultation? 

 

What I have here is a document that was tabled in this House, 

as a matter of fact, that lists many, many people with whom 

we've consulted on numerous issues.  This government is not 

wanting in consultation.  It's not wanting in consultation, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The consultation is adequate as far as this government is 

concerned, and we will continue to consult with the public in 

the hope that our decisions will reflect their concerns. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  From Madam 

Minister's remarks, there will be some people in Saskatchewan 

that are happy that she has now committed the government to 

restoring fully the old dental school program.  Those were your 

remarks, Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I've spoken to many individuals about 

your government's decisions regarding medicare 

in Saskatchewan and there's one consensus that is coming 

through clearer and clearer.  Your wellness plans means: get 

well, stay well, or farewell.  That is the essence in the 

summation of your wellness model. 

 

And many people are hurting from your terrible decisions, 

Madam Minister.  One particular gentleman has an aunt who 

lives close to Regina -- in a town here -- and she received a 

document, which I have with me, she received a document 

entitled: resident income test form.  And she got that from your 

government. 

 

Could you explain, Madam Minister, exactly what the purpose 

of this form is -- and I have it right here -- and why seniors all 

over Saskatchewan are receiving this form? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I think what the . . . Mr. Speaker, first of 

all, with respect to farewell, with respect to farewell -- that's 

what the people said to the Tories last October. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the document that the 

member opposite is talking about, I would ask him to table it.  

We'll take a look at it and we will tell him what it is about.  So 

I ask him to table it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Mr. Speaker, I will be only too happy to 

table the form that her department has sent out if the minister is 

not aware of what the form is. 

 

Madam Minister, then maybe the next questions are also not 

going to be answered by you, but I'm going to ask the question 

anyway.  Is it your intention to change universality in senior 

facilities?  If not, why is it necessary to test the income of 

seniors and why are some seniors being forced to pay $200 

more per month than other seniors? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've asked the member to bring the form 

over.  We'll take a look at it and then I'll provide him with the 

information that he requires. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is we have provided a safety net, for 

example, with respect to the drug plan that allows people -- 

seniors and others who cannot afford their drugs -- to get 

special protection and special compensation.  There are other 

programs in the government that allow for low income seniors 

and low income people to get special consideration by the 

government in tough economic times.  And so I wouldn't be 

surprised that there will be a mechanism by which the 

department determines whether or not someone needs this extra 

protection. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And to the Minister 

of Health once more: Madam Minister, the senior I'm talking 

about has seen her monthly residence charge jump from $726 a 

month to $937 a month.  She's looking at an increase of $211 

per month, which means she has only a little over $300 a 

month to pay for her 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

prescription drugs, which you have increased; your telephone 

service, which you have increased.  She has less money left to 

pay for her clothing, for her presents for her grandchildren, and 

so on.  She cannot afford to pay her residence charge each 

month without going in the hole by about $200 a month. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, to make matters worse, your 

government has cancelled the seniors' heritage fund.  What do 

you tell these seniors, Madam Minister?  What do you tell 

these seniors?  What do you tell these seniors?  That because 

they gross over $1,500 a month . . . or 15,000 a year -- which is 

below the poverty line according to your figures -- do you tell 

them that you don't care if they can't pay their bills each month 

because of your harmful decisions that we've been talking 

about this afternoon? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I wonder what the member 

opposite tells seniors -- that they went from $140 million 

surplus in this province to a $15 billion debt.  I wonder what he 

tells the seniors about his responsibility for the fact that now 

we have to engage in budgetary reductions with respect to 

programs that are available. 

 

The fact that this government is trying to get a handle on the 

outrageous debt legacy they've been left with . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There wasn't any interruption at 

all when the member asked his question.  I'd ask the members 

please not to interrupt when a minister is trying to answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wonder what 

the members opposite say to seniors who built this province to 

what it was, to see their heritage for their grandchildren 

destroyed by those members opposite.  I wonder what they say 

to seniors in that kind of a situation. 

 

It is true that there are budgetary reductions in health programs 

and in other programs throughout this province to pay for the 

huge debt legacy that you have left us, but I say to the hon. 

member, he has an obligation to explain his actions to the 

seniors. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was wondering, 

Madam Minister, how long it would take you to get into the 

political rhetoric.  When you don't have an answer, the deficit 

becomes everything. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I just asked the members opposite to 

not interrupt when the minister is speaking.  I'm asking the 

government members to not interrupt when the member is 

trying to ask his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  According to you, 

Madam Minister, the end justifies any kind of means to get 

there and you're doing it on the backs of the seniors. 

 

I'll tell you what we did when we were in government.  We 

took your six-year moratorium off of nursing homes. 

We continued to build nursing homes for seniors.  That's what 

we did while you were busy buying potash mines -- dry holes 

in the ground, creating no new jobs.  That's what we did, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the senior that I'm talking about is one of 

the lucky ones because she has a family to help her.  Many 

people do not.  Many seniors do not have a family to rely on.  

What about those seniors who gross between $900 a month and 

a thousand dollars a month?  According to your department, 

they're paying 751 and $801 a month. 

 

How do you, Madam Minister -- my question, Mr. Speaker, to 

Madam Minister, if I can just be heard over some of the other 

members -- how do you expect these seniors to be able to 

survive on less than $200 a month, Madam Minister?  What are 

you going to do to help them? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the government has set up 

safety nets for people who are on low income and have 

difficulty meeting their expenses.  Anyone who is in that 

situation can contact the government and their situation will be 

reviewed. 

 

The fact of the matter is, the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker . 

. . and I have a seniors' commentary here, a newsprint that talks 

about the budget and shows the need for budgetary restraint of 

the nature that this government has put forward during the 

budget.  This is a seniors' commentary and what they say is on 

the whole those seniors, particularly those on low incomes, 

didn't fare too badly. 

 

They go on to talk about the increase in grants to home care 

and how that is a bright side.  The government increased 

funding for home care by $6 million, a hike of almost 20 per 

cent, a hike of almost 20 per cent, Mr. Speaker.  The seniors 

know . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before I ask the member to . . . 

I think all members know that I do have a timer up here.  And 

in this particular case again the member took more time than 

the minister took in answering the question.  But I keep very 

strict time of the members asking questions and the minister 

giving them.  There's time for one more question and I'll 

recognize the member from Rosthern. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I promise this 

is my last question for the afternoon.  Madam Minister, it 

seems the word "closure" has become one of the NDP's 

favourite words.  Closure on this motion, closure on that 

motion, closure of rural hospitals, closure of rural schools, and 

now closure of senior facilities. 

 

You who belong to a party who claim to be the only people 

who care about children are now backtracking on your promise 

to reinstore the old dental plan.  Your government, the NDP, 

who have claimed for quite some time that you are the only 

ones capable of caring for our seniors, are scrapping the 

seniors' heritage fund, increasing taxes to seniors, increasing 

prescription drugs for seniors, and now you're making seniors 

dig deeper 



2002 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

and deeper into their pockets just to pay for their well-being.  

How do you account for that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Another example, Mr. Speaker, of the 

Tories misleading the public.  What this seniors' commentary 

says -- which is the accuracy and the truth -- is that the heritage 

grant program was not eliminated.  Did we not just hear him 

say it was eliminated?  Which many seniors thought might 

happen.  Instead, the eligibility ceiling was reduced. 

 

The seniors go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that government found 

itself caught between the devil and the deep blue sea -- the 

devils over there.  But without stern economic measures at this 

time, the situation would deteriorate even further.  The seniors 

of this province have more common sense and more 

commitment to Saskatchewan than the members opposite, who 

constantly act like little schoolboys. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 

would like to ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion: 

 

 That the House recommend the appointment of Derril 

McLeod as Information and Privacy Commissioner pursuant 

to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and Protection 

of Privacy Act. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

(1445) 

MOTIONS 

 

Appointment of Information and Privacy Commissioner 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I thank the legislature for giving me 

leave, Mr. Speaker.  I move, seconded by the Minister of Social 

Services: 

 

 That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 

Lieutenant Governor recommending that Derril McLeod, 

Q.C. of the city of Regina in the province of Saskatchewan 

be appointed Information and Privacy Commissioner 

pursuant to section 38 of The Freedom of Information and 

Protection of Privacy Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I just 

want to make a couple of comments before we support the 

government with the motion.  First of all I would like to add 

that I was pleased to be part of a government that first brought 

forward the freedom of information Act to the Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We all are aware of the fact that it is no secret that politics have 

changed over the years and especially here in Saskatchewan, 

politics has become a subject that is talked about as often as the 

weather.  I think it is right, Mr. Speaker, that people should be 

able to obtain details 

about their tax dollars, how they are being spent, have the 

ability to obtain information about government economic 

activities and so on.  The freedom of information Act, used in 

its intended form, provides that information for the public. 

 

I'm also pleased that the former government's freedom of 

information Act provided for a privacy commissioner to help 

implement and oversee the Act.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, if 

allowed to perform his duties properly, Mr. McLeod will be 

able to offer the public of Saskatchewan a service that they 

have never previously had access to. 

 

We hope that this is a sincere effort to protect people's privacy 

and provide information to the people of the province, and that 

Mr. McLeod will not have his efforts hindered by a 

government that seems to be interested in putting limitations on 

freedoms of individuals. 

 

I sincerely hope that the powers given to the new Privacy 

Commissioner by the NDP government will indeed have a 

tremendous benefit to the people of Saskatchewan so that this 

individual can do the best job ever.  Thank you. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 86 -- An Act 

for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of Money for the 

Public Service for the Fiscal Year ending March 31, 1993 be 

now read a second and third time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker.  I am pleased that we finally have an opportunity to 

bring this matter to a resolve and a conclusion because, as 

members of this legislature well know, the importance of the 

interim supply Bill in providing timely payments to third 

parties, municipalities, to non-government organizations, to 

people on Saskatchewan assistance, is dependent on the 

passage of an interim supply Bill. 

 

That's one of the reasons why, as I rise to speak, Mr. Speaker, I 

never cease to be surprised and somewhat concerned that the 

members opposite would prolong a debate on something like 

an interim supply Bill which has a tradition in this House over 

many, many years of taking no more than 15 or 20 minutes to 

pass. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Give me a break. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now the member from Thunder 

Creek looks and he says, give me a break.  Well I will try to do 

that as I go through my remarks, Mr. Speaker, and clarify some 

of the misleading things that the members opposite have been 

saying in this debate. 
 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, there is no denying the fact that in 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2003 

the last couple of years, interim supply debates have taken a 

little longer than the usual 15 to 20 minutes.  But, Mr. Speaker, 

that does not change the circumstances whatsoever.  The fact is 

that the members opposite, although they rose in this House 

and spoke at length about not being able to ask questions, were 

not being totally factual in what they were saying because, Mr. 

Speaker, this is the third interim supply Bill that has been 

brought before this legislature in this session. 

 

The first one, the members opposite had five days in which 

they asked questions in interim supply.  The second interim 

supply Bill, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite took two or a 

little in excess of two days to ask questions.  Mr. Speaker, in 

this interim supply Bill, all of last Thursday into the evening, 

the members opposite rose to ask questions.  So for them to 

make the allegations that they did not have an opportunity to 

ask those questions, Mr. Speaker, is just not the facts.  I want to 

make that clear into the record. 

 

The other thing I want to clarify, Mr. Speaker, for the record 

and for the public, is what an interim supply Bill is all about.  

The members opposite fully realize that all that an interim 

supply Bill does is provides one-twelfth of the appropriation 

which the whole budget requests.  The reason for that is so that 

the legislature can approve that one-twelfth expenditure, Mr. 

Speaker, and that the government does not do it arbitrarily.  It's 

a very important accountability measure. 

 

Now having asked the questions on the first interim supply 

Bill, on the very same budget, which has not changed because 

it has not yet been voted on, Mr. Speaker, there are not many 

new questions that the members opposite could possibly need 

to ask.  So for the members to say that they have not been able 

to get questions in, Mr. Speaker, is just not correct. 

 

They also very well know, and so does the public know, that all 

of the expenditures of interim supply and all the proposed 

expenditures of the government will be brought into this House 

when the Estimates of all of the departments are considered by 

this Assembly.  And there, at that point, Mr. Speaker, all of the 

appropriate questions can be asked by the members and all the 

answers will be provided. 

 

The record on interim supply and what cannot be asked, and 

what cannot be asked, is very clear.  I bring to your attention, 

Mr. Speaker, a ruling that was made.  And this is one of several 

rulings made in 1990 by the former Speaker, your predecessor, 

who happened to be a Speaker during the time of the former 

administration. 

 

And here is what that Speaker ruled, Mr. Speaker.  He said on 

May 10, 1990, that: 

 

 . . . members must realize that this is not an appropriate place 

to get into detailed questions on the operation of specific 

departments' programs. 

 

And then he went on to say: 

 

 And the purpose of interim supply is to grant money for the 

operation of the government 

 departments and programs on an interim basis while 

reserving to the Legislative Assembly the right to complete 

the detailed review of Estimates at a later time.  For this 

reason members must reserve their detailed questions on 

Estimates and government financial policy for the regular 

review of the main Estimates. 

 

Now how can anything be more clear, Mr. Speaker?  That is 

the way the ruling of the House has been and continues to be 

on these matters.  So what do I conclude and what can the 

public conclude from what the members opposite have been 

doing in the last three days?  The only thing that we can 

conclude, that they are still doing what they have now been 

doing for 58 days in this Legislative Assembly -- wasting time. 

 

I don't understand why.  The members, on the one hand, argue 

that they want to ask questions.  On the other hand the 

members opposite won't allow the Estimates for the various 

departments that have come to this Legislative Assembly so 

that they then are provided with an opportunity to ask those 

questions. 

 

The only conclusion therefore, Mr. Speaker, that the members 

are not interested in having the work of the people of 

Saskatchewan done in this legislature which they elected every 

member of this House to do.  I find that unacceptable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

When the motion was before the House the other day, Mr. 

Speaker, every one of the 10 members in the opposition and 

even the Liberal member had an opportunity to speak.  They 

say they're being muzzled.  Well they're not being muzzled, 

Mr. Speaker.  Because even though they were given an 

opportunity to speak, only three of them spoke.  All the rest of 

them did not avail themselves of that opportunity to speak in 

this debate. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I've said, I'm not going to take too long 

but I want to clarify one or two other things.  I want to make 

this one comment and I don't want to do it in a controversial, 

adversarial kind of way.  But I want to make it, Mr. Speaker, 

because for all the years that I have been a member of this 

Assembly I have felt very strongly about this matter.  And so 

I'm going to make this one brief statement, and that is in 

reference to a comment made by the member from Arm River 

yesterday with regard to public servants. 

 

Well I want to say for the record, Mr. Speaker, that the public 

servants of this province are as good and maybe even better 

than most public servants across all of Canada.  And we should 

be proud of them because of the work that they do.  And I think 

that the time has passed . . . the 1980s under the former 

administration should be put aside when it was fair game, it 

seemed, for politicians, both Conservative and some Liberal -- 

and I'm not including the member who sits in this House in that 

-- to attack public servants who are unable to defend 

themselves out in the public and in here, simply for cheap 

political gain. 

 

They work for a living just like fishermen do and like farmers 

do and like labourers do and construction workers do.  And for 

the member for Arm River to stand in 



2004 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

this House and say what he said about public servants 

yesterday -- for which he was then told that he could not sit in 

the House for the rest of the day because he was called by 

name -- is unacceptable.  And I want to say that I for one do 

not want to associate myself with those comments, and neither 

do my colleagues on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, people are 

asking, what is going on in this legislature?  And they are also 

saying that they are extremely upset by the fact that the 

opposition, the official opposition, is not prepared to do the 

work that they were elected to do in this Assembly. 

 

There has been nothing but total obstructionism for the 58 days 

that this Assembly has been sitting. 

 

And when the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, presented itself the 

other day to deal with Bills . . . I think it was on Thursday 

evening.  Or was it Monday evening?  This Assembly dealt 

with six Bills.  Six Bills came to this Assembly and it took all 

evening to get those Bills through even though members 

opposite did not rise to speak on any one of them. 

 

They did not rise to speak on any one of them.  What did they 

do?  Every time a Bill came up for second reading, Mr. 

Speaker, the Conservative members of this Assembly rang the 

bells for 30 minutes, which is the time limit allowed for the 

ringing of bells, without ever speaking to the Bill, in order to 

use up the time of the House so that other business could not be 

brought to this Assembly. 

 

I don't think, Mr. Speaker, that there needs to be any more 

proof of the fact that the issue here is not interim supply in the 

minds of the members opposite; the issue here is not with 

responsible government; the issue here isn't to get on with the 

work of this Assembly and deal with the legislation and deal 

with the Estimates.  The issue simply here is that the members 

of the official opposition are not doing their homework and 

preparing themselves so that we can get on with the work of 

the people's business which is what they expect us to do here. 

 

And the other reason, Mr. Speaker, is that for some strange 

reason, and I pleaded with them here in a positive way on 

another occasion, they refuse to accept the fact that the public 

of Saskatchewan on October 21 of 1991 made a very important 

decision.  And some of us thought the decision was the right 

one.  The people obviously did, because they're always right.  

And some decided it was not the right one.  But that's 

irrelevant, because the decision of the electorate is always the 

right one. 

 

(1500) 

 

And so the time has come for the members in opposition to put 

the memories of that election behind them and begin to make a 

contribution to this legislature in a positive way.  Let's get on 

with the business of this House because that's what we're here 

for. 

 

Now the argument was made by one of the members opposite 

-- I think it was the member from Kindersley -- 

who said that if the government would provide them . . . Or 

was it maybe the member from Moosomin?  Does it really 

matter?  It's made on behalf of the opposition.  But they said 

that if the government provided an idea of what the work 

would be for any particular day, they'd be quite prepared to get 

on with it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, for the last several weeks that's exactly 

what's been happening.  The House Leader for the government 

side has indicated to the members opposite what a certain 

amount of work agenda would be done in any particular day, 

and the members of the opposition agreed.  And then as the day 

progressed they never got to that work, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there is no sense in thinking that you can deal with those 

members opposite on that kind of a basis. 

 

The bottom line to all of this is this: one, the people of 

Saskatchewan elected us here to do their work for them.  They 

did not elect us here to waste the time of this Assembly.  Two, 

an interim supply Bill in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is not 

unusual.  It is only providing one-twelfth of the amount of the 

full budget for one month of expenditures.  And if the next 

month there needs to be an interim supply Bill, the Minister of 

Finance will have to come in here once again and introduce an 

interim supply Bill. 

 

And when that's all over, there is still the opportunity for 

considering the Estimates of the Department of Finance and 

every other department in detail -- as should be the case 

because the government should be accountable -- at which time 

the members can get the information that they rightfully should 

have and which the public of Saskatchewan should rightfully 

have. 

 

So really, Mr. Speaker, what we have been doing here since 

last Thursday is not what I would have liked us to be doing.  

We should have been on to other business several days ago if it 

wasn't the desire of the Conservative members opposite to 

filibuster, to waste time, and to delay on one issue which is in 

their mind, the issue that they want to delay on, and that is the 

GRIP legislation. 

 

Well even that, Mr. Speaker, is no reason to delay the work of 

the interim supply which is now one day late.  And therefore 

some of the people who are going to get their payments, which 

they require and which they need and which the government is 

obligated to provide to them by law, are going to get them late.  

That's hardly a justification, Mr. Speaker, whatever the motives 

of the opposition are, to do that kind of a delaying tactic and 

causing people to suffer because of what they're doing. 

 

I'm glad that this debate is over.  And when another interim 

supply that is necessary comes to the House in this session or 

some other session, the Minister of Finance will rise and 

provide answers once again within the limits of the debate that 

are provided under the rules, just as has been the case on 

previous interim supply Bills this year including this one which 

we're considering now. 

 

I'm glad this debate is over, Mr. Speaker, and we can get on 

with the business of the House, because I for one do not 

support the position taken by some members of this 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2005 

House that it's appropriate to waste the time and the taxpayers' 

money for doing nothing while there is an agenda in the 

legislature to be accomplished. 

 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support second 

and third reading of this Bill. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 3:05 p.m. until 3:35 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Wiens Serby 

Tchorzewski Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Roy 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Atkinson Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Stanger 

Penner Harper 

Hagel Kluz 

Lautermilch Carlson 

Calvert Langford 

Murray Jess 

Hamilton  

-- 35 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock 

-- 10 

The Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

MOTION FOR CLOSURE 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I guess I should 

repeat the motion.  Before the order of the day is called for 

resuming the adjourned debate on item 12, a motion to proceed 

with the vote of first reading of a Bill respecting amendments 

to Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation, I move: 

 

 That debate on the motion to proceed with the vote on first 

reading of a Bill respecting amendments to Certain Farm 

Income Insurance Legislation be not further adjourned. 

 

The division bells rang from 3:39 p.m. until 3:49 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Wiens Serby 

Tchorzewski Sonntag 

Teichrob Flavel 

Shillington Roy 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Carson Crofford 

MacKinnon Stanger 

Penner Harper 

Hagel Kluz 

Lautermilch Carlson 

Calvert Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

-- 34 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock 

-- 10 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Vote to be Taken on First Reading of Bill 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wiens. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- As I said on Friday last week and beginning 

the discussion, Mr. Speaker, I talked about the historical day 

that it was for the people of the province of Saskatchewan and 

this Assembly.  I want to point out a number of things that I 

think are historical.  We've had, I believe, four closures in the 

last month -- that's historical, I believe, in every sense of the 

word -- and three in the last day.  I think that is historical.  I 

want to point out a number of things today that I think are of 

interest, and I want to point them out in a sense of why I 

believe the government is acting in this overpowering way. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture sent a letter out to every producer 

-- and I got one in the mail as well as everyone else -- dated 

July 21.  And in that letter -- I believe it was in reaction to the 

letter that the Minister of Agriculture for Canada sent out -- and 

in that he makes a statement like this: 

 

 The province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, has 

taken on a dramatically increased role in providing income 

support to farmers. 

 

In my belief, Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely false.  In every 

budget, in every budget line, in every budget line across the 

Department of Agriculture, there is a reduction, Mr. Minister.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what . . . This minister says it is 

otherwise.  And what . . . At the bottom of this, one person had 

the courage to send it back, so far.  Two people from Marcelin, 

Saskatchewan, said this: 



2006 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

Maybe you should have kept the old GRIP format and we 

wouldn't need to go begging to the federal government.  But 

because you're so cheap or too cheap to pay up doesn't mean 

farmers should do your dirty work and write to the federal 

government.  Do your job. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what they wrote to the Minister of 

Agriculture as a result of that.  And that is what I believe the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, along with the 

opposition, believe.  That is a fact.  Do your job, and then you 

won't have to go begging to everybody else to have the farmers 

write in, if you did your job in the first place. 

 

The second . . . I just want to quote, Mr. Speaker, in today's 

paper, the Leader-Post said a number of things I think that are 

significant.  The newspaper article says that there are a number 

of reasons why GRIP is on the list of things that we in the 

province of Saskatchewan believe should be discussed. 

 

The first reason is this: 

 

 GRIP was not only just another PC government program -- it 

was one of the cornerstones in their re-election platform. 

 

Yes sir, Mr. Speaker.  And, Mr. Speaker, what did they lose?  

Mr. Speaker, every farmer in the province of Saskatchewan is 

going to have a broken contract later this day, Mr. Speaker -- 

later this day. 

 

 The second and nearly as obvious reason for the Tories 

opposing changes to GRIP is the abysmal way the NDP 

government has attempted to carry out those changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have attempted . . . and the press have 

realized, and the people across this province have realized that 

the abysmal attempts of the government opposite, and I believe 

that minister, are at the root of all of this. 

 

 Just how wrong the NDP government has been in attempting 

to retroactively change the rules of the old program via the 

new GRIP bill -- the reasons behind the 18-day bell-ringing 

walkout and the source of much of the problems this session 

-- is something the NDP still doesn't fully appreciate. 

 

They don't understand.  Closure.  Unilateral changes to rules.  

It's not been done in the history of this province where 

unilaterally changing rules to drive an opposing view into 

oblivion. 

 

 An unyielding, ham-handed government clearly broke 

contracts with farmers by not properly notifying them of 

changes to the program by the March 15 deadline. 

 

And it goes on, Mr. Speaker.  But I'm limited.  I can read the 

whole thing, but I'm limited, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Speaker, by 

you opposite who told me that I have 20 minutes to finish this 

discussion.  You told me that I have 

20 minutes to talk about it and that's it.  We'll throttle the 

opposition by that. 

 

I want to tell you why I believe that this government is doing 

this.  The first reason I believe the government is doing this in 

a Bill is because they're afraid to go to court.  They're afraid to 

stand in the court room and say, we didn't follow the law.  

That's what they're afraid of.  That's what this whole 

government -- that's the executive branch of government -- is 

afraid of. 

 

The second thing they're afraid of, of having the trial jury 

decide that they are guilty by their own admission.  The 

admission as evidence as presented in a court of law in 

Melville said that the Minister of Agriculture would provide to 

the court a letter, a statement of fact with the legislation saying 

that he had deemed to have sent out a letter prior to March 15. 

 

That's the second reason why this government doesn't want to 

go to court.  That's why they're putting it in this Assembly, so 

that they can have the freedom of expression in this Assembly 

and it cannot be held against them.  They want to have this 

Assembly change evidence in a court of law. 

 

The third reason, Mr. Speaker, they don't want to go to court 

and do this in a normal fashion is because they're afraid to 

testify under oath whether they knew about the time line.  I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, that is clearly why the Minister of 

Agriculture and the minister responsible for Crop Insurance 

don't want to be involved in a court case.  They will have to say 

that they knew.  They will have to say that they knew in this 

Assembly by identifying in a court of law the Bill before this 

Assembly today.  They will have to identify that they were not 

correct. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what they're going to have to testify 

on when they're asked or subpoenaed to the court.  And they're 

afraid of that, Mr. Speaker.  So they're going to have this 

Assembly change evidence before a court of law. 

 

(1600) 

 

The fourth reason is they don't specifically want this minister to 

have to appear in court.  That is the reason.  Because he will 

have to stand there and say, I knew, or he'll have to say, I didn't 

know.  And one of them is the truth and the other one is not.  

And that is what he's going to have to say.  And as I made my 

case on Friday, this minister will either tell the truth or perjure 

himself.  That is the truth of the matter, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fifth reason why this government doesn't want to go to 

court is because every one of those people in Crop Insurance 

who were fired do not have to toe the line today in relation to 

testifying before a court of law what the truth really is.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is also what they're afraid of.  That is what 

they're afraid of. 

 

Item number six: this government is afraid of going to court 

because they don't want to have the GRIP committee testify 

that this minister stood there and told them, somehow we'll get 

around it -- referring to the March 15 deadline.  Somehow, Mr. 

Speaker, we will get 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2007 

around it.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the sixth reason. 

 

The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is they have broken the rules of 

the agreement itself.  Mr. Speaker, in the agreement is a rule 

that says that there must be a committee established to have the 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan come to them, to this 

committee, to see whether their rights have been forfeitured.  

That is what the agreement says. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this Minister of Agriculture has 

not done, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, he is in breach of the 

very contract itself.  He has not given an opportunity for 

farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to appeal the decision 

on changes of GRIP to this committee, which would be their 

legal right.  And that agreement has been broken.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly the reason why we think this Bill before 

the Assembly, that is going to be presented later today, is 

wrong.  It's wrong because of those items, as I lay them out 

before you here today. 

 

There are significant, I believe, issues of difference in 

philosophy in what the government believes for GRIP '91 and 

what we believe for GRIP '92.  However I want to point out to 

this Assembly that our objection, our total objection in all of 

this, has been that this government mishandled, misused, and, 

Mr. Speaker, they are about to abuse, the justice system in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I believe that as sure as I stand here, Mr. Speaker, that that is 

the reason why they're putting this Bill forward.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, as long as I have the right to speak, which is being 

eroded every day in this Assembly, I will continue to talk to 

this executive branch of government about their loose use of 

the truth and their misuse of the opportunity to speak in this 

Assembly, and the privilege that the individual who speaks in 

this Assembly has, and that it cannot be used in a court of law. 

 

This minister is going to say in this Assembly, I can assure 

you, ladies and gentlemen, that he is going to tell this 

Assembly, that he is not in breach of the law.  But he will not, 

he will not allow the court to determine that.  He will want to 

determine that himself, because the 12 members of this cabinet 

think they're the jury, and the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan will decide that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is going to be opportunity for me to discuss 

this in second reading, which is going to follow shortly.  And 

therefore, Mr. Speaker, I am going to conclude my remarks by 

saying this. Never in my life did I expect to have people 

respond in a fashion on an issue as pointed as this one is.  

Because this one is, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, an illegal 

process in an illegal action done by this Legislative Assembly 

in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have said my piece and I rest my case. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today as 

the representative of the largest urban constituency in 

Saskatchewan, Saskatoon Greystone, to enter the debate on the 

motion to introduce one of the most important 

agricultural Bills in the history of our province.  The member 

from Morse has eloquently outlined many of his concerns, and 

I have many concerns of my own, but from a different 

perspective. 

 

This Bill is not just a farm Bill nor is it a Bill that will simply 

impact on rural Saskatchewan.  The Bill presently under 

suspension is one which will influence the agricultural future, 

the economic future, the social future, and indeed I believe the 

political future of this province. 

 

Over the past year two political parties have gone toe-to-toe in 

the political arena over who knows best for farmers.  Never in 

the memory of Saskatchewan people has there been an issue 

which has created so much acrimony and disrespect within this 

legislature. 

 

As someone who was elected on a promise to put the interests 

of people ahead of partisanship, I am deeply disturbed by the 

apparent lack of willingness to put politics aside in the interest 

of solving the problems which GRIP was developed to address. 

 

This Assembly is faced with a decision, a decision about 

whether the proposed GRIP legislation should be introduced 

for discussion, while those of us in opposition know that there 

will be no discussion and no room for compromise.  The recent 

actions of the NDP have given evidence that no matter what 

this Bill contains, good or bad, it shall become law. 

 

And we know that in spite of all of the tools an opposition can 

employ to delay, a lopsided majority government will 

inevitably rule.  This new government has proven to be more 

interested in power and control than in showing leadership and 

commitment to solving a very serious problem. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I am saddened that the debate in this 

Assembly will not be, nor has it been until now, about the 

merits or deficiencies of the gross revenue insurance program 

or the changes proposed thereto. 

 

I am saddened that the debate will be about the right of the 

government to refuse to negotiate, to refuse to debate with an 

open mind, to refuse to allow criticism of its legislation 

because it has already decided the outcome before the process 

even began. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, when we are considering in this debate 

whether the suspension of the GRIP Bill should be continued 

or lifted, thus allowing it to pass and become retroactive law 

regardless of consequences, we must indeed consider the 

process through which this Bill came about. 

 

It is obvious that the process that the Saskatchewan 

government implemented to bring about changes to GRIP was 

done in great haste and resulted in a program that left many 

Saskatchewan farm families in a desperate situation.  Most 

importantly, the original program was not the result of broad 

consultation with the farming community across our province.  

With a reduced level of support under GRIP '92, the lower 

coverage will result in many farmers not even being able to 

cover operating costs.  For farmers facing an average or 

below-average 



2008 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

crop this year, the difference between GRIP '91 and GRIP '92 

will mean failure to realize a net income. 

 

In assessing the changes made to GRIP, Mr. Speaker, it is 

apparent that everyone in the Saskatchewan government was 

concerned about a small number of individuals who were 

perceived as abusing the system.  And admittedly there was 

room for abuse, and indeed I'm sure some abuses were being 

committed.  The result however is that the government jumped 

the gun to implement changes which may have reduced the 

abuses, but have at the same time exposed most Saskatchewan 

farm families to a substantially higher level of risk.  With the 

enormous array of risks and factors beyond the control of our 

farmers today, it defies reason to see the government creating 

one more difficulty for them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was the present opposition who threw the initial 

GRIP together in pre-election haste.  People are saying that 

GRIP '91 was full of holes.  And every farmer in Saskatchewan 

can attest to that.  And, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives did 

have time to correct some mistakes.  But people have been 

forthright about the problems with the initial program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have an NDP government in Saskatchewan 

now.  They are responsible for the process.  They are 

responsible for the content.  They are responsible for the 

outcome of their choices.  They are the ones who chose to 

create a program that costs farmers more and offers less 

coverage.  They are the government that chose to trip over the 

recommendations of their own Farm Debt Committee.  Just 

when one committee offers recommendations to help address 

the farm debt problem, the government changed GRIP and 

undermined some very well thought-out suggestions. 

 

The Farm Debt Advisory Committee recommended the phasing 

out of the counselling and assistance for farmers program that 

helped farmers acquire operating credit because they believed 

farmers could obtain credit without too many difficulties 

because of the '91 GRIP program.  And just when the 

government followed the suggestions of their own Farm Debt 

Committee, they also rush ahead and change GRIP, 

undermining their own efforts to deal with farm debt. 

 

As a result of their hasty changes to GRIP, Mr. Speaker, it is 

now much more difficult for farmers to get the credit they 

need.  But now CAFF (counselling and assistance for farmers 

program) is gone, and farmers have no defence behind which to 

safely stand.  It appears in this government that the left hand 

did not know and still does not know what the right hand is 

doing, and only confusion reigns over the situation. 

 

But when this Minister of Agriculture claims to be acting in the 

best interest of farmers because he has consulted with them and 

then hides behind a majority government to ram changes 

through retroactively to cover two left footprints, farmers are 

saying that he is not speaking for them. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when I stand here today to deliver my 

message on the GRIP motion, I can honestly tell you that I 

have talked to many Saskatchewan farm families, and I 

have been forthright with them.  I don't tell them that I have 

any ultimate solutions for agriculture.  And they in turn have 

chosen to be forthright with me. 

 

Farm families are watching what is going on in this legislature 

and they are telling me, they are saying, nobody is really 

speaking for farmers.  The whole thing has now been reduced 

to petty politics and we, the Saskatchewan farm people, are 

being sold down the drain with the muddy water. 

 

When we talk about bringing this Bill back for a vote, every 

single person in this Assembly had better take a good, long 

look in the mirror to see the person who is going to rise as an 

elected representative in this House and cast a vote on behalf of 

what is right for agriculture, what is right for people, and what 

is right for democracy in this province. 

 

And there is not one member in this Assembly, particularly in 

the government, who should be so arrogant or so nave as to 

think that voting to ram this Bill through is one of the rights of 

power.  Not one of the members of this Assembly should forget 

the impact that bad decisions can have on the economy of this 

province, on the lives of our people, and on the communities 

that make up the social fabric of both rural and urban 

Saskatchewan. 

 

GRIP '92 isn't just some new form.  It isn't a shiny pamphlet in 

some easy, flip-of-a-coin decision for many Saskatchewan 

farmers.  Many of these people signed up for a new, improved 

version, Mr. Speaker, only to find that when they applied for 

operating money this spring, their lenders could not calculate 

the bankable income and said no to financing.  Farm families 

are left feeling bitter and betrayed when they could not even 

count on the support of their own government in an attempt to 

achieve lender confidence. 

 

I can say with certainty that if the Saskatchewan government 

was really serious about supporting farmers and making 

much-needed improvements to GRIP, they would have heeded 

the advice to place far more emphasis on the index moving 

average price which over time reduces the support price to 

farmers.  In a period of increasing costs, lower support prices 

only add to the increasing debt load facing many farm families. 

 

(1615) 

 

But let's face it, Mr. Speaker, this government was in a hurry.  

They were in a hurry to respond to pressure from disgruntled 

people.  They were in a hurry to take away the political 

soap-box from which the outgoing Conservatives had preached 

to farmers for so many years.  They were in a hurry to get on 

with some changes, any changes, to take the heat off their new 

Agriculture minister.  And so they unilaterally opted out of 

GRIP '91 as quickly as the former premier had opted in. 

 

So now here we sit -- a motion to proceed with a Bill to 

retroactively justify changes to a program which is still 

unworkable; an arrogant government which has removed all 

reasonable chance at creating a spirit of co-operation in this 

legislature.  The Premier and the 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2009 

Leader of the Opposition engaged in a childish game of 

sand-box politics over who did the best job of creating an 

unworkable farm safety net program. 

 

And while we engage in this non-democratic, non-productive, 

non-sensible process, the lives and the livelihoods of thousands 

of farm men, farm women, and children swing and sway in the 

delicate balance between future and foreclosure. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is the reality of the situation, not what is 

going on in this Assembly.  This is not reality.  Farmers who 

come in from a long day and crunch their numbers, calculating 

anticipated yields and input costs and farm subsidy 

expectations, they're not worried about the government 

invoking closure.  They are worried about the bank invoking 

foreclosure. 

 

While we ring bells and read petitions and spend hours talking 

about everything and nothing to stall the process and forestall 

the inevitable, farm families are lying awake at nights in fear of 

their future. 

 

While the Leader of the Opposition and his caucus do enter 

into insults across the floor and wait for the return volley and 

retorts and defences and accusations from the Premier and the 

Minister of Agriculture, I know that this is political 

game-playing at its worst, and that there is a different reality 

for farm people across this province.  Because, my fellow 

members, there are real quarrels, there are real family 

breakdowns, there are real suicides that are happening over the 

decisions that we make or we fail to make inside this Chamber.  

And there must be more that we can be doing. 

 

I would like to think that it matters what I have to say about 

whether this Bill comes back before this House for debate.  I 

would like to think that the members of this government will 

make their final judgement on the Bill based on its ability to 

improve the lives of people in this province.  Or if it doesn't, 

that we would go back to the drawing-board to create a better 

and more effective legislation.  But I continue to be 

discouraged, discouraged by government members whose 

talents, capabilities, and compassion are laid to waste by either 

an iron fist of party discipline or the mob mentality that has 

come to characterize the New Democratic Party. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I do the best to participate in the process, 

wanting to be a reasonable voice. 

 

I will in closing state what I believe to be the best course of 

action for the province of Saskatchewan.  And I hope that 

members will hear my comments, not from a political point of 

view, although I don't know if they have that ability, but as 

constructive suggestions as to what could be solutions to an 

admittedly difficult problem. 

 

During this period of tremendous pressure on farm families, I 

must question the wisdom of the government to reduce the 

farm support programs giving Manitoba and Alberta a 

competitive advantage. 

 

And I strongly urge the Minister of Agriculture, before 

returning this Bill to the floor, to meet with the ministers of 

Agriculture from Manitoba and Alberta with one item on 

the agenda -- to achieve concurrence on a prairie grain belt 

GRIP and a third line of defence request from the three prairie 

provinces. 

 

My second recommendation is for the leaders of all three 

political parties in Saskatchewan to come together and exert 

pressure on the federal government to deliver on whatever 

agreement emerges from the three ministers of Agriculture.  

We must become a unified voice that works collectively in the 

best interests . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I hate to interrupt the member, 

but I've been listening to the member from Shaunavon, and this 

is not the first time.  The member from Shaunavon does 

interrupt at least three or four times on every day that we have 

debate.  And I wish that he would read the rules, and knows 

that when another person is debating, he is not to interrupt. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The $40 million 

offered recently by the federal government is an insensitive 

refusal to acknowledge the severity of the problems faced in 

dried out regions of our province. 

 

And finally, I suggest that we must revisit this legislature as 

players on a team bigger than politics.  We must sit down and 

repair the broken parts of GRIP so that it will run smoothly 

over all the farmers' fields for as long as we need to rely upon 

it.  This would be an accomplishment of which we could all, 

regardless of our political stripes, be proud. 

 

In the mean time, Mr. Speaker, I urge the government to pull in 

the horns of its majority in the interest of progress and 

productivity.  I urge the opposition to act less in its political 

self-interest from time to time and more in the interests of 

farmers, if that is truly who they are wanting to serve. 

 

And for my part, I will support whatever efforts are made to 

revise this legislation, which I will not be voting to bring back 

to this House until a more concentrated leadership effort is put 

forward by the government to bring the opposition parties on 

side with this Bill by negotiating its necessary changes. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd like to inform the Assembly that Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor is here to give Royal Assent 

to the interim supply Bill.  This must be done by leave.  Do we 

have leave? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 4:23 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bill: 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 1993 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence,  



2010 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 4:25 p.m. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Vote to be Taken on First Reading of Bill 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I realize 

that the time allotted to me has been limited by the motion 

that's been presented by the government . . . or the Minister of 

Finance today. 

 

And I would just like to make a few comments, first of all, 

regarding the original motion presented by the Minister of 

Agriculture, a motion that was placing a limit on this Assembly 

regarding the further debate and restrictions or interference and 

the ability of the government to bring forward their Bill on 

GRIP and suggesting it was time that it would come forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the past number of days and weeks we have 

discussed in this Assembly many of the reasons why we feel, 

as an opposition, that the GRIP '92 legislation should not 

proceed to this House.  We find, Mr. Speaker, that over the 

process and period of time, the government has acted 

unilaterally to bring forward changes, to in fact push their way 

upon the members of this Legislative Assembly and the elected 

. . . the people, the electors of this province. 

 

And as my colleague from Morse indicated earlier, certainly 

we have seen, through editorials and in the press, over the past 

number of weeks and months, individuals have taken the time 

to at least indicate to the province of Saskatchewan, the people 

of Saskatchewan, the reason for the debate that has taken place. 

 

One of the comments made today was the fact brought forward 

by one of the editorials said: 

 

 The image problem the NDP has on the GRIP issue has now 

been compounded by the way it has tried to cover up its 

mistake through what has been nothing short of political 

bullying. 

 

 Unilaterally ending bell-ringing, repeated use of closure to 

limit debate on other issues, and even hints that it may use 

time allocation on the GRIP Bill itself have revealed the NDP 

as the ruthless, uncompromising sort it can be. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I also go back to comments made in this 

House back in the 1989 debate regarding closure used at that 

time on a Bill that had been before this Assembly that had been 

debated for some 30 days, or almost a month, prior to the use 

of the closure motion. 

 

And a comment made at that time by the member from 

Saskatoon South, where he indicated: That is why, Mr. 

Speaker, I find this piece of legislation so abhorrent.  He 

doesn't have -- referring to the Government House Leader of 

the day  he doesn't have the right to decide 

how long I can speak in this legislature.  He doesn't have that 

right.  The people of Saskatoon South have elected me to speak 

for them. 

 

And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that my colleagues and I 

feel that the people of Saskatchewan, peoples in our 

constituencies, have elected us to speak for them as well.  We 

must also remind people of Saskatchewan we will, over the 

next few days as we get into further and prolonged debate on 

the GRIP question, the fact that this opposition has laid out a 

number of ideas, a number of options. 

 

We've asked the government to give consideration to a number 

of options regarding the GRIP Bill that the government intends 

to bring forward to this Assembly.  We've asked the 

government to offer the farmers the ability to choose between 

the '91 and '92.  We've asked the government to consider the 

recent federal offer. 

 

And certainly, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the recent offer 

that has been presented by the federal government, the offer 

would have put more money into the hands of individuals who, 

this year, through no fault of their own are facing the reality of 

a crop loss -- a major crop loss.  And we know there are many 

areas across this province where many thousands of acres have 

already been ploughed down.  Crops have been ploughed under 

because there was nothing there. 

 

And in fact recent dry weather is going to wither even more of 

that crop.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, as farmers take a closer 

look at the GRIP motion, as they take a closer look at their 

cropping situation, as they look at what they're going to be 

harvesting, where three weeks ago many farmers were 

expecting a fairly average or above average crop, they may find 

-- should the very high, hot, dry weather continue -- that that 

crop may not be as bountiful as they were anticipating and that, 

indeed, the '91 GRIP may not be all that good for them as well. 

 

(1630) 

 

We also ask the government to consider the fact that Alberta 

and Manitoba worked together with the federal government to 

make minor changes to their programs and allowing farmers in 

those two provinces to have even a better program than they 

had last year, giving them the ability to guarantee a bottom line 

and yet at the same time be productive and put the inputs into 

their crop and grow the crop or become the efficient and 

effective farmers they would like to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our problem with the GRIP Bill centres around 

the fact that this province depends on agriculture.  Agriculture 

is a mainstay of . . . it's the economic machine of this province, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And that's why we find it very abhorrent 

that the government would move unilaterally, would make a 

decision to bring in its third motion of closure in the last two 

days to limit the ability of the members on the opposite side of 

the House, the opposition members, to continue to raise 

questions regarding the legality of the Bill that is going to be 

coming before this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to quote from the 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2011 

Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of, I believe it was, July 23 . . . July 

18: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, Premier Roy Romanow 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP. 

 

 But just a few kilometres away, farmers remained oblivious 

to the message. 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," said Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just southwest of The Battlefords . . . 

 

 . . . the argument of Premier Roy Romanow that the 

situations are not (as clear) . . . is as vacant as the NDP's 

legislative morality.  He says that because the NDP 

campaigned to change the Gross Revenue Insurance Plan, it 

has the democratic right to push through its Bill. 

 

 But did the NDP campaign on the promise of making 

changes after the GRIP deadline and using the power of 

government to, as the Tories say, "tamper with evidence" in a 

case now before the courts? 

 

 However the most offensive aspect of the government's 

behaviour has been the way it's ramming through arbitrary 

changes to the legislative rules.  Ignoring the parliamentary 

tradition of all-party consensus on such changes, the NDP has 

applied 30-minute time limits to the bell-ringing.  And to do 

it, the NDP brought down the heavy fist of closure to silence 

debate after only four days.  This can only be described as a 

tyranny of the majority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I realize that the debate has been limited.  And I 

realize that I could go on for the 20 minutes allotted to me.  But 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, I have given in a few short minutes the 

reasons that I stand in this Assembly today to speak against the 

way the government has unilaterally decided that they are 

going to run this Legislative Assembly.  That they're going to 

tell the people of Saskatchewan, tell the opposition that this is 

the way we're going to do things and if you're going to stand in 

our way, we will use whatever measures are available to us.  

And that's why I find it very abhorrent that the government 

would use closure in the underhanded way they have. Thank 

you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  We 

rise here today to speak on the motion to return GRIP to the 

floor of the House.  The motion is whether or not the 

government should be allowed to bring in a law that will break 

the contracts, not only . . . set a precedent not only for farmers 

but for everyone else in the province.  Should the government 

be allowed to deem that events have happened that indeed did 

not happen? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, history shows us that there was not a 

letter sent out on March 15.  And no matter what the 

Minister of Agriculture says, no matter what his legislation 

says, there was no letter.  This is the crime that the NDP 

government is perpetrating with their GRIP legislation.  There 

were indeed problems with the '91 GRIP program, but there are 

many, many more problems with the GRIP '92. 

 

One of the concerns in my area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 

GRIP legislation and whether or not it should be allowed to 

come back before this House, is the area averages rather than 

the individual averages.  That is one of the main problems that 

I see in the program. 

 

Also there's no protection for crop failures, for drought, under 

the '92 GRIP program.  Those protections were indeed there 

under '91.  Everyone, when the Bill comes through, will have 

crop insurance, but everyone will receive the same type of 

funding under the GRIP revenue insurance.  Whether or not 

these people have a good crop or a poor crop, they will still 

receive the same amount of funds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In 1991 farmers knew they had a bottom-line minimum that 

they would receive from their crops.  In '92, no such thing.  

They know what their crop insurance guarantee is, but GRIP 

there is no . . . nobody knows what the information is going to 

be, what the dollars are going to be at the end of the year, 

because it's all based on what the whole area seeded and what 

the revenues are from those crops. 

 

Last year they could take their GRIP information, their money, 

their bottom line to the bank and get a line of credit based on 

that.  This year they could take their crop insurance, a much, 

much less amount, a much smaller amount.  Last year they 

could get good lines of credit based on the GRIP program; this 

year, not so. 

 

In 1992 not a single farmer knows how much support he is 

going to receive from the GRIP program because it's all based 

on what the prices will be for the '92 crops.  Last year people 

knew; they had a bottom line that they could take to the bank. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it's the deeming portion of this 

legislation that is the most offensive.  The government is going 

to deem that they did perform an act that they did not do so.  

And that is what is most offensive.  And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is why I will be voting against this motion. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  This is a 

sad day for Saskatchewan today.  Especially, Mr. Deputy 

Chairman, because we're moving to closure; when this 

government, with their arrogance, has said that we are going to 

stop debate when it hasn't hardly started. 

 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, who are the losers in Saskatchewan 

today?  We can say it's the farmers.  But to me it's every 

individual in the province of Saskatchewan.  Every individual, 

every one is a loser.  Because I'm not . . . My remarks are not 

going to be in detail today, because I'll do that in second 

reading and committee.  It's going to be because of the 

retroactive legislation, which is a sad day for Saskatchewan, 

where a government is deeming to have this letter that it's 

going to tell the courts that they did 



2012 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

get a letter that the farmers never received.  That is a sad, sad 

day.  And it's a sad day for democracy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 

sad, sad day. 

 

And I know that before three years is up -- or whenever the 

next election will be -- that this message will be imprinted into 

the voters of each and every one in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  They'll know.  So many people don't know 

exactly what's happening here.  So many of the public do not 

know what's happening in this legislature.  They just think it's 

'91 versus '92 GRIP.  That's not the case.  That isn't what we've 

had all this impasse here for this last while.  It's been because 

we as an opposition have been told that we are your bosses, and 

we will tell you when you can speak, and we will tell you when 

you cannot speak, and we will tell you for exactly how long. 

 

Now that is not democracy.  We've had closure before this here 

session.  We've had closure twice before in this province in the 

history, and it was after hours and hours.  In fact the potash 

Bill, as I said in my remarks yesterday, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

was 120 hours.  And the House came in on March 7 or 8, and 

on the 4th of August we had closure in this House and then 

allowed them another 80-some hours of speaking. 

 

Now it's down . . . We had our, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 

Minister of Finance said this afternoon that he was prepared 

and he did answer questions in the interim supply Bill for five 

days.  It went on five days, counting the weekend, but there 

was closure brought on that Bill in five hours because the 

interim supply Bill started at a quarter to 3 on Thursday, and 

when the member from Estevan was speaking at quarter to 9, 

with the two-hour supper break, a total of five hours, they 

interrupted him.  The House Leader stood up and said, we are 

now moving closure.  That's never happened in the British 

Commonwealth of this great . . . in the whole world. 

 

It's never happened.  It has never happened -- not in a 

Commonwealth.  It probably hasn't even happened, my friends, 

this probably never even happened in the socialist countries of 

Europe.  Probably the only place it's ever happened is in 

communist Russia, and today they wouldn't do it. 

 

In this country we are turning right to a dictatorship type of a 

government.  And if anybody, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says that 

it's not dictatorship, then tell me, when you stand up to vote, 

when you stand up to vote in this House and look yourself in 

the mirror and say, I think it's right that we change the law so 

the courts are going to believe that a letter was sent to the 

farmers on March 15, 1992, which is absolutely false and did 

not happen, how could any government any place in the world 

do something like that?  It is wrong -- absolutely wrong. 

 

But the man, the individual that has escaped all this here 

argument and all this dissension, has been the gentleman that 

has been in Ottawa for days and days and days.  He seems to be 

able to stay out of all this. 

 

Our Premier of this province has never, ever been in this 

picture of what's happening in this House.  I know he's in 

Ottawa -- he's not there maybe today, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker -- and I know he has to be there over the constitution.  

I know he must be there.  But when he's here, he does not get 

involved in what's happening in this legislature.  He does not 

get involved.  He stays away from being involved with closure 

and all the things that's happening here.  He's the man that lets 

the dirty stuff happen. 

 

And I feel sorry for the Minister of Agriculture.  He has been 

the scapegoat here.  He is the man that has been dictated to by 

the Minister of Finance.  The Minister of Finance has said, I 

would like to tell you, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, I would like 

to tell you that I have funds so we can have a GRIP Bill, the 

'91, an improved '91 GRIP Bill so the farmers can have some 

little chance of success on their farm, of surviving. 

 

But he says, no, I didn't get many votes from the farmers so I 

will have to tell you, that poor Mr. Minister of Agriculture, 

kick those farmers off that land.  And that's exactly what you're 

doing. 

 

We had an election in October and what happened?  We had 

promises of moratoriums . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, he said we lost.  And yes we did lose.  But 

why did we lose?  Why?  Because of your promises you made.  

You made promises and you broke them all.  You broke almost 

every promise.  The only group of people in this province that 

you haven't hurt are the groups you haven't met yet.  You've 

got them all. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- And before four years are up, you won't 

have anybody that has any respect left for the good old CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) of this province.  

The good CCF.  What happened to the good CCFers under 

Tommy Douglas?  I'd be looking at myself in the mirror tonight 

and say, I hope Tommy isn't knowing what's going on. 

 

Yes sir, Mr. Speaker -- and I mean my good friend, Tommy 

Douglas.  I knew him, Mr. Speaker.  I knew Tommy Douglas a 

lot better than most individuals over here.  My mother went to 

school with him, so if you think I don't know him personally, I 

do.  I know him very personally.  He was a gentleman. 

 

But even if I didn't believe in his philosophy, Tommy Douglas 

believed in Canada like John Diefenbaker.  I always figure 

they're two of the best statesmen we ever had.  They at least 

believed in what they said.  They at least believed. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not these people.  They don't believe.  

They believe in power . . . Any time that you're doing what 

you're doing here and taking the heart right out of agricultural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1645) 

 

I challenge the Minister of Agriculture to come out to my 

riding, come out there tomorrow and I'll take you to Aylesbury, 

Craik, Davidson, Dundurn, Outlook.  And if you can find one 

out of five farmers who will even talk to you, then I've missed 

my political guess.  But, Mr. Deputy 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2013 

Speaker, I ask him not to do like the member from Canora.  

Don't fly over -- drive there.  Sit down and talk to them.  But as 

I said before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do feel sorry for him 

because he knows better than this.  He knows better than what 

he's doing.  He's dictated to by the rest of the people. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- At least he's entertaining. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, all we get from these 

people is just snickers and somebody said, at least he's 

entertaining.  Well why don't you get serious?  Because I've got 

some faith yet that maybe this is -- I'm going to let my other 

members speak -- but I have faith yet that . . . today we're going 

to see this Bill, we're probably going to see it sometime later 

this day, and I still have faith that that Bill has been changed 

from the day that the House Leader said publicly in this 

province, publicly, that this Bill is going to deem that there was 

a letter sent out to farmers prior to the 15th of March. 

 

I'm hoping and I'm praying that this government has changed 

their mind and this Bill won't be as bad as what it was deemed 

to have been a month ago or more.  I hope that they have 

changed it.  I hope that they will, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

they will give the farmers a chance in the court room.  The 

farmers are in a court room in Melville.  There's many 

hundreds to follow.  And they know they're right.  The judges 

know they're right.  And, as my colleague from Morse said 

earlier, they don't want a court case because there is too many 

people that will not want to be on that stand under oath.  They 

have trouble in this place here being under oath because every 

individual that stands in this room is under oath when they get 

up to speak, especially the cabinet ministers.  They are under 

oath of everything they say about their department.  And you, 

Mr. Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you, Mr. 

Minister of Agriculture, will have to stand on your feet and 

defend this letter that the farmers did not get.  Because if that 

hadn't have happened, the farmers would be winning their day 

in court. 

 

Now in closing, I want to say to you that I've had it on some of 

the best source in Canada that this is an unconstitutional Bill, it 

is absolutely unconstitutional and the Queen's Bench judges, 

you may get by, because if this GRIP Bill goes through and 

you're forcing it upon us, goodness only knows, you're 

whitewashing the whole Assembly here, making a sham of it, 

and you'll probably get your GRIP Bill through. 

 

The Queen's Bench judges, Mr. Speaker, will probably have to 

rule against the farmers.  But what they haven't forgot . . . what 

they forgotten, the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, what 

they've forgotten that there's the Supreme Court in Canada 

where there, then, this Bill will be ruled unconstitutional. 

 

Now in closing, Mr. Speaker, I'm still hoping that there'd be 

some leniency and some good thinking on behalf of the 

members in the front row with pressure from the 

back-benchers.  And I just hope, for goodness sakes, that the 

Bill is changed.  And if it hasn't, that you'll accept some of the 

amendments because this is the party that's speaking on behalf 

of the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

And if somebody can laugh . . . the member from Swift 

Current, Mr. Speaker, laughs, snickers.  All right, there was 

150,000 votes went to the Progressive Conservative Party in 

Saskatchewan and there's approximately 150,000 voters vote in 

rural Saskatchewan.  And where did they come from?  They 

came from farmers.  Because in my riding, Mr. Speaker, I won 

absolutely every rural poll in my riding -- every one.  And with 

this kind of a Bill that you've brought toward this legislature, I 

will guarantee that you back-benchers and you people that sit 

in rural Saskatchewan better take a good look at yourself in the 

mirror and realize what you've done.  Because it is serious. 

 

And in closing, I want to say, like I said the other day, when I 

sit down I am ashamed.  I am ashamed.  I'm one of the . . . I've 

been here 15 years in this Assembly, and I'm ashamed of the 

front benches.  I'm ashamed of this type of government they 

have ran.  I am absolutely ashamed of you. 

 

You have hurt people.  You affected your lives.  Now let's 

hope, before this GRIP Bill is passed and become law, that you 

come to your senses.  Listen to some of the things we've got to 

say.  Don't stand there and snicker.  Accept some of our 

amendments.  And let's get the politics out of our lives -- 

because that's exactly what you've been playing -- and let's 

think of the farmers and the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's going to be very 

difficult to in a very short period of time do as good as job as 

my colleagues ahead of me of describing the issue that is at 

stake, because it is of such tremendous importance, not only to 

this Assembly but to all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

We truly have, Mr. Speaker, here a Draconian measure by a 

Draconian government.  We have a situation where, as my 

colleagues have pointed out, this very Assembly will result in 

effectively tampering with the evidence in a trial.  And that is 

not only a shame for the farm families involved, but it certainly 

has to be a shame for all of the people who depend on the 

judicial system to work and to be just.  We have seen a 

government so intent here to have its way that it has been 

willing to end the very rules of this very Assembly, setting one 

precedence after another in the way that they do it. 

 

They stopped the bell-ringing to begin with, to make sure that 

they could ram this legislation through in short order. They've 

used closure after closure after closure after closure -- more 

times in nine months than ever before recorded in the history of 

this province.  More times to get their way and their will in a 

dictatorship that has truly, truly formed. 

 

This government threw away 200 millions of dollars at the 

beginning of this whole exercise -- 200 of millions of federal 

dollars that farmers and farm families could have had in their 

cash flow.  They would refuse to negotiate any kind of a deal to 

get those dollars just because they want to retain their 

principles and their ideas. 



2014 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

Then they were offered $40 million a couple of weeks ago, on 

top of everything that's happened, and they kicked that in the 

face, Mr. Speaker.  And why?  All to save face.  All to save 

face for one provincial Minister of Agriculture who got caught 

with his foot in his mouth. 

 

And they're willing, Mr. Speaker, to screw 50,000 farm 

families out of their cash flow to save face for one Minister of 

Agriculture.  The federal Minister of Agriculture put it very 

squarely when he said, and I repeat as I read from the 

newspapers his thoughts, he says it's akin to, and like a young 

person going out and shooting his parents and then asking for 

welfare because now he's an orphan. 

 

What a sad thing to have to use such a cruel analogy to make a 

point.  But it's a point that has to be made.  There is no 

alternative. 

 

Mr. Minister of Agriculture, there is an old saying that you 

should take heed to.  It goes very simply: eat crow when you 

are wrong.  And the quicker you eat it and the quicker you start 

to eat it, the less of it you will have to eat.  I'm afraid, Mr. 

Minister, that your plate is getting too full.  You'll never be 

able to eat it all. 

 

If justice is to prevail in this province, Mr. Speaker, if these 

changes to the evidence, if this tampering is to be stopped, it 

will probably have to happen outside of this Assembly now.  

And perhaps the judge will see that light and do those things.  

I'm not sure how the system will work, but I fear that his hands 

will be tied as well. 

 

It's a shame that this government, having been offered a 

compromise that in the last few days would have taken 

everybody off of the hook and at the same time would have 

given a compromise where people with the '91 GRIP needs 

would have had their needs addressed as well as the people 

who are in the situation where the '92 system would be the best 

would now have had their needs addressed . . . What a 

tremendous compromise that could have been.  And yet this 

government is intent upon kicking that in the face -- kicking it 

away with both feet to save face for one socialist.  Mr. Speaker, 

the price is too high. 

 

I want to draw just one comparison, and I hope that the 

member from Cumberland will take particular note of this.  

What if tomorrow the government of this province decided to 

deem through legislation that there never were any Indian 

treaties in this province, that there were never any reserves?  

Wouldn't that be a constitutional commotion!  Think about it.  

If they can do it to the farmers of this province, Mr. Speaker, 

why can't they do it to the rest of the people in whatever area 

they choose? 
 

There is an irony, Mr. Speaker, in all of this for me as an 

individual.  Because as a result of heavy rainfall and my good 

fortune as a farmer, I find myself this year in a situation where 

if we don't have a hailstorm or a serious frost in the next couple 

of weeks, I personally will probably benefit by the 1992 

program.  And yet my friends and neighbours all through my 

constituency are not so fortunate.  That's the kind of a year it is 

this year.  There are extremes of both cases throughout the 

entire province.  Some will prosper by one, and others will lose 

bitterly. 

I plead with you, Minister of Agriculture, take that option, take 

that package, that deal that will give all farmers the best of the 

cash flow that they so desperately need.  Eat some crow.  The 

quicker you do that, the less of it you will have to eat. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  On March 13, the 

Minister of Agriculture, the member for Rosetown-Elrose, 

announced changes in the gross revenue insurance program.  

He was advised by the advisory committee that March 15, two 

days later, farmers were to receive written notice of contract 

changes.  That never happened, Mr. Speaker.  That notice 

never went out.  And yet the Minister of Agriculture who has 

the authority and all of the resources of government at his 

disposal, easily -- very, very easily could have made and called 

for that notice to go out.  But he didn't do it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

His advisory committee, the committee he holds up as the 

example of why the gross revenue insurance program had to be 

changed, advised to him that the March 15 deadline had to be 

met time after time after time in their meetings.  And yet the 

minister said to them, don't worry about that; we will get 

around it somehow . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's 

exactly true. We 're into the getting around it right now, Mr. 

Minister. 

 

In rural Saskatchewan, as many of the folks here today will 

know, often deals are put together on a simple handshake.  Mr. 

Minister, I'm sure you've maybe even done that, a simple 

handshake.  But then as we see more and more unreputable 

people coming into rural Saskatchewan, people felt that the 

next step of evolution had to be that they needed a contract -- a 

contract to hold themselves and hold whoever they're doing a 

deal with, bind them together so that it could not be broken. 

 

(1700) 

 

The farmers of Saskatchewan had a contract, Mr. Speaker.  I 

had a contract as a farmer, Mr. Speaker.  The Minister of 

Agriculture had a contract with the government, Mr. Speaker. 

And that contract has been violated.  That contract, Mr. 

Speaker, has been violated by the Minister of Agriculture in his 

actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, governments should set examples.  

Governments should set good examples.  Governments should 

set the kind of examples that people can hold up and say, here 

is a government that we can trust.  Here is a government that 

will do the right thing.  Here is the government that will always 

do the right thing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But what has happened here?  They have set another kind of an 

example, Mr. Speaker.  They have set an example that clearly 

says to the farm families of this province that the Minister of 

Agriculture cannot be trusted.  He simply cannot be trusted 

with a contract that they had with this government. 

 

Mr. Minister, you were wrong.  You are wrong in what you are 

doing, and now you're trying to correct the mistake 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2015 

that you made, and you know you've made it.  And I think it's 

abundantly clear to every person in this province.  There is no 

question in the people's minds of this province.  You made a 

mistake, sir. You should not have disrespected that contract. 

 

And now, Mr. Minister, you find yourself in a position where 

you're going to have to defend your actions.  And the defence, 

Mr. Speaker, the defence is to bring in legislation into this 

legislature and cancel, strip the rights of farm families away 

from them.  That's what the Bill that you're bringing forward 

later this afternoon will do, Mr. Minister.  You are going to 

strip the rights of the farm families away.  You're going to take 

their contract away from them.  You're going to take my 

contract away from it.  You're going to take your own contract 

away from yourself, sir.  That's what you're going to do. 

 

This is not a question of '91 GRIP or '92 GRIP.  It's not a 

question of the merits of '91 or '92.  It's a question of contract 

breaking, Mr. Minister.  And, Mr. Minister, you are wrong, and 

you know it. 

 

Eighty votes -- 80-some votes put you here, sir.  Eighty-some 

votes put you here, sir.  And the people of Rosetown-Elrose, 

they know now they have made a mistake, just as you are 

making this mistake today, sir. 

 

Mr. Minister, farmers can't trust you.  Farmers don't trust you.  

Mr. Minister, you took an oath.  You took an oath to uphold the 

law, and now you're going to break it.  Now you're going to 

bring in legislation that tampers -- tampers with the evidence 

before a court in order to protect yourself.  In order to protect 

yourself, you're bringing in legislation that tampers with the 

law.  And the farm families of Saskatchewan will not put up 

with it, sir. 

 

The people of Rosetown-Elrose will not accept it, sir.  They 

will correct their mistake next time.  They will correct the 

mistake that has sent you to this legislature, sir.  And I firmly 

believe that the farm families of this province will not forget 

this for ever, sir.  They will not forget the actions you are 

taking that break their contract.  You have broken their contract 

and you are breaking the handshake with rural Saskatchewan, 

sir.  Mr. Minister, you will go down in history as the Minister 

of Agriculture that could not be trusted by farm families. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I have 

a few words I'd like to say about this Bill.  Mr. Speaker, first of 

all I'd like to remind the public, if they're listening, what this is 

all about. 

 

This Bill is not about the GRIP '91 or '92. This Bill is about the 

breaking of a contract -- contract signed by farmers in good 

faith and broken by a minister who, if he had in the first place 

said to the farm community, I made a mistake, he could have 

done two things, Mr. Speaker.  He could have said, I will for 

one year only give you a choice.  Because for whatever reason 

that he may want to suggest caused the mix-up in whether the 

farmers got a letter or not, he could have said, because you did 

not get the letter, for one year only I will give you a choice.  

The farmers would not have held that against him. 

I said before in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I've lived by 

this philosophy, it's not the mistake you make that you're going 

to be judged by, it's by how you fix up the mistake you made.  

And as my colleague from Kindersley said, maybe you should 

eat a little crow now because you may have to eat more later. 

 

The day that you ask all those back-benchers to stand up in this 

House, if that legislation that you bring in has not been 

changed from what the minister . . . the House Leader led the 

public to believe, you are going to be asking all of your 

colleagues to join you in perjury.  I say that.  I say that. 

 

And he -- that minister -- is going to be asked to stand in a 

court of law, he's going to be asked to stand in a court of law 

and defend that.  He is going to have to say yea or nay -- I did 

or did not send the letter.  He's going to have to do that. 

 

Those people on the committee that work with him are going to 

have to stand in front of a judge and say, we warned this man, 

this Minister of Agriculture, that he was making a mistake, but 

he said, I'll get around it somehow -- I'll get around it.  And 

today we see how they're getting around it. 

 

For the last two years the people of Canada have been arguing 

over Triple E.  What did we get in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker?  

We got triple C -- closure, closure, closure -- the indiscriminate 

use of closure, and we expect it'll be used again and again.  

And it's like any other unsavoury trick that's done -- the more 

you do it, the easier it gets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am like my colleagues.  I never thought I'd have 

to stand in this place . . . now I haven't stood here for 15 years 

like the member from Arm River, but I came down here the 

same as all the rest of you, with stars in my eyes, thinking that I 

was going to be in a place where honour and integrity was 

there.  Mr. Speaker, there is no honour and there is no integrity 

in this kind of a Bill. 

 

This Bill breaks the law.  This Bill asks other people to break 

the law.  And if you want to read -- you may think I was a little 

harsh -- read what perjury says.  Read what perjury says -- the 

definition of perjury, read it -- and then stand in your place and 

vote for this GRIP Bill.  Stand in your place and vote for this 

Bill after reading what the Criminal Code says about perjury. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance sits there in his 

smug, arrogant manner, and he smiles away and he says, it's 

not right, John.  Well we'll see. 

 

I can only hope, like the member from Arm River, that between 

the time you led the public to believe that you were going to 

retroactively change the law, that you have seen the light and 

when that Bill comes in tonight, then it will have been changed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to read you some quotes.  And I will quote 

from the members opposite -- maybe not in the order of their 

importance, Mr. Speaker, but here's what the member who is 

now the Finance minister said about closure. 



2016 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

An Hon. Member: -- Sounds good. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- From Regina Dewdney.  Yes, sounds good.  

Well I'll read it to you, sir.  He said: 

 

 But I want to say, as other colleagues have said, that even 

though the government may muzzle us in this legislature, we 

will not be muzzled in saying the things that need to be said, 

because if we can't say them in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

will say them from one end of the province (to the other) 

wherever we go, because those are the kinds of things that 

(is) important to the people of Saskatchewan.  Democracy 

(must) . . . be protected by this opposition to the largest 

extent that we can, at every opportunity we can. 

 

He said that.  Now where is he today?  Brought in closure, 

closure on a Bill for farmers.  Now he went on to say, Mr. 

Speaker, 

 

 . . . when the people cannot be heard, freedom, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is destroyed. 

 

What does he do today, that member?  Now I'll tell you what 

your leader said.  I'll tell you what the now Premier said about 

closures: 

 

 . . . a government coming in and using the heavy hand of its 

majority and arbitrarily deciding in its (own) opinion that the 

opposition's debate has been too long, in its opinion that our 

arguments have been irrelevant, in its opinion that we ought 

not to be talking about it. 

 

That's what the Premier said, the now Premier, when he was 

opposition standing on this side.  He goes on to say: 

 

 They come here to define the rules of this legislature, to do 

this arbitrarily by simple majority, and to equate this kind of 

heavy-handed, undemocratic, unprecedented, and 

unwarranted attack to the rules where all the members agree . 

. . 

 

That's what he said.  Now you square that, Mr. Speaker, square 

that with me, with what you're doing today.  He went on to say: 

 

 But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what does this show.  This 

motion today shows (that) this black Friday for democracy, 

this unprecedented attack on freedom in this province of 

Saskatchewan, maybe an attack on 26 lonely members in the 

opposition. 

 

Only 26 lonely members -- we've got 10 over here.  And what 

are they doing over there now, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Let me also . . . let me quote from another of the prominent 

members, the House Leader.  What did he say?  What did he 

say?  As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the now Premier went 

on to say, and I'll just read that too. 

 

  . . . discredited and desperate (discredited and desperate) this 

government has no other choice.   It resorts to 

the actions of a bully. (and) . . . resorts to the actions of 

coming down and guillotining the opposition here. 

 

Talk about guillotining the opposition. 

 

And then the now House Leader said: And then after the rule 

has been changed, they keep up the debate for a couple of 

weeks and find they're still losing in the opinion polls and in 

the minds of the people of the province. 

 

And so what do they do?  Well then they say to the people of 

the province, we're not playing the game any more.  We're not 

going to play any more.  We've got the most players; we 

choose the game; and we're going to play.  We picked the 

referee -- let that sink in for a minute.  We changed the rules to 

our best advantage and we still can't win, so we're going to quit 

playing.  So we're going to quit playing.  That's what he said. 

 

Well he goes on to say:  Well I say that closure is the most 

despicable rule that this government could invoke. 

 

Yes he said that.  And what have we got here?  Well we got the 

triple C, triple C all in one day.  Mr. Speaker, I, like most of 

my colleagues, could go on for quite a while. 

 

(1715) 

 

But I say to the Minister of Agriculture, I say to the Minister of 

Agriculture, what's wrong, what's wrong with you telling those 

farmers out there that you will pull out the retroactivity of your 

Bill, or you will, as the member from Kindersley said, give us 

your hand and say anything in this Bill will not impact on that 

case before the courts.  Do that.  Why don't you do that?  We 

would gladly see that happen. 

 

Mr. Minister, what would be wrong with that?  That's what I 

want the people of Saskatchewan to know.  We're not arguing, 

Mr. Speaker.  We're not arguing, even though some of the 

members on this side of the House do not like '92 GRIP Bill, 

that's not the case here.  The thing we're arguing about is the 

process. 

 

And all of this could have been done . . . all of this 

confrontation didn't have to happen.  All he had to do was 

withdraw that retroactivity and say to the farmers, this will not 

impact on your court case, and you would not be in the mess 

that you're in, sir.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Speaker, I have heard enough 

discussions of the issue about which the . . . that our Bill 

addresses that I think it is appropriate for the public record to 

state a few facts clearly to cut through some of the carelessness 

and misstatements that have been made about what has 

happened. 

 

The member who spoke previously had talked about process.  

And I think it's worth spending a moment talking about the 

process by which GRIP came to be. 
 

It's been identified by others that GRIP was a program that was 

hurriedly implemented for an election campaign -- hurriedly 

implemented and then carried forward with 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2017 

changes.  The meeting I went to, the staff of the department 

that were out there said that it was change number 95, and the 

next day was change number 96. 

 

All changes made after March 15 -- the deadline which they 

now attach so much importance to -- in the Bill they then 

created.  The program they created and a contract that they 

describe that they would have trouble putting together for 

anybody of reasonable mind. 

 

There was a pamphlet in which a March 15th number was 

discussed.  And the members opposite are aware that that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to clarify something 

here.  And it's just been brought to my attention.  I was right in 

the first place.  The minister is closing debate.  If you look at 

item 12, on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Wiens, the 

Minister of Agriculture . . . the Minister of Finance moved a 

closure motion today, not this motion. 

 

So the member is closing debate.  But because . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . No.  Because of the confusion that existed, I 

will allow any member now the opportunity to speak in this 

debate who has not spoken before the member closes debate. 

 

Are there any other members who wish to speak at this time?  

If not, the Minister of Agriculture continues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To continue 

with the process that was engaged in last year, the farmers' 

decision-making time was extended to May 15 in order to 

accommodate the many changes that the members opposite 

were making as they were developing the program. 

 

The contract with the federal government, which was a real 

contract, a federal-provincial agreement, was signed I believe 

on September 18 or 19 after most of our crops were in the bin.  

These are the processes that were followed last year in the 

construction of the GRIP program. 

 

It is a matter of record in history that farmers were upset about 

the program from the day it was first described, through the 

multitude of changes that went on on the run, through the way 

in which the payments were being made from the program.  

And it's a matter of record that farmers demonstrated by the 

thousands last fall, to have some reason brought to farm 

programming. 

 

The fact that we were not in control of was when the members 

opposite would call an election.  And in late October when at 

the absolute latest time that the government could call an 

election, one was called.  And the members opposite assumed a 

new role, and our government took over the issue of managing 

the affairs of a province devastated by the circumstances that 

have also been a matter of public record relative to the finances 

of the province. 

 

And our . . . because we did not have a large amount of 

time to reconstruct the process for review, we took the review 

process described in the Act, passed by the members opposite 

in their time in designing the Act, and carried it forward in 

order to have a public review of the GRIP program. 

 

The members who were appointed to that GRIP program have 

been described . . . to the GRIP review have been described by 

members opposite as reasonable people.  And they are and they 

were and they are reasonable people, representing a number of 

farm organizations and professional people in Saskatchewan. 

 

The chairman -- Barry Senft from the Saskatchewan Wheat 

Pool, a person I hope the members opposite continue to respect 

for the contribution he's made to the exercise; Brian Perkins, 

who was the president of the cattle feeders association; Roy 

Piper, from the united grain growers; Lloyd Johns, an 

independent member appointed by myself; Brett Meinert, 

named by the soil conservation association; Gordon Cresswell, 

Hartley Furtan, named by the university; Keith Hayward, 

named by the Crop Insurance Corporation; Leonard Kehrig, I 

believe named by the canola growers; and Sinc Harrison, 

named by SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities).  Members who signed this report, members 

who had submissions from in excess of 300 people and 

organizations and listened to what they had to say and observed 

the facts of farm programs in Canada and in Saskatchewan and 

recommended some changes. 

 

These changes were not brought forward in any hurry at all.  

These changes were brought forward in the time allotted by the 

members opposite in a Bill that described the original program.  

The legislation describing the program said by February 15 

changes should be recommended.  By February 15, Mr. 

Speaker, the members on the committee recommended the 

following, and I read directly from the report of the committee: 

 

 The Advisory Committee strongly supports some general 

principles on how GRIP should operate.  These general 

principles included: 

 

 GRIP should be provided as separate crop insurance and 

revenue insurance programs . . . 

 

I remind the members opposite, who have said some 

organizations disagreed with this report -- the members of the 

organizations signed this report with these recommendations 

that I carry in my hand here, these, specifically all of them: 

 

 GRIP should be provided as separate crop insurance and 

revenue insurance programs . . . 

 

That defines that there will be a crop insurance portion subject 

to the kind of deductibility that is there when you have 80 per 

cent coverage.  And there will be a revenue insurance portion 

calculated by another mechanism.  That's definitive in the 

recommendations of all of the members who were on the 

committee . . . or all the members who signed the report.  I 

remind the members, as I remind myself, that two members did 

not, and they are, as admitted, a minority report, which in 

principle also supported that. 



2018 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

the crop insurance program should operate as it was prior to 

1991, and . . . the crop insurance price be set at the same 

level as the market price used in the revenue insurance 

program; 

 

And how much noise have the members opposite made about 

that issue?  Those were the recommendations of this broad 

industry committee. 

 

 the revenue insurance program should operate more as a 

deficiency payment type program; 

 

A distinct definition and distinctly carried forward in the Bill 

that's being introduced today. 

 

 that no offsets between price and yield should be included in 

the revenue insurance program; 

 

A point the members opposite have disputed repeatedly while 

they claim to support the integrity of the members of the 

committee and the good judgement of the members of the 

committee. 

 

 that both crop insurance and revenue insurance should reflect 

the management abilities of individual farmers in 

determining coverage and payments; 

 

The members opposite are aware that while they have 

sometimes tried to construct the new program as one that does 

not respect individual production, this program very much 

respects individual production.  It groups crops so one cannot 

select an individual crop and select one's own target program 

payment. 

 

It was one of the chief problems identified by this broad 

industry committee that when farmers needed to go to the 

program to select their coverage level, it created a problem in 

the industry.  It said "that both crop insurance and revenue 

insurance should reflect the management abilities of individual 

farmers in determining coverage and payments." 

 

And the members opposite are aware that when the program 

payment is calculated for an area, that your individual 

production index is multiplied by the area program payment to 

reflect your production above or below on the long-term area 

average.  So your investment in your production practices is 

reflected.  And I do not see why anybody would quarrel with 

that principle. 

 

And in response to the point that members opposite and the 

member from the Liberal Party have made often about offering 

a '91 and a '92 program, I tell the members opposite that that 

question was put to the committee.  And the committee made 

in its recommendation (f) on page 12 of their report: 

 

 that only the revised program be offered to farmers in 1992 

(i.e., current GRIP should not be continued as an option to 

farmers). 

 

That's the recommendation of the committee.  Long before you 

got into the dispute about what programs should be out there, 

they assessed the ability to deliver two programs concurrently,  

and it was concluded that it could not be done.  So the empty 

politics that's been . . . It has nothing to do with money, Mr. 

Goohsen.  It has nothing to do with money. It has everything to 

do with the practical ability . . .  
 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I ask the member to be reminded to 

refer to members by their constituencies and not by their proper 

names. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I apologize to the member opposite for 

that error. 
 

It has to do with the ability to keep two separate pools in a 

similar program and to try to create some day some sanity out 

of this, and to try to create a premium methodology that is 

somehow workable with the federal government.  Those were 

the recommendations of the committee. 
 

The process that was then followed . . . and I reiterate that that 

was as the result of the consultation with over 300 individuals 

and groups in Saskatchewan.  Those of you who would then 

say that something was erring in the process thereafter, if we 

believe in consultation and we take the work of a committee 

seriously, it seems to me that it is then the responsibility of the 

person receiving the report to take forward those 

recommendations -- a novel idea for the members opposite.  

But I think it's reasonable to think that if you put some people 

to work and give them a task and you ask them for some 

recommendations, that they might expect that you might 

implement them. 
 

So we began discussions with the federal government.  And 

members of the committee, a number of members of the 

committee were on the national GRIP committee and they 

brought their recommendations forward in the belief that it was 

within the federal-provincial agreement that these 

recommendations could be implemented without change. 
 

These are members of the committee, the hon. members that 

you described the other day.  These people believe that the 

federal-provincial agreement did not need to be altered.  

However, when we began the discussions with the federal 

government, then the members opposite have talked about 

game playing and politics in this business. 
 

Then the games started to be played.  Then the federal minister 

said no, no, this does not fit in within the federal-provincial 

agreement, much to the surprise of the members of our 

committee.  So then we began to say, well all right, then let's 

alter the federal-provincial agreement as others have, if you 

insist on interpreting that way.  And then the federal minister 

said no, we will not alter the federal-provincial agreement in 

the way we would do for any other province; we won't alter the 

agreement. 
 

For what reason?  I suspect . . . Well you can draw your own 

conclusions about what reasons there would be for that.  So 

then they said, you have to go through a different process.  

Then the officials that the members opposite have all so rightly 

described as honourable in our department were astounded 

when I presented them with the conclusion of the federal 

minister that they would have to go and meet with officials of 

other provincial governments and get the approval of the 

majority of 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2019 

provinces required to amend the agreement in order to put this 

agreement forward differently from any other agreement that 

had ever had to be changed. 

 

(1730) 

 

Talk about process.  And who played games and who was 

playing politics?  And not until we had that confirmed on 

March 12 or thereabouts did the federal government say, we 

will now approve your changes.  And it was not until that time 

that we could then say with certainty that Saskatchewan knew 

what the program was that it could offer -- the old program, 

much maligned by farmers, or the new program constructed by 

this committee. 

 

So at that point we made the announcement, and the members 

opposite correctly observed that we had a press conference on 

March 13 and unveiled the program and announced the 

changes that would be coming forward. 

 

And it was at that time that the decision-making time for 

farmers was extended from March 30, which is the date that is 

concurrent with the March 15 description that the members 

opposite have mentioned.  A 15-day time lag is what's given 

for farmers to make the decision in the pamphlet mentioned by 

the members. 

 

The government said no, we're going to give farmers till April 

30 to make the decision.  A decision extended to May 15 later 

on, and then by the court case that ensued, till July 20.  So 

farmers had a number of months to make these decisions, and 

farmers had a more extensive process for understanding these 

changes than had ever before been engaged in by the members 

opposite. 

 

The members talk about farm income adequacy and concern 

for farmers, and the member from the Liberal Party 

self-righteously talks about what this means and what this 

program does.  And the members opposite also talk about the 

letter to producers.  And they say Saskatchewan, in its fragile 

state, did not increase its contributions to program payments. 

 

Well I tell the members opposite that it was because the 

members, when they were in government, did not recognize the 

fragile nature of the Saskatchewan economy that they did take 

on substantially increased responsibility for paying for farm 

programs beginning in 1988 and continuing through to 1991, 

where Saskatchewan's contribution to farm programs, 

off-loading from the federal government, increased from no 

contribution to direct program payment to in excess of 200 

million.  In the 1991 year, there was $260 million paid by the 

province of Saskatchewan to farm support programs.  The 

Saskatchewan taxpayers are now paying for programs that 

were the responsibility of the federal government. 

 

We know what the income situation is in Saskatchewan.  We 

know the ability of Saskatchewan farmers to pay those kinds of 

costs, and we know the ability of Saskatchewan taxpayers to 

pay those kinds of costs.  And we will support Saskatchewan 

people in saying it is the federal government who needs to 

maintain the responsibility for those kinds of programs. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Now for the life of me I do not understand 

why the members opposite first got into these agreements; but 

secondly, continued to make comments about how 

Saskatchewan taxpayers should continue to be the victims of 

this off-loading when Saskatchewan farmers are suffering from 

a farm income crisis and a farm debt crisis that they fell into 

during the time of the members opposite and that they have no 

responsibility to bear.  And that we will fight for them with the 

federal government in order to get fair incomes, to restore the 

$900 million of income shortfall that they've incurred in the 

last number of years; and to put farming back on a sound track 

by demanding that the federal government do do what's just for 

Saskatchewan farmers, and recognizing the problems 

Saskatchewan taxpayers have in this. 

 

So with that, I want to conclude the debate on this Bill, and 

remind the members opposite that the process that was 

followed was as full as the time permitted by the call of the 

election by the members opposite, as broad as was possible 

within the construction of farm organizations in Saskatchewan, 

and implemented with as much integrity and as much attention 

to the detail of the report brought forward to the ministers, to 

the department, and to myself in the recommendations by the 

farm organizations. 

 

And if those actions are in error, then I am in error.  If not, they 

represent the kind of approach I would hope that I could use in 

future programs as well.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 5:35 p.m. until 5:49 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Trew 

Thompson Sonntag 

Wiens Roy 

Simard Cline 

Tchorzewski Scott 

Koskie McPherson 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Kluz 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Renaud 

Lautermilch Langford 

Hamilton Jess 

Johnson  

-- 31 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock 

-- 10 



2020 Saskatchewan Hansard August 5, 1992 

The Speaker: -- Pursuant now to the order of the Assembly 

that we have just voted on in the affirmative, I will now call the 

vote on the first reading of a Bill respecting amendments to 

Certain Farm Income Insurance Legislation. 

 

The division bells rang from 5:52 p.m. until 6:02 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Hamilton 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Simard Sonntag 

Tchorzewski Roy 

Teichrob Cline 

Shillington Scott 

Koskie McPherson 

Anguish Wormsbecker 

Goulet Crofford 

Kowalsky Stanger 

Mitchell Harper 

MacKinnon Kluz 

Penner Carlson 

Cunningham Renaud 

Upshall Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

-- 34 

Nays 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

Martens Haverstock 

-- 10 

The Bill read a first time and ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 6:06 p.m. 

 

 

 

 

 



August 5, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2021 

CORRIGENDUM 

 

On page 1937 of Hansard No. 57B Monday, August 3, 1992, 7 

p.m., in the second recorded division in the left-hand column 

substitute the name Hagel for Bradley. 

 

We apologize for this error. 

 

 


