




















































Hansard: August 04, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1941 

 August 4, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to 

present the following petition on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan: 

 

 To the Hon, Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are mainly from the Regina 

area, and I present two petitions.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have also 

petitions from the city of Regina and from the town of Pense 

with regards to the same topic, so I won't go into the reading of 

the entire thing.  I'll simply ask the people to 

come and collect them and -- the pages -- and we will hand 

them in and have them tabled for the purpose of the 

government to consider. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, I, as well, have petitions with 

respect to chiropractic care in this province. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is from the North Battleford area, 

Meota, some more North Battleford folks, Cochin, Unity, and 

Hafford.  The second one, the people are from primarily the 

Saskatoon area. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I too, Mr. Speaker, have petitions here dealing 

with chiropractic care and praying that the Assembly would 

present them to the minister, and that these petitioners are from 

the Regina area and I will provide them to the Assembly now. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a couple 

of petitions I would like to lay on the Table, Mr. Speaker.  It's 

to do with chiropractic treatment.  And as my colleagues have 

read the petition, I will not go through the whole prayer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are broadly from Regina city.  I'll 

not go into the addresses, but they're, I would say, 90 per cent 

from the city of Saskatoon.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I as well 

would like to lay some petitions on the Table for consideration 

by the Assembly and by the government -- petitions that have 

been signed by many people throughout the city, in this 

particular case, of Regina, asking the government to reconsider 

their chiropractic care and to give the same emphasis to health 

care that they have indicated they would in their speech and in 

the election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions again today that I'd like to lay upon the Table.  My 

colleagues have pretty well covered the reading so I won't take 

any more time to read that.  The petitions today, Mr. Speaker, 

the first one is nearly all Yorkton and Yorkton area -- 

Bredenbury, Foam Lake -- but most of them are from the city 

of Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other one is mostly Regina.  There's two on here from Gull 

Lake and the rest are Regina.  And by the addresses I'm quite 

sure they're all Churchill Downs. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions I would like to lay on the table for consideration for 

the Minister of Health and the government.  And I think 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

part of the prayer deserves to be re-read to emphasize the point 

that these petitioners are asking the government for: 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with a 

"wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I notice that the names on the petitions that I am 

presenting today are largely from Regina.  And I notice also a 

signature on the very same street that I live on, on Harvey 

Street in Regina here. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- I too am going to join my colleagues in 

presenting this petition with respect to chiropractic care in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  And I'll just go through the last 

sentence of this petition: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

People on this petition are from Regina, Holdfast, Southey, 

various southern communities, Grenfell, people from Vibank, 

Glenavon, Balgonie, Edenwold, Rocanville, and more 

addresses from the city of Regina.  I do now table these. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have two sets of 

petitions today to table, one to deal with the chiropractors and 

the other one to deal with GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program).  I'll only read the last paragraph of the chiropractic 

one, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic 

 treatment and that your Honourable Assembly withhold 

consent from any government proposal to discriminate 

against chiropractic patients by charging them fees not 

assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

There are individuals here, Mr. Speaker, from North Battleford, 

Cut Knife, Yorkton, Bredenbury, Churchbridge -- people from 

all over the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And secondly, Mr. Speaker, I have petitions here concerning 

the issue of GRIP, and I'll once again only read the last 

paragraph because the petition has been read into the record 

many times: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to: 

 

 1.) allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this year, 

 

 2.) start working with the federal government and farmers to 

design a program that will be a true "revenue insurance" 

program by the end of this calendar year, and 

 

 3.) to make sure that the individual cost-of-production to 

return ratio is there instead of a risk area formula. 

 

There are people here from Prince Albert, Paddockwood, 

Henribourg, Meath Park, Prince Albert city -- generally the 

north-central part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 11(7) they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of farmers and citizens of the province of Saskatchewan 

humbly praying that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to allow the 1991 GRIP program to stand for this 

year; 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is my privilege 

to introduce to you and through you to members of the 

Assembly two individuals who are seated in your east gallery, 

and I ask them to rise please, Robin and Hazel Bellamy.  Robin 

is the executive director of the Friendship Inn, and both of 

them have worked very hard in the community of Saskatoon to 

enhance the lives of people there.  So I ask you to warmly 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like 

to rise today to introduce to you and through you to the 

Assembly four young people in your gallery up top there.  One 

of them is my nephew, David Cunningham, and his friends 

Ingrid Fernandez, Amanda Fayant, and Stacey Fayant.  And I 

notice he was looking around, having a hard time recognizing 

his uncle with a tie on, but I think he finally picked me out.  

Welcome them to the Assembly, please. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goulet: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 

and through you to other members of the House, a person from 

Cumberland constituency, Earl Cook who is at the west gallery.  

Mr. Cook has been involved in the field of education for many 

years.  He served as the director for the northern teacher 

education program which is quite famous in the province of 

Saskatchewan and in Canada on teacher education, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as now working for the Northern Lights 

School Division as a consultant in the field of education.  

Please welcome Mr. Cook. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Complaint Against Crop Insurance Board Member 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 

responsible for Crop Insurance.  Mr. Minister, the board of the 

Saskatchewan Crop Insurance is made up of people whom you 

appointed to set and carry out policy with respect to the GRIP 

and Crop Insurance programs.  This board is appointed by 

yourself. 

 

Mr. Minister, you said one of the main reasons for changing the 

1991 GRIP program was moral hazard.  Will the minister of 

Crop Insurance admit that this was one of the main reasons for 

introducing the 1992 GRIP program?  And will he tell us 

whether he would expect Crop Insurance board members to not 

only live up to the letter of the law, but the spirit and the terms 

of the Crop Insurance contract? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, moral hazard is not 

the term that I would use to describe the reason for changes to 

the GRIP program.  The changes to the GRIP program were 

one that would make it more market responsive, would make 

the farmers grow crops that were the proper crops for the 

market, and the conditions that would result in cheaper 

premiums in the future for farmers and for both levels of 

government.  And if you say to a farmer, if you grow lentils I'll 

guarantee you $200 an acre no matter what happens to the price 

of lentils and no matter what happens to the price of lentils, and 

no matter what happens to your crop; if you grow barley, I'll 

guarantee you $90 an acre no matter what happens to the price 

of barley or no matter what happens to the crop, I don't think 

the moral hazard is with the farmer, the moral hazard is with 

the program.  And that's the reason the programs were changed. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, Mr. Minister, would 

you please tell us in the Assembly today whether you would 

expect board members to live up to the terms and the spirit of 

the Crop Insurance contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we expect everybody 

to live up to the terms of their contract. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you.  Will the minister tell us what he 

believes the moral hazards are, associated with farming in this 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the moral hazards are 

that somebody will write a program that doesn't fit the 

conditions in Saskatchewan and will lead us, not only the 

farmers but the taxpayers, into oblivion as we try to pay higher 

and higher premiums from a program that doesn't respond to 

market and gives the wrong market signals to farmers.  That's 

the moral hazard that's involved with the GRIP program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the only real moral hazard the 

farmers of this province have to worry about is this 

government.  Every time the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government turns around, farmers have to check their pockets 

to find out if their wallets are still there. 

 

Livestock cash advances, gone.  FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) program, gone.  Fuel rebates, gone.  Rural 

hospitals, gone.  Rural schools and even, yes, their highways, 

gone.  And meanwhile the government accuses farmers of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I've listened to about a half a dozen 

government members interrupting while the member is trying 

to ask his question.  I heard no interruption when the minister 

was answering.  I don't want any interruption when the 

member's asking his question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The government seems 

very high on shoving its version of moral hazards down the 

throats, and morals down the throats, of the people of 

Saskatchewan.  All you have to do is look at the recent Liquor 

Board announcements in the past days. 

 

Mr. Minister, if one of the board members for your Crop 

Insurance board -- a board which, I remind you, you appointed 

-- if we were to find one of those members abused the GRIP 

program, and you found that they abused the GRIP program, 

what action would you take, Mr. Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 

again continue to read questions and not listen to the answer, I 

think.  They seem to have the GRIP program on the brain here.  

They've tried to link it to rural 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

hospitals and to lingerie shows.  I don't know the relevance 

there, but I think if somebody's in violation of their contract, I 

would certainly like to know that.  Because as in any case, we 

expect people to live up to their contract. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, I have a letter here from a 

gentleman that has written to the board, the chairman of the 

board of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance.  The minister knows 

full well about that letter.  The letter is a complaint against one 

of the members of the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance board. 

 

Will the minister confirm that the complaint was that Mr. Greg 

Marshall of your board has not only admitted, not only 

admitted to abusing the program, but he is also counselling 

other farmers to do the same? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again you get back to 

the comments that I made at the beginning.  If a program gives 

the wrong signals and farmers follow the wrong signals, I do 

not blame the farmers for being morally wrong or breaking 

contracts.  If farmers are following the signals that are given by 

the program, that is management decisions.  And those 

decisions need to be based on what's best for the province and 

for the taxpayers and for the farmers themselves, and not on a 

program that leads them to make decisions that are not 

economically sound.  And that's what the old program did and 

that's why we changed it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, would you then confirm that you 

just said that you condone the action of Mr. Marshall of 

abusing the program and counselling other farmers to do the 

same? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we don't tell any 

farmer how to farm his land and we don't tell Mr. Marshall how 

to farm his land.  And that is why we changed the program, 

because the program was telling people how to farm their land 

and that's not the way we want this province to operate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, in an earlier question you suggested 

that everyone should live up to the terms of the agreement, 

even board members, Mr. Minister.  Will you confirm for this 

House that you believe the actions of Mr. Marshall of abusing 

the program are acceptable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again we have 

allegations.  Day after day after day members stand up on the 

opposite side of the House and make allegations against people 

-- misleading and deliberately slanderous allegations.  If you 

have evidence that Mr. Marshall was illegal and did something 

illegal or in contradiction to his contract, if he broke his 

contract, he committed fraud or 

in any way abused . . . in any was in violation of his contract, 

step outside the House and say that.  And don't come into the 

House and use your cover in the House here to make 

slanderous allegations against individuals day after day after 

day. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, you have had possession of the 

letter since February, the letter of complaint against Mr. 

Marshall.  Mr. Marshall, it alleges, is abusing the program.  

Have you taken the time to go through the complaint and look 

into it to see whether indeed the allegations are correct? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I have no evidence 

that Mr. Marshall was in violation of his contract, that he did 

anything unlawful or wrong.  And if I have evidence of that . . . 

if the member opposite has that evidence, please table it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, the complaint in possession of 

yourself and in possession of myself indicates the board 

member in question is apparently recommending to other 

farmers to maximize their profits from the GRIP program by 

knowingly eliminating inputs.  Will the minister at least . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I ask the Minister of Health not 

to intervene and that I also ask the member from Wilkie not to 

intervene . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don't need your help, 

sir. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, will you at least survey Mr. 

Marshall's neighbour in investigation so that the information 

can all be viewed by the public of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have looked at 

that complaint.  There is no evidence of wrongdoing.  If there 

is evidence of wrongdoing, I want to see it.  And I don't think 

that the member opposite should be standing there, accusing 

somebody of wrongdoing, using his privilege in the House to 

do what would outside this House be slander and unlawful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, not only do you have the letter, I 

have the letter.  And I will table it this afternoon.  Mr. Minister, 

would you confirm that Mr. Marshall has, like other 

appointments, like the Liquor Board, been a contributor to the 

NDP Party, and that qualified him for a membership on the 

board of directors of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Again, Mr. Marshall is very 

competent.  He farms.  He has a background in farming. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

 He has a background in insurance.  And he is a very competent 

and qualified person to be a member of the Crop Insurance.  

And I again say that to make allegations and slanders in the 

House against somebody is . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I want to remind the 

members in the opposition, I don't think there was very much 

interruption when the member from Kindersley asked his 

question.  And I've heard three or four of you people 

interrupting. 

 

Now I think the Minister of Health ought to be ashamed too.  

When the Speaker is on his feet, you know you don't interrupt . 

. . And that goes for the member from Rosthern too.  You 

people don't want to ask questions, fine with me.  I can stand 

here as long as you want me to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, the letter that was 

tabled here -- and I have seen the letter -- is not . . . does have 

no proof, has no evidence of wrongdoing in that letter that was 

tabled here.  I've read the letter.  I've looked into the allegation. 

There is no proof of any wrongdoing.  And I think for the 

members to suggest in this House that there was wrongdoing 

and that somebody has acted immorally or illegally on the basis 

of a letter that does not even say that, I think that, Mr. Speaker, 

is wrong. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Marshall has admitted as a 

farm business man it is not his job to grow wheat but to make 

money.  He admitted to growing wheat on stubble with no 

fertilizer.  He was asked if that would be considered an 

acceptable practice by experts in agriculture.  And he admitted 

that that probably was not so. 

 

The minister has a signed complaint from a citizen of our 

province, and you're trying to tell this House that you have 

acted.  This is shameful.  This is the same type of action that 

your took with respect to drought: fly over it.  That's your kind 

of action. 

 

Once again the minister is . . . We would ask the minister to 

take the time to throughly review this complaint and examine 

the farming practices of your NDP appointment.  If there is any 

perception of wrongdoing, will the minister do the honourable 

thing and ask for Mr. Marshall's* resignation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, would the members 

opposite have me investigate the farm practices of every person 

in Saskatchewan?  Should I check . . . Mr. Speaker, are they 

asking me to check every farmer that didn't use fertilizer, who 

didn't use an adequate level of fertilizer, and pass judgement on 

whether or not that was a good farming practice? 

 

Is that the kind of government that the members opposite are 

asking for -- when we send inspectors around to check farmers' 

practices and see if they delivered enough fertilizer or put 

enough chemical on?  Who's going to make that judgement? 

What we did was change the program so that farmers can 

respond to the market-place and make the decisions based on 

market. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Commitment to Democratic Reforms 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy 

Premier.  Mr. Minister, during your nine and a half years in 

opposition, you frequently demanded legislative reform from 

the government of the day.  In your first throne speech, you 

stated that your main objective, and I quote, was to restore 

public respect for this legislature. 

 

By the evidence of rule changes and abuses of power by your 

government to stifle debate and usurp democratic processes, it 

suggests that you in fact have abandoned this commitment.  

What reforms are your government prepared to put forward to 

restore public respect for this legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to 

respond to that.  As the member opposite knows by her 

presence at Rules Committee meetings and by the first 50 days 

of the session, we had brought in some meaningful democratic 

reform here in the Assembly that included private members' 

statements; it allowed the Leader of the Liberal Party to move 

motions without seconders. 

 

Those rule changes we agree with and we believe the Leader of 

the Liberal Party should have the opportunity to move motions 

without seconders.  And as she will know, the official 

opposition would not allow those rules to remain in place.  

However, I'm sure with your support and your encouragement 

of your other members of the opposition, that those kind of 

changes can take place that will make the legislature work 

better for the people who elected us. 

 

So those kind of changes are being studied.  The Rules 

Committee is in place.  We're looking at other ways to make 

the legislature and public involvement more relevant to the 

political process.  And ideas that you have and members of the 

opposition have, I'm sure we'd be very interested in hearing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you.  Mr. Minister, indeed I was 

part of the Rules and Procedures Committee.  Mr. Minister, 

indeed I was part of the Rules and Procedures Committee.  And 

I sat on the committee on which your government made a 

decision to unilaterally use its majority on the committee to 

undermine all of our work that we did do to arrive at what had 

been instigated for 50 days, so don't talk to me about who 

changed the rules and began to I think go on a slippery slope 

right down into oblivion as far as democratic reform is 

concerned. 

 

You were the people who said that you were going to defend 

democratic reform when you got into government.  You told 

this to people during the campaign.  And now your government 

is in the position to do something, to actually restore public 

trust and actually reform this Assembly. 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

I want you to tell the people of this province when you're going 

to stop manipulating rules to fulfil your own political agenda 

and actually institute reform in this legislature. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- The member will know that the rule 

changes that we had in place were supported by all members of 

the Rules Committee.  And it was brought into the Assembly 

and the government members supported it and members of the 

opposition supported it.  And after 50 days, when we wanted to 

extend those rules, it wasn't possible because members of the 

opposition voted against it. 

 

Now I want to talk about the issue of bell-ringing, the issue of 

bell-ringing, the issue that you raise here and take such a strong 

stand on.  You will know that the public in Saskatchewan, by 

many, many expressions, are opposed to lengthy bell-ringing 

and wanted that changed.  And the government acted on that. 

 

The member opposite will know, who raises the question, that 

you felt so strongly about that change that when the vote came 

in the House, you sat on your hands and didn't even vote.  So to 

raise that issue today and say, I felt so strongly about this rule 

change that I wanted it to go this way or that way, we are still 

waiting patiently for you to tell us how you do feel about it, 

because when the vote came, you refused to vote on it.  So 

today raising . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

this is not about me.  I voted according to my principle and 

everybody in this place knows it.  They know exactly.  I, like 

the members . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  I wonder which 

member in the government is going to be answering.  Or are 

you anticipating the question already and answering? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't have to 

defend a principled position and everyone knows what it is.  

The NDP, since you've come into power, has legislated 

by-election reform. 

 

Will you commit to take a step further and give people the 

confidence that anyone who declares intention to seek a federal 

political nomination will be asked to step down upon filing 

those nomination papers, or remove him or herself from the 

taxpayers' payroll while campaigning for the nomination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting 

that when the Leader of the Liberal Party, Mr. Ralph Goodale, 

who sat in that exact position, ran for the nomination in Regina 

South, collected his salary as an MLA (Member of the 

Legislative Assembly), even though he was out actively, very 

seldom showing up in the Assembly, that he worked very 

diligently for the Liberal Party, working on a nomination. 

 

I wonder at what point the Liberal Party changed their 

mind as it comes to federal candidates and their relationship as 

MLAs in the legislature.  When did you make that change in 

the Liberal Party?  Was it today in the Assembly?  Or was it at 

the previous convention of the Liberal Party?  When did you 

make that change? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I don't speak on 

behalf of Ralph Goodale.  I speak on behalf of myself.  And 

two wrongs do not make a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Just to remind the member to 

direct her questions through the Chair rather than to the 

member opposite. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

when will the minister confirm or deny that the member from 

Regina North West has indeed filed his nomination papers, and 

would he be in a conflict of interest if he continued to be paid a 

salary and allowances as a provincial MLA as any person 

previously would have been doing in this House, and will be in 

the future while campaigning for a nomination? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is that there's 

very . . . Mr. Speaker, is that there are very strict regulations 

and laws as it comes to who can run and who can't run for 

federal nominations and federal election.  And that all of the 

rules and laws that apply to federal candidates will apply to 

anyone in this caucus or anyone else in the country when they 

run for federal office.  That all of the laws that apply and are in 

place will be followed very diligently by any member of the 

NDP when they come to run for nominations.  I'm sure that the 

Liberal Party will follow the same rules.  And I'm sure that Mr. 

Goodale, whether you support him or not, was following all the 

rules and regulations that were in fact in place. 

 

If you want to change the laws at the federal level as it applies 

to federal candidates, you're in the wrong place.  You'll have to 

run for a nomination and go to Ottawa. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, as 

I stated before, talk is cheap, and the people judge a 

government on its actions.  When will you and your 

government . . . when are you going to cease using your power 

to ramrod political agendas through this House and direct it to 

achieving some meaningful democratic reform which will 

actually make this legislature workable again?  It's the 

government's responsibility to show leadership. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well I think it's the responsibility of 

all members of the Assembly to make the Assembly work.  

And obviously the members of the opposition right now are 

involved in a filibuster to prevent the GRIP Bill from being 

presented to the House.  And that's fair enough.  They're using 

the rules at their disposal in the rule book that we all follow to 

delay the tabling and the first reading of the GRIP Bill.  And 

they've done that effectively I believe now for 57 days.  And 

that's well within their mandate. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

Now there comes a time in the Assembly where we will use as 

a government the rules of the Assembly to table and give first 

reading to a Bill.  That's not unusual.  The rules are there for all 

of us to apply. 

 

I never heard the Leader of the Liberal Party once in Rules 

Committee say that this rule should be changed.  If you're 

saying rule 34 should be excluded from the rule book, that's a 

fair comment.  But I have not heard you once in the Rules 

Committee make that argument.  So if you're opposed to it, 

there's a place . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Complaint Against Crop Insurance Board Member 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for the Crop Insurance Corporation.  

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for 

Crop Insurance. 

 

Mr. Minister, you are responsible for a multibillion dollar 

industry in this province.  I'd like to quote from the letter, 

because this letter that was given to you in February and tabled 

in this legislature today has a quote that I think that you should 

be reminded of. 

 

As Mr. Saul says: 

 

 He then stated that I could have done the same and that 

maybe I should have . . . a closer look at the program this 

spring.  I replied that I had better morals than that and that if 

everyone thought the same as him the crop insurance system 

would collapse. 

 

Mr. Minister, this was a person who wrote you a letter with 

witnesses' names attached, who heard your board member say 

this in public.  The system would collapse because of what 

your board member was condoning. 

 

You said that you performed an investigation. Mr. Minister, for 

the sake of Mr. Saul and the witnesses who signed the letter, 

would you table that investigation in this House? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we do not do legal 

investigations of hearsay and moral values of people.  And 

again I say, we are not in the business of judging farmers' 

morals.  That's not what the Crop Insurance is here for. 

 

And the Crop Insurance, if you look at what happened in Crop 

Insurance this year, the fertilizer use is going up -- way, way up 

in Saskatchewan, and not doing so in the neighbouring 

provinces.  You will see that this was very widespread; that the 

program encouraged farmers to produce for the program, to 

seed crops that were not right for the market, to use input and 

management practices that were not right for the market.  The 

program encouraged that.  That wasn't the farmers that were 

immoral; it was the program that was immoral.  And we've 

made changes to the program.  And if you would let us bring it 

into the House, those changes would be in here 

and implemented and that would solve your moral problems. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

that's not the question that was asked.  You were sent a letter, 

Mr. Minister, by a contract holder with witnesses' signatures 

attached, that your board member was advising people in his 

community to abuse the system -- not to use inputs, not to use 

fertilizer, not to use spray.  This is your board member. 

 

Now, Mr. Minister, you admitted in this House the other day 

that all of your board members from the Liquor Board were 

bought-and-paid-for NDP members.  Mr. Minister, if the same 

criteria's in place, I can see why you don't want to reveal the 

investigations.  Surely a contract holder of Crop Insurance has 

a right to ask the minister for an investigation.  And you should 

table that here today, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, nobody has the right 

to ask Crop Insurance to check farmers' morals.  The program 

is what was creating the problem.  The program was creating 

people to use poor management in poor management decisions.  

The program was causing farmers to make bad management 

decisions.  And that was a reason for the program change. 

 

It had nothing to do with the farmers' morals.  It had to do with 

the lousy program that was introduced by the previous 

administration.  And we made the corrections to the program 

that now let farmers make the decisions based on what they can 

grow, what they can grow best, and what they can sell best.  

And we do not in Crop Insurance have to go out to the farm 

and tell them how to farm their land.  They can make those 

decisions on their own.  And that was the purpose of the . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Bill No. 86 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Year 

ending March 31, 1993 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move 

that Bill No. 86 be now read a second and third time. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to draw to the 

attention of the public, and particularly the media that explains 

to the public what's happening in the legislature, exactly what 

happened in this interim supply Bill yesterday. 

 

I want to draw to the attention . . . It was a holiday yesterday 

throughout most of Saskatchewan, and perhaps some of the 

media didn't recognize that for the first time 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

in Saskatchewan's history we had a Minister of Finance bring 

his officials into the Legislative Assembly and when we asked 

questions of the Minister of Finance, he wouldn't answer them.  

He never got up once to respond. 

 

The government, the NDP government, invoked closure on 

interim supply so that in the normal proceedings where you 

have grievance before supply . . . members of the opposition 

can ask questions and the minister should give you answers.  

The NDP administration invoked closure which meant we only 

had 20 minutes a piece.  And when two or three of us asked 

questions, starting with the member from Arm River, about 

health care, about education, and agriculture, we waited for the 

Finance minister to get on his feet and he refused to stand. 

 

And that's never happened in the history of Saskatchewan.  

And as far as I know, it's never happened anywhere in 

democracy in the British parliamentary system, where the 

Minister of Finance when he has his officials here to answer 

questions -- and we're going through grievance before supply -- 

he doesn't get to his feet. 

 

People have asked, what's happening in the Legislative 

Assembly in the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

(1445) 

 

Imagine, we're talking about money going for taxes and health 

care and education, agriculture, roads, and we want to ask the 

minister and his officials that are brought in here: why this? 

Why not that? What are you doing with one-twelfth? Why are 

you out? What are the variations?  And the Minister of Finance 

doesn't get to his feet.  We've never seen that.  And no one has 

ever heard of that in the British parliamentary system.  This 

Legislative Assembly under the NDP with their new rules is 

turning into a complete democratic sham. 

 

How could the minister bring his officials in and have them sit 

through this, knowing, knowing that he would not stand up and 

answer questions?  Mr. Speaker, it's such an oddity, it's so 

undemocratic that we'd have a chairman of this Legislative 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- you weren't in the Chair, the 

chairman -- because you could ask questions, and we're all here 

to get information, and the Minister of Finance will not 

respond. 

 

He's an NDP Minister of Finance, afraid.  And in front of his 

officials and in front of the television cameras, afraid to answer 

questions.  And in part because he's afraid of the answers.  But 

secondly, Mr. Speaker, he knows once he gets up and then 

takes his seat, he can't get up again, given the crazy rules of this 

Legislative Assembly.  He was confined to one answer.  So you 

bring in officials, and even if you had the courage to answer a 

question or two, when he sat down he could never get up again.  

What nonsense. 

 

We have members of this Legislative Assembly who have been 

here 15, 20, maybe 25 years, like the member from Quill Lakes 

and others.  And they, Mr. Minister, they, Mr. Speaker, know 

all of the reasons that you bring officials in and ask them to 

help the minister give the answers.  And now when you get the 

NDP drunk with power and they 

come in here and they change the rules unilaterally, they bring 

in closure even on interim supply.  They even rule themselves 

out of participating. 

 

Well I want the public to know, those in the gallery, those in 

the public, those in television and radio, that when we asked 

this minister questions about health and education, he stood for 

the first time -- it was a black, black Monday -- the NDP 

Finance minister didn't get up from his seat and answer one 

question.  Not one question. 

 

We had closure imposed on us -- closure imposed on us.  And 

the Minister of Finance from his seat saying, that's not right.  

And it's absolutely right.  We brought it in.  We had the first 

speaker after closure, the second, and the third speaker after 

closure.  We waited for the minister to respond and he said 

absolutely nothing. 

 

He brought his officials in.  They never counselled him because 

they never had to for two reasons.  Number one, because he's 

afraid, and this lack of courage in coming up with the answers 

because people are complaining all across the province is bad 

enough.  But secondly, he was stymied by his own rules 

because he knew if he did get up and give an answer -- how 

many items have you increased the tax 15 per cent? -- and then 

he sat down, he couldn't get up again. 

 

Now what kind of a Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is 

that?  What kind of Assembly when the Minister of Finance in 

supply, in grievance before supply, is only entitled to one 

statement and then if he takes his place he can't answer any 

more because of the haywire rules, the arrogance, the 

undemocratic nature of the NDP administration. 

 

How could any of you go back home, or 15 years from now 

when you're trying to explain to the public about your great 

performance in 1992, justify the Minister of Finance not being 

able to speak because of your rules in this Legislative 

Assembly.  Unbelievable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Dewdney who failed to 

get up, the Minister of Finance who wouldn't get up in the 

Legislative Assembly, and answer questions because of the 

closure motion here -- and he had a chance once and he 

wouldn't because he was afraid to give the answers; and 

secondly because he knew he could have no rebuttal, couldn't 

dig it up -- this is what he said about this kind of process in 

1989. 

 

And I quote this NDP Finance minister when he was in 

opposition, the self-righteous individual in opposition.  This is 

August 7, 1989, and this is the member from Regina Dewdney, 

the NDP member who now is afraid to stand in this Legislative 

Assembly and invokes closure: 

 

 But I want to say, as other colleagues of mine have said, that 

even though the government may muzzle us in this 

legislature, we will not be muzzled in saying the things that 

need to be said.  Because if we can't say them in here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we will say them from one end of the 

province, wherever we go, because those are the kinds of 

things that are important to the people of Saskatchewan.  

Democracy will be protected by 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

 this opposition to the largest extent that we can, at every 

opportunity that we can. 

 

Well, Mr. Minister, Mr. NDP Minister, you didn't like closure.  

You didn't like the thought of it.  And you said what you will 

do is you will tell people all across the province about how the 

Legislative Assembly here was trying to hush you up in 

opposition.  And now you sit in your place through Estimates 

of supply and never even get up to speak as a result of your 

rule changes. 

 

Well believe me, Mr. Minister, you're going to eat those words 

when you say we're going to tell people all across the province.  

The people of Saskatchewan are going to know about the NDP 

and the undemocratic nature of the NDP. The hypocrisy -- the 

hypocrisy. 

 

And the minister points his finger over here because I'm 

reading to him what he thought and what I believe he knows is 

right when he was in opposition.  And he sits there as a 

minister of the Crown and brought his officials in in some sort 

of a sham and façade, knowing he wouldn't even answer a 

single question. 

 

What do the officials say when they go back into the 

bureaucracy?  Well the minister brought us in, but we couldn't 

even advise him because he couldn't speak, given his own 

rules.  It's a joke all over town in the bureaucracy.  Officials 

come in to advise ministers and they can't even respond 

because the sham this Legislative Assembly has turned into.  

What a joke. 

 

And the member from Quill Lakes says, why don't you grow 

up and get on with it?  He's yipping from his seat.  These kinds 

of rules, this is what you got elected for.  This is it.  This is it.  

Now he's . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I ask the member from 

Quill Lakes to please not continue to interrupt.  I'm sure he will 

get up later on to make his views known to the legislature. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And the interesting 

part, Mr. Speaker, about the closure motion yesterday and the 

words that are so diametrically opposed to what the NDP said 

in opposition and what they're doing in government, is while 

the members like the member from Quill can chirp from their 

seats, not one of them got up and spoke.  The political cowards.  

Not one got up and spoke about interim supply and about what 

they're doing with the money. 

 

Every member of this Legislative Assembly had an opportunity 

to stand up there and tell us why they got elected, tell us about 

their new reforms, tell us about the self-righteous nature of all 

of these things, and not one of them . . . But when we get up to 

speak, they talk from their seat and they clap, and it's bravado, 

as they jam the rules through -- unilateral changes, when even a 

minister himself can't respond in supply. 

 

It is pathetic, absolutely pathetic.  No place else in Canada will 

you see this.  And only with an NDP administration.  The 

back-benchers, I'm sure, are really proud of this when they get 

to their caucus meetings -- really proud of them.  Boy, what a 

nice democratic bunch, the 

non-democratic party.  That's what it is -- the non-democratic 

party, when your own rules don't allow your ministers to 

respond.  Because if you didn't reply and you check it with the 

Clerk, he was one chance and then he's cut off.  Great rules! 

Great rules.  And not one of them would get up and defend 

them. 

 

Not one NDPer would stand in his place or her place and 

defend these rule changes.  Not the minister, not the member 

from Quills.  And the member from Quills says it's not a rule 

change.  When you bring in unilateral changes to the way this 

place operates and only the NDP get . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I asked the member . . . it 

wouldn't be so provocative if he spoke through the Chair rather 

than to individual members in the House.  But having said that, 

I want to ask the member from Quill Lakes again, please not to 

interrupt. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, when the members chirp from 

their seat . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I asked the member to direct his 

answers through the Chair, and let's get on with the topic that is 

before us. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the members of the NDP would 

not speak when they had an occasion, not once.  They found 

other avenues to speak up, but they didn't have the courage, the 

political courage, to speak up in this Legislative Assembly.  

And as well on this black Monday when the Minister of 

Finance couldn't answer questions, the NDP members of the 

legislature, and only in Saskatchewan with the NDP, guess 

what else happened?  They voted alone with their rules.  Only 

the government got to vote.  Imagine, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The tradition is, you look to the Sergeant-at-Arms and if he 

brings in the members from both sides, then away you go.  And 

he looks to the opposition first.  Not under the NDP.  You don't 

even need other members in the Legislative Assembly.  So two 

rule changes unilaterally made. 

 

Yesterday was a black, black day, when only the NDP, only 

government members, get to vote in Saskatchewan.  Isn't that 

democratic?  Well there they go, Mr. Speaker.  They had an 

opportunity to defend this yesterday and they didn't defend it.  

They can chirp away now.  Undemocratic. 

 

It's a disgrace of every Legislative Assembly across the 

country.  You get elected because you believe in some things.  

This is not part of the history and the legacy of the CCF-NDP 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 

Party).  Where do you find this in the books?  You find this 

somewhere in the bowels of the files in Tommy Douglas 

House? 

 

Where's this from?  Where do you get it from?  What is this 

new-found democracy, this non-democratic party that will even 

muzzle its Finance minister and muzzle all the members?  The 

caucus members can't speak.  You can't speak.  And they say:  

well just watch.  They had every opportunity with closure, on 

closure, on closure, to 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

speak.  Mum.  Not one of them spoke, because they're afraid to 

speak. 

 

And number two, they're told if they do speak, it might prolong 

this because they'll dig themselves into a hole.  Well you've 

dug yourself into an historic hole that you're not going to get 

out of for generations, because nobody's going to forget this. 

 

As the minister of Finance said in '89:  we're going to tell 

people all over the province about this.  Your federal members 

of parliament are ashamed of you.  Rod Laporte is ashamed of 

the NDP in Saskatchewan.  He doesn't want any part of you.  

He says I'm not a part of the NDP in Saskatchewan; it's a 

different party; they're on a different agenda; they don't ask us 

about this.  They said the NDP federally are going nowhere, 

they're going down the tubes.  And in Saskatchewan it's led by 

you people because you are arrogant, and you unilaterally 

change rules. 

 

And imagine in democracy now when you won't even allow 

your minister to answer questions in interim supply, and none 

of your members stand up to defend it.  What an unbelievable 

Monday yesterday was, and then only NDPers get to vote in 

this Legislative Assembly.  The first time that's ever happened 

here, and as far as I know the first time we've seen it in Canada. 

 

How do you feel about that?  Vote NDP and only the NDPers 

get to vote.  The opposition doesn't matter.  We'll change the 

rules. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I would remind the Leader of 

the Opposition that we are on interim supply, second and third 

reading.  That means we discuss the principle of the Bill that is 

before us, not what occurred in the House yesterday on 

something else.  And I wish that he would get back on the 

principle of the Bill that is before the legislature. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the principle of this Bill, interim 

supply, is in such shambles.  The principle is in such shambles 

because the Minister of Finance yesterday refused on this Bill 

to answer questions.  Now that's never happened -- ever, ever 

happened in the history of Saskatchewan where the Minister of 

Finance wouldn't answer questions on interim supply. 

 

He was muzzled by the rules that the NDP brought in.  The 

caucus are all muzzled.  So the officials come in.  They are of 

no use at all.  And, Mr. Speaker, the officials comes in and 

they're set, and he wouldn't bring his deputy minister.  He 

brought somebody else, somebody else.  He knew very well 

that he wouldn't respond. 

 

And the NDP House Leader knew there would be no point in 

having him respond, because if he did get up, that would be it.  

And he'd have to take his place and then he couldn't respond 

again.  What an absurdity, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 

principle of this Bill -- unprincipled, absolutely unprincipled. 

 

(1500) 

 

I want to add to that, because when we look at the process 

that we go through now on interim supply, on the principle of 

grievance before supply, where we experience these kind of 

rule changes . . . And listen, Mr. Speaker, I'll give you another 

good example, and I just use the Minister of Finance when he 

had to experience this and what he said.  Here's what the 

member from Saskatoon Riversdale said about the same 

process: 

 

 . . . a government coming in and using the heavy hand of its 

majority and arbitrarily deciding in its opinion that the 

opposition's debate has been too long, in its opinion that our 

arguments have been irrelevant, in its opinion that we ought 

not to be talking about it. 

 

 They come here to define the rules of this legislature, to do 

this arbitrarily by simple majority, and to equate this kind of 

heavy-handed, undemocratic, unprecedented, and 

unwarranted attack to the rules where all the members agree . 

. . 

 

That's the NDP leader, the NDP Premier, August 4, 1989. 

 

And he goes on to say about this procedure: 

 

 But I tell you, Mr. Speaker, what this does show.  This 

motion today shows (that) this black Friday for democracy, 

this unprecedented attack on freedom in the province of 

Saskatchewan, maybe an attack on 26 lonely members of the 

opposition. 

 

Well there you go, Mr. Speaker.  In this process the NDP 

leader, who is Premier now, condemned the closure because he 

only had 26 members in opposition.  And he says, the huge 

majority would do this.  Now the NDP have all of the members 

but 11 and they have to ram it down the throats of a smaller 

opposition.  Ten members here. 

 

And they will not answer questions; they changed the rules; 

they do exactly the opposite to what they said before.  They 

even changed the rules so that they can't speak.  And on top of 

that . . . The NDP leader talked about a black Friday.  On black 

Monday yesterday, the NDP even got to vote only by 

themselves.  How democratic! 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where were you? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- And the Minister of Finance says, where were 

we?  We were watching you, Mr. Minister of Finance, vote by 

yourself under your rules where you can't even speak.  And the 

NDP administration has changed the rules so only they can 

vote.  Only the NDP can vote, because we are cut off from 

speaking and cut off from answers.  We have a small time to 

speak, and then when we want answers, you are cut off from 

giving the answers under your rules. 

 

And the NDP member from Regina Dewdney says, well where 

were we?  We were here fighting for farmers, fighting for 

people, and fighting for rules that are democratic.  And a 

non-democratic party has changed all that in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  And the hypocrisy of campaigning on the 

opposite is what's very interesting. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the same arguments come forward from the 

member for Regina Churchill Downs.  This is on August 7, 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

1989, when he apparently in good conscience didn't like 

unilateral changes or closure.  And I quote: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I rise to take part in what I think is an (ever) 

historical debate, the first time closure has ever been invoked 

in this province. 

 

And he says this, and I want to read it carefully and slowly to 

the hon. member.  This is the NDP member from Regina 

Churchill Downs.  He says this about closure: 

 

 And I sincerely hope (this closure) will be the last time (it's 

used and) ever invoked in (the) province (of Saskatchewan). 

 

Mr. Speaker, look at the hypocrisy.  Look at the political 

hypocrisy.  The NDP member for Regina Churchill Downs, 

Mr. Speaker, said this: 

 

 I rise to take part in what I think is an (ever) historical debate 

. . . 

 

And then he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . the first time closure has ever been invoked in this 

province.  And I sincerely hope it'll be the last time closure is 

ever invoked in this province. 

 

That is the NDP member from Regina Churchill Downs who 

said he hoped he'd never see closure again.  But was he telling 

the truth? Did he really believe that?  I believe he believed it.  

And I believe all the NDPers believed it. 

 

And yesterday we had it twice by an NDP administration. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind the Leader of 

the Opposition again, that speech that he's making today would 

have been very appropriate yesterday when we were talking 

about closure. 

 

Rule 15, rule 15 is what we have before us today, is second and 

third reading of the Appropriation Bill, and rule 15, let me read 

it out to the members.  Rule 15 simply says: 

 

 The proceedings on the Orders of the Day for resuming 

debate on the motion "That the Appropriation Bill be now 

read the second and third time", and on any amendments 

proposed thereto, shall not exceed one day. 

 

This is the second and third reading of the Appropriation Bill.  

The closure did not, did not, pertain to the second and third 

reading.  It pertained to the other stage of the Appropriation 

Bill.  And your speech, sir, would have been in order yesterday, 

but today you should be on the principle of second and third 

reading of the Appropriation Bill.  Order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, I don't believe, the members of 

the opposition certainly don't believe, that this Bill should be 

read a second or third time.  It shouldn't be.  It shouldn't be 

because it's all wrong. 

 

This is historic.  What happened yesterday is all wrong and we 

don't believe it should be read a second or third 

time or ever, under these reasons. 

 

Because the minister couldn't even answer questions.  How 

could we have it read a second or third time when he can't 

answer questions?  It's absurd.  You don't need an opposition 

then, if that's all you need.  You can vote by yourselves, you 

can run your own rules, you can just have a monopoly.  And 

that's what NDPers campaigned for.  Monopoly's fine as long 

as they get to run it.  A dictatorship is fine as long as they're in 

charge. 

 

Well, what socialist gobbledegook!  Pathetic.  That's what they 

said in the Soviet Union for years and years and years. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Will the member please get 

back on the Bill that is before the Assembly.  It's a second and 

third reading of the Appropriation Bill.  The principle of the 

Appropriation Bill, that's what's before the Assembly today. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Point of order, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- Yes, what is your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- My point of order, Mr. Speaker, is that what 

we are debating now is whether or not this Bill should be read a 

second time.  That's what this is about. 

 

We are saying, sir, no, it should not be read a second time.  

And the Leader of the Opposition is going to great pains to tell 

the people across the floor and the people of this province why 

it should not be read a second time. 

 

Now if he is not allowed to advance his arguments, then I 

submit to you, sir, that we cannot do our job as the opposition.  

That is why we are adamant that he should be allowed to make 

his arguments, sir. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'd like to just consult with the Clerk, please.  I 

think the member is making a valid point of order, but I want to 

check. 

 

Order, order.  I think the member from Rosthern has a valid 

point of order.  But the problem that we're having is that the 

Leader of the Opposition is dwelling only on the closure.  If he 

makes his argument that the second and third reading should 

not proceed, that's valid. 

 

But if you're arguing on the closure part, which only was on 

stage one, then it doesn't pertain to this.  If you want to draw in 

the closure from time to time as to your arguments as to why 

second and third reading should not proceed, that's fair enough.  

But, sir, you can't base your whole argument on other rule 

changes that do not pertain to second and third reading. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- But he's only on the first half-hour of a 

three-hour speech. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well that may well be, but I'd like him to 

draw it to the appropriateness of second and third principle of 

the Appropriation Bill. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well I agree 

whole-heartedly with the argument that we shouldn't 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

proceed with second and third reading for lots of economic 

reasons as well as the closure reasons.  The closure that got us 

to here was such a sham that we shouldn't proceed with second 

and third, and all the economic arguments that we couldn't get 

answers for. 

 

So I could read the member from Arm River's questions that he 

asked the minister, and then we sat here and we didn't get any 

reply, so we don't believe that we should proceed.  We can't 

proceed.  How can we proceed when we didn't get any answers 

from the minister and he was locked in in a procedure from the 

day before that wouldn't let him get up on his feet? 

 

It's that ridiculous.  I've never heard of it.  I've never seen it.  I 

don't know that any Legislative Assembly has ever experienced 

anything like this when members stand and ask questions 

knowing that they can't get any answer.  How could we be in 

support of this thing proceeding through that sham, that awful, 

undemocratic arrangement.  And secondly, to let the minister 

off the hook so we can bring his officials in and not respond, 

how can we let it go to second and third when he didn't get on 

his feet? 

 

And then on top of that, under these new rules, they get to vote 

by themselves whether we like it or not.  And now we're into 

second and third, and they want us to pass it and let it proceed? 

 

The public, nobody -- nobody in Regina, Saskatoon, or 

anybody that believes in democracy -- would believe in this.  

What we just saw Monday and Tuesday is not democracy.  

We're cut off.  The minister's cut off.  Only the NDP get to vote 

by themselves.  Only the government gets to vote by 

themselves on a supply Bill, and this is grievance before 

supply.  We were complaining; we're asking about health.  We 

ask about nursing homes.  We ask about agriculture.  We ask 

about GRIP.  We ask about the Liquor Board.  We ask about 

pensioners.  We ask about diabetics.  We ask about 

chiropractors -- no answers. 

 

How can we let them proceed to second and third reading of an 

interim supply when they won't respond to the public?  We get 

letters and requests and phone calls over and over and over and 

over again, asking us to lobby the government, asking them 

why they're doing that. 

 

My seat mate has a survey the NDP have done -- $50,000 

survey prior to the budget.  But we have all kinds of questions 

that we want the minister to respond to, and we couldn't 

respond to the fact that they have spent $50,000 on an NDP 

survey, taxpayers' money.  We can't ask them in interim 

supply.  Now isn't that ridiculous.  How many NDPers have we 

always heard asking, what about your polls, taxpayers' surveys, 

the polls. 

 

Well here we've got one through freedom of information.  The 

NDP have done this survey, and we can't ask the Minister of 

Finance to explain it, to justify what he's doing.  And he's got 

health, education, unemployment, and all these things in here.  

And the rules cut him off so he can't speak.  And if he does 

speak, he only gets one crack.  He has to take his place, and 

therefore we couldn't ask anybody.  In fact I'm not so sure how 

it works after that.  You're just cut off. 

Now this is the track and the black, undemocratic box that this 

Legislative Assembly has got itself into, and the NDP opposite 

are trying to justify that.  So should we let the second and third 

reading proceed?  Of course not. 

 

Imagine what they would say if they were on this side of the 

House when this . . . We didn't even come close to this kind of 

a procedure.  They were pulling their hair out and screaming 

"undemocratic" and all of that.  Now they're doing it like it's 

never been done before, even cutting off their own caucus 

members and their own MLA and their Finance minister voting 

alone, and they expect us to give them free will to proceed. 

 

So you're right, Mr. Speaker.  It's because of the procedure.  It's 

because of the unanswered questions by the hundreds that we 

have, even on their own expenditures.  They spent this money 

prior to the budget so they had to fund it out of somewhere.  

Even where did you get the money for the survey?  Why these 

questions in the survey?  Why didn't you ask about agriculture 

in your survey?  Why didn't you ask about uranium, economic 

development?  Why didn't you ask about a plan for economic 

growth in your survey?  They can't answer any of those. 

 

They jump right over it.  That's why we don't want this to 

proceed.  And the minister sits there.  He doesn't have to 

answer questions; he doesn't have to do anything.  He's free.  

And the NDP think that this is normal, this is something we 

should defend. 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've asked the minister time and time and time 

again if he would explain where his revenues come from, why 

he's allocated his expenditures the way they are.  And we had 

many more questions with respect to the whole health care 

budget.  And it's one-twelfth of the expenditures, let alone the 

GRIP, and we went through the one-twelfth.  And now we're in 

a position where none of that can be answered in this grievance 

before supply.  And we have some grievous questions.  And 

black Monday meant that they could vote by themselves and 

didn't have to respond. 

 

So I just say to the members opposite that this is a complete 

sham of a procedure.  This Legislative Assembly is not about 

democracy.  It's about a dictatorship.  Why should we let an 

NDP dictatorship do as they like without answering questions, 

without standing on their feet, and only voting on this to get it 

to where it is today by themselves?  We can't ask questions in 

this debate.  We get to speak and that's it.  They don't have to 

respond.  For all I know, they won't respond at all. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I'm just going to sum up my remarks by 

saying this . . . and to the general public.  Yesterday was a 

black day for the Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan.  A 

black day because it was closure on closure.  It was the first 

time in interim supply when we have the Minister of Finance 

and his officials here that he would not answer a question, 

because number one, he was not prepared to answer the 

questions, and number two, he knew that if he got up, he would 

be sit down for ever after that because of 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

his own rules. 

 

And the public should know that, that the NDP have even 

muzzled the government.  And finally, when it was all said and 

done, the NDP got to vote by themselves for the first time in 

the Saskatchewan's legislature.  I'd be ashamed of myself if I 

was an NDPer sitting in this Legislative Assembly.  You 

should all be ashamed of yourselves.  Dictators.  

Unprecedented, unparliamentary, unfair.  And the arrogance of 

believing it's . . . well I guess they can do it because they got 

elected.  And they know full well they'd never get elected on 

anything like this. If you campaigned on this, they'd kick you 

from here to Hamilton. 

 

That's the unfair, undemocratic, despicable part of the NDP and 

why so many people know that's really what they're all about -- 

the small minds that have always wanted to get elected to run 

something.  And they don't really know why, just to do it.  And 

then you get a chance to have power, you just run roughshod 

over everybody. Tell them about their morality. Tell them how 

to change contracts.  Tell them how to change the rules.  Tell 

them they don't have to vote in the legislature.  Tell them even 

ministers of Finance don't have to answer questions. 

 

What a record.  What a pathetic record.  Mr. Speaker, I 

certainly won't be supporting this, going into second and third 

reading of this Bill, passing it, because I think it's absolutely a 

sham and it's shameful. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the member from Estevan, the Leader of the 

Opposition has outlined so ably today, that we are involved in a 

process here that I think puts a lot of disrepute on this 

particular debate, on this Legislative Assembly, that will 

ultimately, Mr. Speaker, lead people to be far more cynical 

about politicians than they already are. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'd like to start off in saying my opposition to the 

second and third readings of this particular interim supply 

motion is eloquently summed up by the member from 

Riversdale in a previous debate.  And he said to this House, 

and you've heard this quote before, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 What new-found Democrats are these, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  

What new-found democracy is this?  What kind of a charade 

is this?  What kind of an unprecedented action is it for these 

people to bring forward a motion for rules change without 

consultation . . . without any consultation from us; out of 

pique, out of pique. 

 

That's the words that the Premier of Saskatchewan in a 

previous debate, Mr. Speaker . . . A debate that had so many of 

the elements, so many of the possibilities involved for downfall 

in it. And we've seen that downfall occur in this legislature in 

this interim supply motion. 

 

We have closure upon closure, meaning that it isn't possible for 

this opposition to agree with second and third reading of this 

particular Bill.  It has meant that the 

questions that should be asked on behalf of the taxpayer, after 

three interim supply motions and two special warrants, Mr. 

Speaker, going into the sixth month of this budget . . . that 

means taxpayers have to have answers to expenditures.  That 

means that this opposition should be very diligent questioning a 

government that said it would never, ever embark on a process 

such as that. 

 

Coming from a political party that criticized over and over 

again one special warrant, one special warrant from the former 

government; that in a committee similar to this, took great issue 

with a Finance minister of the day and said, we have every 

right as an official opposition to ask question upon question 

upon question before we grant you interim supply; questions 

about your tax measures; questions about your revenue; 

questions about dealings with the federal government on an 

issue that is still with us today, Mr. Speaker, and that is GRIP 

-- all of those things from the members of the New Democratic 

Party when they were in opposition. 

 

And they said to the minister of the day: Mr. Minister, we 

cannot grant you second and third reading on your supply 

motions because you won't answer these questions for us. 

 

And the member from Regina Dewdney was vociferous in 

asking about revenue from the harmonized sales tax, and 

absolutely insisted that before second and third reading could 

be granted on that particular interim supply motion, that the 

minister of Finance had to account for those revenues on an 

ongoing basis. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Speaker?  I can remember after 

reading the debate in Hansard, that the minister of Finance was 

fairly forthcoming.  Even though in the narrow ruling that 

could have been applied on interim supply, he didn't have to 

give the member from Regina Dewdney anything, if he would 

listen to the current Minister of Finance in his interpretation. 

 

I mean, he would like us, Mr. Speaker, to come in here, simply 

glance through his document, say trust me, boys, and give me 

the cheque.  I mean that's kind of the attitude that we have from 

this bunch.  We got a great big majority, you know.  We 

recently got elected.  We can do whatever we want.  I'm going 

to go write a cheque to the federal government for nearly $14 

million here shortly on the whole question of agriculture, and I 

don't expect you guys to ask any questions on it.  You've got to 

trust me that I'm going to write the cheque properly; that we're 

going to negotiate properly. 

 

So you ask some more questions about those negotiations and 

some of the analysis that his department has done in regards to 

the federal offer.  And we're told it's none of our business, 

simply trust me, write me the cheque, this process shouldn't 

take any longer than an hour.  And if it does take more than an 

hour, I'm going to have the House Leader come in and use 

closure.  And then when he uses closure, we'll set it up so that 

nobody can answer any questions, even myself, because if I do 

I have to sit down and I'm done. 

 

Now that's the kind of process we're involved in here, Mr. 

Speaker.  We have a Minister of Finance who's spent 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

considerable amounts of the taxpayers' money on a survey.  

And it asked a whole lot of questions -- a thousand respondents 

in the province of Saskatchewan -- asked a whole lot of 

questions about unemployment, deficit, government spending, 

economy, recession, education, constitution, taxes, resources, 

industry, environment, health, grain prices, agriculture, rural 

economy, other, don't know, refused.  I mean, it covered the 

piece, Mr. Speaker.  And the minister supposedly built his 

budget around it. 

 

But can we ask any questions about this expenditure of 

taxpayers' dollars?  Somewhere in that interim supply, at some 

point, either through a special warrant or interim supply, this 

thing had to get paid for.  No doubt about it. 

 

I'd like to know from the minister why there were no specific 

questions in here on Saskatchewan's largest industry, 

agriculture, and how they were going to approach GRIP.  And I 

guess that's because the decision had already been made, that 

they were going to break the contracts.  Therefore they didn't 

need to ask anybody about it. 

 

And I wonder why, when we're polling Saskatchewan people 

by the thousands about issues pertaining to the budget, why we 

wouldn't ask them anything about the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, why we would disenfranchise 54,000 people.  You would 

have thought 54,000 people would have registered on the 

Richter scale somewhere of a very expensive survey done by 

your government to set your budget by.  I would have thought 

so.  But maybe that decision had already been made, Mr. 

Speaker, and that's why the Minister of Finance wouldn't want 

to talk about those kind of questions in grievance before 

supply. 

 

And I don't see a darn thing in here about economic 

development and the uranium industry -- once again heavy, 

heavy ramifications to the budgetary process, a very large 

industry in our province, tens of millions of dollars in royalties, 

tens of millions of dollars in taxes, thousands of employees. 

 

I would think those things impact upon the budget of this 

province very significantly.  But they're nowhere in the survey.  

And I can't even ask the Minister of Finance why they weren't 

in the survey, why this expenditure of the public's money on 

pre-budget information wouldn't include the uranium industry 

and the pension plan and GRIP. And we can go on and on and 

on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we can't ask those questions, because if we do, Minister of 

Finance says no, the resolution's very narrow.  And after a 

couple of hours of that, the House Leader says no, we've got to 

have some closure here to make sure that you don't ask those 

questions, make sure that the public expenditure on survey 

results doesn't get talked about. 

 

And then we change the rules so that members on this side are 

expected to vote on second and third reading of this Bill 

knowing full well the process involves not asking any 

questions and not having the Minister of Finance answer any. 

 

And it's a strange, strange process, Mr. Speaker.  When 

one goes through, Mr. Speaker, all of the various verbatim 

from 1989, and it pretty well covers the piece here, Mr. 

Speaker, on issues like this, you really have to wonder what the 

New Democrats would be like if they were on this side of the 

legislature today faced with granting second and third reading 

on this supply Bill. 

 

And I would like to read into verbatim a quote, and I'm sure it 

was used in this Assembly before, Mr. Speaker, but I think it's 

important to refresh the minds of members.  This comes from a 

very vocal member of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker.  This is 

from the member from Regina Rosemont: 

 

 Seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this motion before us, this 

motion which would limit the democratic right, this motion, 

rule 33(1), that would limit the democratic right of the 

citizens of the province to participate, stands in stark contrast 

to our attempts to democratize this legislature for the citizens 

of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  And I 

guarantee, Mr. Speaker, (this is the personal guarantee of the 

member from Rosemont) I guarantee that when we form the . 

. . government in this province, those members (meaning the 

Conservatives) will have the right to have their viewpoint . . . 

as opposed to this kind of undemocratic, undemocratic 

jackbooting that faces us here in this legislature. 

 

(1530) 

 

Well I'm wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the member from 

Rosemont is out getting fitted for the jackboots.  Because that's 

what we've seen in this legislature in the last few days.  We 

have seen unprecedented use of power by this government to 

make sure that the official opposition doesn't ask those 

questions.  That we grant supply without grievance.  That we 

give the Minister of Finance a blank cheque to do what he 

wishes without having to answer questions, even though we are 

into the sixth month. 

 

And I find that strange, Mr. Speaker, from a party that in its 

own throne speech, delivered a few short months ago, talks 

about these very things.  A process that isn't simply allowed in 

other jurisdictions. 

 

The member from Arm River was relating a conversation that 

he held with a member from the Ontario legislature last month 

on this particular item and how this government is ramrodding 

this legislature.  And he said to the member from Arm River, it 

would take at least six months in our legislature for this to 

occur.  We simply would not be allowed to get away with this 

type of high-handed, in the words of the member from Regina 

Rosemont, jackbooting procedures that we're seeing from this 

government. 

 

And yet we're asked to grant second and third reading.  The 

member from Regina Elphinstone, the House Leader of the 

government, stands on his feet and says that you've held this 

legislature up for 57 days on the GRIP Bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know that's not the truth.  Yes, the 

official opposition left this Assembly for 18 days; that included 

weekends.  But I remind the member, it was the Speaker of the 

Assembly that suspended the GRIP Bill for 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

some 28 days.  It wasn't the official opposition.  It was the 

highest officer of the House. 

 

And I remember well, the only time that I can remember 

closure being used by my government, and it was after over 

100 days -- I don't know the exact figures; maybe other 

members in debate will know those things; maybe Mr. Speaker 

remembers -- but it was a long ways down the road.  It was 

after dozens of hours of debate on a particular issue and I think 

the House had been in for five or six months -- I don't know, 

something like that.  I mean to even equate those 

circumstances, Mr. Speaker, with what we've seen here is at 

best hoping to pull the wool over the public's eyes, and at worst 

it's exactly what the member from Rosemont is talking about. 

 

And I don't know why this government in their first term, their 

first full term in this House, would want to resort to these 

tactics.  I mean they've got four years.  If there is legislation 

that is that unpopular, all of the alternatives that have been 

presented to this government could have rectified that situation 

and perhaps allowed this opposition, after a decent amount of 

questioning, allowed the second and third reading of this 

particular supply motion to go ahead. 

 

But that's not the case.  And that means, Mr. Speaker, that this 

session will undo perhaps much of the goodwill felt by the 

public in this province when any time you have a transition in 

government.  Usually when governments change, Mr. Speaker, 

there is a sense of optimism, that change is as good as a rest. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- That all of those things that happen in society 

when you have shifts after 10 years will sort of give people a 

breather, and whether they agree philosophically or not, they'll 

sort of get on with their life. 

 

And instead, we have this oppressive, oppressive NDP 

government using its heavy hand, its moral authority, its 

massive majority sort of at a daily whim.  I mean, we can tell 

people what to wear now in this province.  We can break 

contracts unilaterally.  We can change the rules of the 

legislature unilaterally.  We can do all sorts of things on a daily 

basis because we won.  We have a big majority. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can remember full well being part of a 

majority every bit as big.  And between 1982 and 1986 there 

was no closure.  Every member of that NDP opposition could 

stand on their feet and talk for as long as they want, and they 

did.  There was no closure, there was no unilateral rule change.  

There were debates on interim supply.  And at the end of the 

day, the opposition granted interim supply without closure 

being forced down their throats, without some ridiculous rule 

change that says that I can't ask questions to the Minister of 

Finance with his officials in this Chamber and he can't answer 

them. 

 

I mean, Mr. Speaker, we have sunk, I think, to new lows in this 

Assembly if this is the process that we're going to lower 

ourselves to in granting these second and third readings.  It is a 

new low for this Assembly.  And I suggest to you, Mr. 

Speaker, this type of action and procedure will drag it lower -- 

it will.  It will drag this Assembly lower 

and lower and lower in the public's esteem because of those 

actions. 

 

And the way it looks, Mr. Speaker, that we shall be back in this 

Assembly probably in about a month's time, in the dying days 

of August, not with lots of time to pass interim supply, but the 

opposition will be notified a couple of days before the end of 

the month that we must grant the minister interim supply.  And 

I suspect at that time, because government members will be 

even more frustrated, they will seek closure again on interim 

supply, that we'll probably see closure on many Bills, that we'll 

probably see the hours change. 

 

We might even be sitting in here 24 hours a day, Mr. Speaker, 

for all I know.  If the government seems to think that might 

break the opposition down, that it might stop the opposition 

asking questions on behalf of people all across this province, I 

suspect they might do that.  I mean, they got enough members.  

They could probably rotate them in and out of here in three 

shifts, you know.  And we could work this place 24 hours a 

day, and they could wear the members of the official 

opposition out that way.  It wouldn't surprise me at all, Mr. 

Speaker, if that's the mode that we got into here because this 

government seems bent on doing anything possible to do that. 

 

It says second and third reading and interim supply shouldn't be 

any problem for you people.  Simply be quiet, go away, and let 

us do our thing. 

 

In the survey that I was referring to by the Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Speaker, he asked a number of questions on taxes.  These 

are questions 38 through 42.  Question 38 says: Is an increase 

in provincial sales tax acceptable to you as a Saskatchewan 

taxpayer?  Sixty-eight per cent of the respondents said, 

completely unacceptable.  When you put that with the next two 

categories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you find 90 per cent of 

Saskatchewan people in that category of either completely 

unacceptable or slightly unacceptable. 

 

We go down here another notch, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it's a 

question 40: Is an increase in personal income tax acceptable?  

Well 58.6 per cent say completely unacceptable; 14.1 per cent, 

nearly completely unacceptable; 17.4 . . . I mean you don't get 

up till you hit the median mark here at 4.4 per cent.  Once 

again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we've got 31, 58, we're way in the 

high 80 percentage of Saskatchewan that thought that a 

personal income tax raise was completely unacceptable.  What 

we got out of the minister was a 10 per cent surtax on personal 

income tax. 

 

Now I would have thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those are 

the kind of questions that you should ask in grievance before 

supply.  That when Saskatchewan people feel this strongly 

about certain issues, that because we don't have a budget 

passed, we haven't had the Minister of Finance in Estimates -- 

and I mean at any point in time those can be called, as you well 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker -- that given that people had strong 

reactions to the survey information that the minister sought 

prior to designing his budget, that you would want questions 

asked about this. 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And I know that the former New Democrat opposition asked 

many questions in this regard.  Did Saskatchewan people want 

a gasoline tax increase? -- 48.1 per cent, completely 

unacceptable; 21.2, right next door; 18.9, we get a way up here 

to 5.5 per cent before it's acceptable. 

 

There is all sorts of information in here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that I think, given that the minister based his budgetary 

decisions on this survey, or at least he spent over 50,000 bucks 

asking people questions about it, that we should be asking very 

fundamental questions. 

 

And as I said earlier, we should also be asking about what was 

left out of here.  I mean, when you take the entire provincial 

economy and the ramifications of the changes that have been 

brought about by the Minister of Agriculture and the minister 

of Crop Insurance on this economy and the potential for the 

loss, it's no darn wonder, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 

granting of interim supply on second and third reading is 

simply unacceptable to this government . . . or to this 

opposition. 

 

I mean, somehow in the mix here, in our survey results that the 

Minister of Finance commissioned, somewhere in the mix we 

forgot to ask people about the 2 to 300 million bucks that the 

folks in the drought zone are going to be short.  That's a lot of 

money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to this province.  That's a whole 

lot of dough for a whole lot of families in a whole lot of 

communities where it's dry. 

 

And we attempted in the first day before closure was used to 

ask the Minister of Finance about the new federal offer and the 

analysis that his department had done in regards to that and 

what the impacts were in the province of Saskatchewan.  And I 

know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that those analyses are done.  

They're done on a weekly basis, the same as they analyse the 

money markets, the same as the do currency swaps, the same as 

. . . I mean, the bureaucrats in Finance, quite frankly, crunch 

numbers from morning till night.  That's what they do.  And 

there are lots of them. 

 

And the minister has that kind of information because he has to 

be prepared.  If the provincial government was going to take 

the federal deal, and as the minister says, I need 23 million 

bucks to offset that, that means I'll send my guys into the 

money market and they'll hedge, they'll do a currency swap, 

they'll do an intervention on one of our bond issues.  They can 

do many things to guarantee that when that $23 million comes 

due at some point hence, it'll be covered off. 

 

That's what the bureaucrats in the Department of Finance do.  

And it has been done in anticipation of some type of offer from 

the federal government, some kind of transaction, because any 

minister that didn't do that would be negligent in his 

responsibilities. 
 

And I do believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for all his partisanship 

and his wish to rule this legislature in a very arrogant way, I do 

believe that the Minister of Finance knows how to work hard; 

that he probably does listen to his bureaucrats for hours every 

day; that he does ask questions about analysis; he does keep his 

eye on the bond market; that he does keep his eye on the 

American dollar and the Japanese yen and the German mark 

and 

 Swiss franc, and all the areas that he happens to borrow in.  

And maybe he picks up the odd Singapore dollar once in a 

while.  I don't know. 

 

(1545) 

 

But the thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those things are watched 

on a daily basis as is that federal offer and the ramifications it'll 

have on this province.  He doesn't hesitate to come in here and 

say, I'm going to give the feds 14 million bucks on a program 

that you guys were involved in back in 1988 and expects us to 

say: okay, fine, yes we trust you, without asking some 

questions about what's going on at present. 

 

And that's why we can't, can't in good conscience, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, grant this motion.  I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

think just about every member of this legislature on August 4 

can think of other things that might be more appealing than this 

hallowed Chamber of ours. 

 

And I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we all take our 

responsibility seriously.  But if this government is going to 

persevere, persevere down the road that it has chosen to set 

with the unprecedented actions of the last few weeks in this 

Chamber, then we are going to spend an awful long time in this 

Assembly.  Because there's only one way to fight that type of 

undemocratic procedure, and that is to spend the time here and 

fight it. 

 

And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I'm sure that's what was 

going through the minds of all of these New Democrats here 

that we have from Hansard in years gone by -- Rosemont, 

Riversdale, Saskatoon Sutherland, it was called -- it's 

Saskatoon Sutherland-University now -- Saskatoon South, 

Prince Albert Carlton, Humboldt, Churchill Downs, Hillsdale.  

I mean it just goes on and on and on, Mr. Speaker.  Regina 

Albert North, Regina Dewdney, Moose Jaw Palliser.  It just 

goes on and on. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, they were saying the same thing, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  They said you know, there's only one cure for 

the heavy hand of government; that's to stay in this Chamber 

for a long, long time and debate and fight to get the democratic 

agenda back on course so that people in this province can feel 

that they are having their concerns handled in a democratic 

process.  All in the last couple years, this was all said on the 

record, over and over and over again. 

 

And now we see the very same people using the rules of this 

Assembly like they've never been used before to thwart that 

very process.  I don't know how any of those people, how any 

of those people can walk down the street in their home town, in 

their constituency, and look people in the eye.  I don't know 

how they can do it.  Because if they can, that means that there 

is nothing in their soul at all except a black, empty hole -- 

nothing else at all. 

 

I mean, political licence is one thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 

to stand in this House for so many hours and so many weeks 

and so many months fighting for these very principles and then 

to turn around and impose the opposite when you have this 

large, overwhelming, 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

sweeping majority, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is simply 

unacceptable to anyone that believes in the political process in 

this province -- simply unacceptable. 

 

It is indeed a black day on Monday the 3rd for this province.  It 

is a black day on Tuesday the 4th, and it will be a black day, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, for every day that members of the 

opposition have to stand in this legislature and read back to 

these new-found democrats their own words on these actions. 

 

And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by rule 15 of this 

House, the Minister of Finance will get his way.  He will make 

sure that second and third reading of this particular motion go 

through.  The House Leader, the member from Elphinstone, the 

Hon. Minister of Economic Development and Trade has 

already made sure that the front end is looked after, that the 

sham process was looked after, that the closure, the railroading 

. . . So that means that the member from Regina Dewdney, the 

Finance minister, will get his second and third reading.  And 

they can call a vote in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it 

doesn't matter if the opposition's here or not.  Doesn't matter a 

hoot. 

 

So I'm wondering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what's next?  If it's not 

24 hours a day to make sure that we get second and third 

reading, and that we get GRIP, and that we get everything that's 

on our agenda, because we promised the folks inside that we're 

going to get our dirty work done early in our term and then 

we'll be nice, expansive people after that -- what's next? 

 

Maybe the simplest solution to the whole thing would be just to 

limit every speech in this legislature to about five minutes.  I'm 

sure that the House Leader can find somewhere in the rules 

where he could come up with that.  Or that each member only 

be allowed three questions in committee.  That would certainly 

speed the process up.  That would make sure that we would get 

second and third reading off probably in about an hour and a 

half on any given time.  There's only 10 members of the 

opposition.  If they each took three questions and each question 

was -- oh, I don't know, two or three minutes -- that means that 

two hours ought to . . . if an hour and a half didn't do it, two 

hours ought to do it easy.  If we just would limit them each to 

three questions, that should take care of it. 

 

And any time on second reading, well we'll use the rules from 

rule 16.  I'm sure the Government House Leader's looking 

through his rule book right now probably, and I think a rule 16 

is about 15 minutes for the mover and 10 minutes for the 

seconder.  Well we could just take rule 16 and we could apply 

those rules to the House here, and 15 minutes -- well 15 times 

10, what's that?  That's 150 -- yes, that ought to look after the 

opposition in about two and a half . . . two and a half hours?  

Yes, that would look after it. 

 

And that would certainly expedite things, wouldn't it, Mr. 

Speaker . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And I'm sure that this 

government would be quite comfortable with that.  I mean, it's 

the next logical step down the road.  The next logical step so 

that we can make sure second and third reading of interim 

supply go off without a hitch here. 

Make sure that we don't ask a bunch of questions about 

$50,000 surveys; that we don't ask a whole of lot of questions 

about federal government offers in agriculture; that we don't 

ask about 54,000 contract holders in the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan; that we don't ask about 66 rural hospitals that are 

probably going to get the chop; we don't ask about level 1 and 

2 nursing homes and their patients and what's going to happen 

to them. 

 

It would be much more convenient, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we 

just took rule 16 time limits, applied them, and we could 

dispense with all of this nonsense.  That seems to be the 

attitude that we have in here.  That's why we get closure on 

closure.  And that's why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I guess 

we're going to have to spend a lot of time in this Assembly 

reminding New Democrats over and over and over again about 

their very own words, their very own words that they said in 

this Assembly and around this province over and over and over 

again.  Because I'm afraid a whole lot of repetition, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the only way that it's going to sink into their heads 

what they're doing now that they have this massive 

government. 

 

You can't say one thing and do another consistently, Mr. 

Speaker, and have anyone in this province place any credibility 

in the political process. 

 

And that's what we're going to have to do here, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, because we simply cannot grant this Finance minister 

interim supply when he wants supply without grievance.  He 

wants supply without grievance and that simply isn't acceptable 

because his government has used the rules of this Assembly to 

make sure that he gained supply without grievance. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will now take my seat and we'll get 

on with the process of allowing other members of the 

opposition to remind New Democrats about what they said, and 

see if we can't get this government to change its mind; change 

its mind so that we do have grievance before supply; change its 

mind so that we do get our questions answered; change its 

mind so that they start behaving like the government that they 

promised Saskatchewan people, not like the dictators that 

they've become. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I'm proud to 

rise and speak in support of second and third reading. 

 

As a new member, I sit back and think of the way it was.  You 

know, in 1982 and prior to 1982, when we had terrific 

highways, we had a terrific credit rating -- probably the best in 

all of Canada -- we had timely budgets; and politicians were 

respected at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  And in 1982, let 

me remind the members opposite, we had a surplus budget of 

$139 million.  And today, what do we have today?  We have 

accumulated debt of $15 billion, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  That is 

$760 million interest for this year alone -- over $2 million per 

day. 



1958 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

Just think of what we could do with that interest that we're 

paying, over that $2 million per day.  And if we didn't have to 

pay the interest on the public debt, we would have a $249 

million surplus -- $249 million surplus if we didn't have to pay 

those interest charges. 

 

And when the member from Thunder Creek says, let us ask 

some questions on this, well if they will look back to Hansard 

on July 30 from pages 1849 to 1867, that's 18 pages, the 

member from Thunder Creek and the member from Estevan 

were asking the Minister of Finance questions.  They had 

ample opportunity to ask questions. 

 

And now that closure is taking place and the members opposite 

say, when this happened when we were government when we 

did this, that the opposition said we would take it from one 

corner of this province to the other and tell everybody about 

what's going on in here. 

 

Well let me tell the members opposite, they have that 

opportunity as well to do that.  But somehow I think they're not 

going to do it, probably because they're a little bit lazy.  And 

they had 18 days, they walked out of this Assembly for 18 

days, got together some petitions, tabled them in this 

Assembly; there's 240 names on that petition.  My, were they 

ever working hard.  They interviewed the member from Morse.  

He said, oh it's a nice holiday we're having here.  And they 

interviewed the member from Estevan on a golf course. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- What is the member's point of order? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the Assembly 

and the Speaker whether the member has the right to tell people 

whether I was interviewed or not and whether this member of 

this Assembly has the right to prove that he was never 

interviewed. 

 

(1600) 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  What the member is raising is 

a question of debate and is not a point of order, so it's not well 

taken.  But while I'm on my feet, I might encourage the 

member for Kelvington-Wadena to find some relationship 

between his remarks and the Bill that's before us. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I will be getting 

to that in short order, but just trying to get some of my points 

across.  And I think it's time the members opposite took off 

their rose-coloured glasses and got on with business. 

 

We have to get business done in this Assembly.  That's why we 

are moving this way.  It is day 58, day 58. Now when I go back 

to my constituency in Kelvington-Wadena . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . I'm having trouble hearing that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker; it sounds like the magpies in my backyard.  It 

obviously must be getting to the members opposite. 

 

But when I get back into the constituency of 

Kelvington-Wadena or any place here in the city of Regina, 

even the Conservative supporters are telling me, let's get on 

with the business of this House.  I'm glad you ended that 

bell-ringing; let's get on with this business.  We 

have 10 members that we voted out of government; let's get 

back to business. 

 

There's 32 Estimates to do in this Assembly, 25 we haven't 

touched yet.  And the member from Thunder Creek said, that's 

a disgrace.  Well the only disgrace is the shenanigans and the 

ranting and raving of the members opposite. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek says it seems like the 

Minister of Finance is saying, trust me, trust me with this 

budget.  Well maybe I think we should, because if you look 

back to 1982 and prior to 1982 when he was the minister of 

Finance under the Blakeney administration, he did have a 

terrific reputation, in fact balanced and surplus budgets . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- And maybe the only reason they can't trust him is 

because they can't trust theirselves.  The previous opposition 

was opposed to the previous government invoking closure 

because of the going-ons that the 10 deficit budgets . . . And 

the public was also opposed to them on October 21. 

 

The members opposite were not responsible in government.  

They don't seem to be too responsible in opposition.  You 

should be ashamed of the way you ran this province for the last 

nine and a half years -- the waste, the corruption, the 

mismanagement.  And this interim supply, like the Minister of 

Finance's reputation, you should be able to ride on that.  Not 

like the 1986 budget where the minister of Finance said, we are 

going to have a $350 million deficit.  And I was saying, 1986 

when the minister of Finance said, we are going to have a $350 

million surplus budget.  I believe that was an election year.  

And we find out after that it was some place around 1.3 billion. 

 

And we take 1991, when the minister of Finance said it was 

going to be a $265 million deficit.  Four days into the election 

the member from Riversdale wrote the then premier and said 

the people have a right to know.  They have a right to know.  Is 

this deficit on track?  Let's tell the people the whole truth.  Tell 

them the story and then we can go campaign on the financial 

shape of this province. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order, order, order.  

I've listened very patiently to the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena, and the member has yet to relate any of 

his remarks to the Bill that's before us. 

 

And the Speaker has previously interrupted members who 

spoke to this Bill to remind them that they should begin to 

relate their remarks to the matter that's before us.  And I'll give 

the member the floor but encourage him to tie his remarks to 

the Bill that's before us. 

 

Mr. Kluz: -- Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I was just 

trying to convey the message that when the member from 

Thunder Creek is saying why should the Minister of Finance 

say trust me, I was just trying to relate that this interim supply 

Bill should be -- and the money that was asked -- should be a 

direct correlation with that on the previous credibility that the 

Minister of Finance has had. 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1959 

So that is the relationship I was trying to get that across.  And 

that was what my point is. And I will just finish off my remarks 

just to show that the Minister of Finance is going to be doing a 

good job. 

 

So you know, when we got the letter back and said yes, yes that 

the deficit is on track and we formed government and checked 

out the actual financial state of this province, find out the 

deficit is going to be close to a billion dollars.  It was a budget 

that wasn't even passed.  It ran from the legislature. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were elected to govern.  This House is 

going to function.  We're going to pass our Bills, and we're 

going to pass this budget. And it is going to be an honest 

budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Is the Assembly ready for the 

question?  I'll have to recognize the member for Arm River.  

The member has the right to close debate, but only after other 

members have had the opportunity to enter into the debate. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman.  That 

was a nice try by the Minister of Finance.  But he's been around 

here long enough to know, Mr. Deputy Chairman, that he has 

to give everybody a chance.  And I'm sure glad that someone, 

Mr. Deputy Chairman, gave the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena a chance, because I can sure see now why 

that Sherwin Petersen says, I'm going to run again.  I can sure 

see why.  He knows that he's got a sure way in. 

 

But I do want to, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I do want to . . . the 

Deputy Speaker, I want to congratulate that member for getting 

up and at least saying something.  That's more than any of the 

rest of you have done.  We've been sitting here for almost 60 

days in debate and nobody but just the minister that introduces 

a Bill ever says anything in this House. 

 

We have chirpers and chirpers and they never get up.  And I 

want to congratulate the member from Kelvington-Wadena, 

even though I didn't agree with some of the things he said.  Mr. 

Speaker, he said that the word will never get out, the word will 

never get out of this legislature to the province of 

Saskatchewan; it will never get out because the Conservatives 

are too lazy. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to inform him that I've never seen a 

lazy free enterpriser in my life, because they've been keeping 

the socialists in this province for a good many years.  And I 

think it's in order.  The member from Kelvington-Wadena 

misled this House, Mr. Speaker, when he . . . he misled the 

House when he said . . . I think he done it on . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I know the member may wish to 

look over there, but he should direct his questions over here.  

The Chair is over here.  Okay? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It'd be a pleasure 

to look your way.  It'd be a pleasure.  Then I won't 

have to look at them. 

 

He made the statement that in 1982 that when the now Minister 

of Finance made such a wonderful job with his balanced 

budgets, when . . . He'll have to be tuned in, Mr. Speaker, on 

what we talked about here yesterday. 

 

And I guess he doesn't listen when he's in this debates, listening 

to the debates in this House.  Because back in June 1 when we 

got your, Mr. Speaker . . . his Minister of Finance today, who 

was the minister of Finance in 1982 admitting . . . and I'll 

repeat, Mr. Speaker, for the Assembly again just the last part 

here where . . . this is a quote, this is a quote, Mr. Speaker. And 

I want to make it very clear that I said here back in May: we 

don't want to keep on hearing about this here balanced budget 

that the NDP left, and that the Tories left all this mess you've 

got. 

 

Well I'm going to tell you where the mess started from.  It 

started right here.  It's after me questioning, Mr. Speaker, right 

here, right here. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, I questioned . . . for several 

hours I questioned the Minister of Finance.  Then finally I 

asked him under oath . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  I've only been back in the 

Chair for five minutes and I've heard the Minister of Finance 

twice interrupt.  And I wish . . . I know he's going to have his 

opportunity later on. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you very much.  I'm just so anxious 

when the Minister of Finance gets up to answer all our 

questions that we asked yesterday in the motion.  And then also 

he'll be answering . . . I'm sure when he gets up to speak he'll 

be answering many of our questions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I want to go on with my quote for the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena.  After I asked him -- the now Minister of 

Finance -- he finally gave this answer: 

 

 I can give it to you right now.  Mr. Chairman, for the 

information of the member opposite: 1992 the total Crown 

corporations' debt, self-liquidating, not in any way a burden 

on the Saskatchewan taxpayer because the Crown 

corporations' earned income . . .  They charge power rates 

and telephone rates and they paid the loans that were 

provided to them.  But the Crown corporation debt was 

$3.397 billion. 

 

 Now, Mr. Chairman, on the Consolidated Fund, which is on 

the government side, taxpayer supported debt, do you know 

what it was, Mr. Chairman?  A hundred and ninety million 

dollars . . . Do you know what it is today, Mr. Chairman?  It's 

almost $9 billion after 10 years of the good and wise 

management of the member from Arm River. 

 

 All told . . . 

 

Now this is a statement that I don't want any members to keep 

on arguing about because this is his statement: 



1960 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

All told, when you consider the sinking funds which are 

provided, and the member will know what that's all about, 

the gross debt for the province of Saskatchewan in 1982 was 

$3.5 billion. 

 

Now how do we have members, Mr. Speaker, getting up and 

saying about this balanced, clear budget? 

 

I mean, and then take the $3.5 billion and put it into . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm sure that the member from Cut 

Knife-Lloydminster will get up later on and speak on this 

debate.  But until she does, I wish she'd let the member from 

Arm River have his say. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you.  As the member 

from Estevan has said here today and the member from 

Thunder Creek, this is a black . . . these are black days for 

Saskatchewan.  And it is, when we have a heavy-handed 

government.  As I closed my remarks yesterday Mr. Speaker, I 

said I was ashamed of the members opposite that has made this 

black day.  And I want to repeat that again today, that I'm 

ashamed of you. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, they keep saying that we filibustered 

and held this House up for 50-some days and how ashamed we 

should be of ourselves.  I'm going to get into it a little later.  

But I just want to start out with . . . in 1989 the House sat from 

March 8 to August 25.  And closure, for the first time in this 

province, on the potash Bill, was on August 4. 

 

Now if you've figured out the days, from March 8 to August 

25, that's 170 days less holidays.  And I didn't figure them all 

out.  I figured eight per month and maybe one or two more 

holidays was approximately 120 days sitting.  And we were 

close to the end, not at 50-some days when we had a filibuster 

going on and on.  But, Mr. Speaker, we didn't come in with a 

closure like this. 

 

And I wish to . . . I have a quote here, Mr. Speaker, from 

Hansard, by the House Leader, in 1989 when he spoke on the 

closure motion on August 4, 1989. 

 

(1615) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I wonder when the member from 

Kindersley is going to get into this debate. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Next. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well, then wait your turn.  All right? 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I'd say let's talk . . . 

 

This is what the House Leader at that time was saying, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 . . . let's talk a little bit about the current debate on Bill No. 

20.  How long has it gone on?  Well, Mr. Speaker, it has gone 

on now for 80 hours, some 80 hours of debate on second 

reading on this Bill. 

Now if that isn't filibuster . . . And there's a lot of members 

here that were here then.  The new members, I don't blame 

them.  But the new members here know 80 hours of debate. 

 

 Mr. Speaker, this motion that we have before us today will 

allow with, I believe, fairness and reason, that this Bill will 

be debated . . . 120 hours (more).  And I suppose, Mr. 

Speaker, the question is: how long is long enough?  Surely, 

Mr. Speaker, that this Bill, being debated (for) more time . . . 

 

Now we went on and on, and we have somebody has read off 

some quotes from Hansard and all those things.  I may give a 

few more of those later on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, let's . . . just to have the record straight so we 

don't have this here arrogance coming from the members 

opposite, the House Leader, when he says that you'll sit here 

for 56 days . . . this was said sometime last week, 55 or 56 

days.  And you've done nothing.  Only two Estimates passed . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . That is right. 

 

But let's talk about who's been filibustering this last 50-some 

days.  I'll tell you who the filibuster is.  When you ask 

questions of ministers and you do not get answers and you 

bring in Bills like the GRIP Bill, you must expect that.  You 

must have known you were going to get it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Finance, I blame this here 

closure on the interim supply Bill directly on you -- directly.  

Because the other night when we opened up the supply Bill, it 

started out about quarter to three last Thursday.  I believe it was 

quarter to three in the afternoon, and you answered no 

questions from quarter to three till 5 o'clock. 

 

The member from Estevan, Mr. Speaker, entered into the 

debate and asked questions from 7 o'clock until quarter to nine 

-- not quite two hours -- and couldn't get any answers 

whatsoever.  He was answering . . . asking questions pertaining 

to the one-twelfth of the Crop Insurance and how much more 

money could you possibly be looking at to put together if 

there's emergency comes up in Crop Insurance. 

 

And you, Mr. Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Finance could have avoided this whole thing, could have 

avoided all the problems and debate in the interim supply Bill 

going back to May and June and now, if he'd have just stood up 

in this House.  And even if it was questions that he could say, 

oh well you can get those in Estimates, why wasn't he man 

enough just to answer a few questions, and we wouldn't be in 

this mess today.  This wouldn't be happening.  He could have 

answered questions. 

 

You used to put up an awful scream and holler over here if our 

minister of Finance didn't answer the questions.  And we've 

been through that before back in May.  Mr. Speaker, to the 

minister, we've been through that and through that.  Our 

minister gave in and gave you answers. 

 

It's their arrogance, Mr. Speaker, is why we're sitting here 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1961 

in this position today.  They're saying, Mr. Speaker, that we're 

not to ask any questions about GRIP -- not to ask any questions 

because that's policy. 

 

Well okay, GRIP is policy.  I will admit that.  Changing it or 

whatever is policy.  But I'll tell you one thing, that the 

financing of it is not policy.  The financing is where the money 

comes from, and that is your duty, your responsibility when 

we're asking the minister questions pertaining to the financing 

of GRIP.  It is your responsibility to answer.  And you just 

stood up and said to the chairman -- hour after hour in May, 

June and July -- oh you got to get those answers from the 

departments in Estimates and sit down. 

 

If he's the Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker, he could have just 

stood up, answered some of the questions, and we wouldn't be 

into this here difficulties we're in. 

 

I know one of the members from Saskatoon said to me the 

other night that why don't you ask questions.  That's after the 

closure, and we're down to the 20 minutes.  And I don't blame 

her because somebody didn't tell her what the rules were, Mr. 

Speaker.  She said, why didn't you ask questions? 

 

And I said, well if we ask a question and sit down, we've lost 

our place.  But as the member from Estevan said today, it's 

worse than that.  It's much worse than that because, if the 

Minister of Finance got up and answered one question, he 

couldn't get up again either. 

 

Now we know -- and I want to have it corrected on Hansard 

here if anybody's got the thoughts that these are new rules -- 

those rules there for 20 minutes on closure have always been 

there, but the rule for closure after a few hours of debate has 

never happened before.  It has never happened before.  

Certainly when the member from Estevan was speaking, there 

was heckling coming over there that those rules had never been 

changed.  Well they haven't been.  You've only got 20 minutes 

on these particular type of debates on closure.  But why the 

closure, Mr. Speaker?  Why did this heavy-handed government 

bring down closure from three o'clock in the afternoon to a 

quarter to nine at night, and then we moved on to the E&H 

Bill? 

 

Well I'll tell you why it is because it goes right back to the 

GRIP.  It goes back because we're asking them questions.  

What should happen?  What would happen, and where's this 

planning if maybe somehow the public gets to these people, 

Mr. Speaker, and we do have public hearings?  We need to 

know what it's going to cost.  We need to know their planning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was . . . One of the members said 

something about when I was in Bismarck a few weeks ago for 

meetings.  Yes there was four provincial governments 

representing there: Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 

Alberta and 20 or 21 states of America.  And it was very 

interesting, Mr. Speaker, when the three speakers -- the speaker 

from Alberta, the speaker from Manitoba, and the speaker from 

Ontario -- talked about how you pass Bills through their 

legislature, their respective legislatures. 

And it's very interesting when the speaker from Ontario -- an 

NDP speaker, a real nice gentleman -- and he ran us through 

how a Bill gets passed.  And I was wondering how . . . And in 

this here . . . It was an environment Bill, and it was a 

controversial Bill.  And I couldn't understand how he was 

talking about it took six months to get this Bill through.  He 

said six months it lasted. 

 

But what happened is the people had their say.  The people 

were taking their requests to the opposition.  The opposition 

were asking the government for public hearings.  The 

government wasn't listening, but eventually they listened to the 

public.  The public had their day in court.  They had their day 

because eventually they allowed public hearings for 30 days, 

then another 30 days.  Then, Mr. Speaker, it went on to a total 

of six months.  This time the public had hearings, public 

hearings, and voiced their opinions.  And the environment Bill 

had amendments from the people, amendments from the 

opposition, and amendments from their own government.  And 

I was very pleased to see how democracy happens in Ontario, 

but I'm not very pleased to see what's happening here in 

Saskatchewan today. 

 

We're not getting those . . . We wouldn't be in this impasse in 

this House, Mr. Speaker, if it wasn't for the GRIP Bill.  And it's 

not whether it's versus '91 or '92.  It all comes down to a very 

important issue, and that's this make-believe letter that's 

deemed to be sent out to the farmers on March 15.  That's the 

most dangerous precedent that's ever been set in this province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'm hoping, Mr. Speaker, that before we get through this 

here Bill we're on here now and before we get through the 

GRIP Bill and before we get through some other Bills in this 

legislature and before we get through Estimates, I'm hoping 

that the good people of Saskatchewan will be heard by this 

government.  I still feel sincerely that some of these members 

in the front row, Mr. Speaker, will eventually listen to the 

people and will have public hearings and let the farmers have 

their day in court because it's serious, Mr. Speaker, when a 

government changes the law while a court case is going on so 

the farmers will lose their day in court. 

 

Why couldn't we just not put the GRIP Bill aside?  We 

wouldn't have this impasse in here.  We wouldn't be all getting 

so angry and so irritable with one another . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . We could have common brotherhood, as one 

of the members said across the hall.  And I'd like to have that, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The way we could have that is just let the farmers have their 

day in court.  Let the judges of this land decide what's right and 

what's wrong.  Don't change the law beforehand so the judge 

has to rule in a different manner. 

 

Now that's what we need to have: co-operation in this House. 

We need . . . When we want to talk about the interim supply 

Bill, the Appropriation Bill, certainly it's never been held up in 

this House too long by any party.  I never seen it in my four . . . 

I think this is my 15th session, 14th year.  And I've seen it 2, 3, 

4 days some time in opposition.  And I think we held it three 

days or four days here.  But it always gets through in time.  

Nobody ever 



1962 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

needs to start threatening somebody else that any opposition or 

government or whatever is going to oppose a Bill so long that 

somebody doesn't get paid.  I mean that's just using scare 

tactics. 

 

But this time it could have been done the other night.  Last 

Thursday.  Our intentions were to have the Appropriation Bill 

completely -- right through second, third readings -- completely 

finished last Thursday night because we had a lot of questions 

to ask.  And from quarter to three till quarter to nine, if it 

had've went to 10 o'clock, would have been ample time if, Mr. 

Speaker, if the Minister of Finance would have answered 

questions right from the beginning. 

 

But to stand up time after time after time and just say to the 

chairman and to us that you must get that answer out of the 

Estimates or from somebody else.  Well maybe he's partly 

right; maybe he's partly wrong, Mr. Speaker. I do believe, I do 

believe that all he had to do was just answer some of the 

questions that were important on our minds and we wouldn't be 

in this serious situation today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I don't know how . . . what way we have for 

him to respond or to . . . I suppose when closing debate I'm 

hoping he'll try to answer some of our questions here.  We were 

asking the other night, our member from Estevan was asking 

all about crop insurance and the GRIP program and where 

additional funding would come from and is it in the one-twelfth 

of the interim supply Bill. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we got no response.  But we also know that 

they're getting phone calls and letters continually from 

throughout the province where the crops are not good in this 

province. 

 

Why did we get into this impasse or into this here change in 

GRIP in the first place?  It came from the north-east and the 

easterly part of the province, Mr. Speaker.  There's where the 

people, starting back in '91 while we were in government, they 

were protesting against the 1991 GRIP and they wanted 

changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if I was getting too much onto GRIP I apologize.  

I've been around long enough to know, Mr. Speaker, when I get 

the eye, I better change my remarks.  I guess I have a 

disadvantage, Mr. Speaker.  I sit too close to him.  If I was over 

there farther I wouldn't be able to see you. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely just want to say that anything I 

say on GRIP here it's because . . . I'm not going to talk about 

policy.  I have no intentions to get into that.  But if we do want 

questions answered and we did want questions answered on 

where was the emergency money going to come from in this 

interim supply Bill if there was the deal made in Ottawa. 

 

I've got a letter here that I'm going to refer to later on that the 

Premier sent to the Prime Minister asking for help for the 

drought areas of this province.  And they were talking, and 

there was an offer made back and they said, now they've saved 

themself, Mr. Speaker.  Yes, we've got negotiations going and 

perhaps, seeing we've got the doors open that we'll work out 

something. 

So I think it's right and legitimate that we ask the Minister of 

Finance that what if tomorrow that there's some kind of a deal 

made, where is the provisions?  Where's the provisions? 

 

I just couldn't understand.  I didn't get a chance to ask the other 

night, Mr. Speaker.  I didn't get a chance to ask these questions.  

But the kind of a question I would have asked here and I was 

going to ask it back in June in interim supply and I didn't, I 

neglected to ask it when I was asking questions then. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, he says that one-twelfth, I understand from 

memory, that the budget for Crop Insurance roughly 110, 11 

million dollars, and one-twelfth of that is around that 9 to 10, 

11 million, whatever the figure would be.  It's approximately 

$10 million.  And you take $10 million, or whatever it is, each 

month -- it must be about 11, I believe, Mr. Speaker, if 

calculations are working right in my head here -- about $11 

million per month.  And what do they do with that money, Mr. 

Speaker? 

 

(1630) 

 

They don't pay out any claims in January.  Maybe a few in 

January left from the fall before.  But not in a year like last 

year.  In February, March, April, May, and June and July, and 

you'd have to be the end of August before there could be any 

claims paid out.  So I know from being minister in Crop 

Insurance approximately what it costs the province.  They have 

to pay the administration. 

 

But for the costs of paying the share of the premiums and what 

not, and paying into special programs, would only come up as 

maybe two or three times a year.  Maybe from middle of 

August in the westerly side of the province till claims could 

come in as late as, I suppose, the end of October to the middle 

of November in the east side of the north-east.  So that's when 

they pay out their money. 

 

And I wanted to get that information.  I don't know whether I'll 

ever be able to get it now, is why and what do you do with the 

money that you have each month?  I mean, each month you 

take in this here $11 million, and it doesn't take $11 million per 

month to pay the administration of Crop Insurance.  So I know 

that there is questions asked here.  There's this document here 

that he so kindly sent over to us that there's some extra money, 

13 million or something, to go to Crop Insurance now. 

 

Well that takes care of one month, but what about all the other 

months?  Where does it go?  And, you know, those are 

questions that are . . . it bothers me that we can't get from him.  

And we've had this government just say to us when we're about 

to ask these questions and the member from Estevan asked him 

for almost two hours the other night, from 7 o'clock till quarter 

to 9 and couldn't get an answer, till finally there was a 

precedent made when the Minister of Finance got up and got a 

little angry and started making political speeches.  And then so 

did the member from Estevan. 

 

And so then the House Leader knew he had to get control of his 

Minister of Finance, so he come in on closure.  And that's what 

happened, Mr. Speaker.  If the member from 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1963 

Estevan . . . or, I'm sorry, if the Minister of Finance had have 

not broken rank and started into political speeches, we never 

would have had closure.  We would have been all through 

maybe.  I don't think the way he was answering questions that 

we would have finished that night for the interim supply Bill, 

but if he had have been answering, we definitely could have 

been finished by 10 o'clock that night. 

 

We have no reason, Mr. Speaker . . . what would be the 

possible to reason to hold up an interim supply Bill?  What is a 

possible reason?  It's been happening for ever in here -- just get 

some answers.  We're entitled to ask a few questions.  There's 

nothing wrong with asking a few questions pertaining to 4 or 

$500 million. 

 

I'm the critic for ACS (Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan) and Social Services and several other Crowns, 

SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), and 

PSC (Public Service Commission).  And I wanted to ask 

questions about . . . I wanted to ask questions, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Minister of Finance about how much of that one-twelfth 

that's allocated to Agriculture, how much of that money gets 

back to Agricultural Credit Corporation.  I wanted to know 

that.  I needed to know that because we have farmers out there 

that would sure like to know if this government's spending any 

money whatsoever on farmers, or are they just spending their 

money on law firms and taking the land away. 

 

That's mostly what they're doing from what I can see, Mr. 

Speaker, now that they're spending their money or their 

one-twelfth that they put to Agriculture and then they put it 

over to ACS, and I don't know how much.  But I wanted to ask 

the question.  I wanted him to say that this law firm and that 

law firm and that law firm gets X amount of dollars and cents 

to go out and foreclose on farmers.  Because that's what's 

happening.  The Farm Debt Review Board will tell you right 

today that the hardest lender there is to deal with over Farm 

Credit Corporation and all the powerful banks, which I call the 

warmongers of the world, is the major banks plus you got your 

credit unions, and then you got ACS. 

 

And when they said ACS has got to be the most hard outfit to 

deal with and they should be the best.  Mr. Speaker, they 

should be the very best.  When you're dealing with ACS, you're 

dealing with the government that's supposed to have a heart.  

And certainly when they were dealing with us, we had a heart 

for farmers. 

 

And we were promised . . . and we want to know these 

questions: how much, how much money has gone to lawyers, 

to law firms?  Is there any money still going back to the old 

law firm that the now Premier and the Minister of Justice 

belonged to?  Is there still money going through to that firm 

from this one-twelfth that we're talking about here?  How much 

money is going to foreclose on farmers? 

 

That's what we need to know.  We need to know.  We have a 

right to know that MacPherson Leslie & Tyerman, their law 

firm, how much money they're getting; what's their share of the 

one-twelfth; what's their share of this interim supply Bill for 

this next month? 

An Hon. Member: -- Put a lid on it, Gerry. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, one of the members across the 

way, Mr. Speaker, is saying to me I should put a lid on it.  Well 

I'll tell you, I can't understand that because I used to . . . that 

individual sat about right here for four years and we didn't want 

to put a lid on her because we knew she had the right to speak 

in this House.  We knew she had her right.  And I gladly, 

gladly listened to that member.  And I even told her . . . and I 

met with this individual several times and says, you do a good 

job, you do a good job. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, they had something to say all right.  And 

they went out and said it at election time.  And there's where 

the Minister of Finance is wrong on not getting this 

information about this here interim supply Bill because they 

went out and promised everybody in this province they were 

going to balance budgets, lower taxes, increase jobs, save all 

the farmers.  And what did they do?  They broke every last one 

of them.  They broke them worse . . . well they haven't broke 

balancing the budget yet.  He hasn't broke balancing the budget 

yet. 

 

Well that's the only credit, Mr. Speaker, that I sometimes say to 

people throughout the province that maybe he will live up to 

his promise on balanced budgets.  He might, but on the backs 

of whom?  On the backs of whom?  He doesn't care how many 

senior citizens . . . we have a right to know how much money 

was saved in that one-twelfth through the departments when 

they cut people back on their diabetes insulin and their pills and 

their drugs and people that had to have these treatments from 

the chiropractors and what not.  How much money did they 

save?  Was there less money to the Department of Health? 

 

When people have to pay for getting their eyes tested, Mr. 

Speaker, we need to know these questions and these answers.  

We have a right to ask them.  Why couldn't he have stood up 

and say very quickly, yes, this one-twelfth to the Department of 

Health is that much less this time because we socked it to those 

there senior citizens and we squeezed their pocket-books and 

we got extra dollars and cents.  But he won't let us ask that 

question. 

 

We want to know, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, we have a right 

to know how much did you squeeze out of the seniors in this 

province and how much did you squeeze out of almost 

everybody.  I guess everybody's included in the E&H 

(education and health) tax.  How much did you squeeze out of 

them?  How much did these here seniors that will . . . 90 per 

cent of them will never vote for this government again, and we 

have a right to know on that supply Bill, we have a right to 

know how much money you squeezed out of those people 

because they're not very happy with them, Mr. Speaker.  

They're not very happy with this government. 

 

I have a right to know in Social Services.  I have questions that 

I wanted to ask him about the one-twelfth that goes to Social 

Services.  I have a right to ask this here Minister of Finance, 

Mr. Speaker.  I have my rights to ask him that all the different 

departments . . . how many departments and agencies do you 

collect the one-twelfth from, that you pay the one-twelfth into?  

How many are there?  I have my right to ask him that. 



1964 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And then I have my right to . . . when he answers that question 

. . . how many of those departments didn't use up their 

one-twelfth, and where does the money go?  Does it go from 

there into the Consolidated Fund?  That's what I wanted to ask 

him, but we've been stifled, and we can't ask. 

 

Did the deficit that I think that we're still running behind on 

because they've put extra money . . . they have put up a little 

extra money now.  They got the Tories . . . our opposition 

jumped on them so hard about the highways and byways and 

tearing up these gravel roads that he added a little more money 

-- it's right in here -- to the one-twelfth.  There's more money to 

Highways because they decided now that they're not going to 

gravel all . . . tear up and make gravel roads out of all these 

here roads. 

 

We have our rights to ask that.  I want to know these things 

because that's what we're here for.  When I was swore in as an 

MLA in the floor of this legislature -- and it's been four times 

now -- our job is to scrutinize the king's money.  That's what 

we're here for: to scrutinize the king's money.  And this 

opposition, this government, Mr. Speaker, they seem to feel 

that we have no right to scrutinize.  They think that we'll just 

take the rights of those Tories away.  We'll just tell them.  We'll 

do what we want.  If we made a blunder, Mr. Speaker . . . and 

I've had some of the members opposite tell me that our 

Minister of Agriculture has made a blunder, and we'll have to 

cover up for him.  And I've had them tell me that.  But I won't 

mention the names.  But if a member pushed to, I will mention 

them in his here . . . But those are private conversations that I'd 

just as soon not do that. 

 

But I will say under oath that I've had members say that our 

problem is why we're sitting here.  From members opposite, 

I've had two that I'm thinking of now that said because of the 

blunder of the Minister of Agriculture by not sending that letter 

out is why we're in this impasse in this building.  Why should 

the farmers in Saskatchewan suffer for that blunder?  Why 

should they suffer?  It's not reasonable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have a letter here that I think is very 

important; it's very pertinent to the supply Bill.  It's a letter that 

the member from Estevan did talk about a little bit the other 

day.  He read one quote.  But I want to have permission to read 

. . . it's only a short letter, if I could read it all into the record.  

It's a letter the Minister of Agriculture sent out to every 

producer in this province. 

 

Income problems continue to cause tremendous hardship for 

Saskatchewan farm families.  Your Premier and government 

are sensitive to these problems and want to ensure that the 

federal government in Ottawa understands just how serious the 

situation is in rural Saskatchewan.  The Premier sent a letter to 

the Prime Minister of Canada, the Right Honourable Brian 

Mulroney, outlining the provincial government's position on 

farm income.  I have attached a copy of the Premier's letter and 

would welcome your comments and how you think the federal 

government should respond to the farm income situation.  If 

you should decide to write directly to the Prime Minister 

Mulroney expressing your concerns, would you please provide 

Premier of Saskatchewan with 

a copy of your letter. 

 

I have also enclosed information from Saskatchewan 

Agriculture and Food regarding changes in the sharing of costs 

of the agriculture support programs between the federal and 

provincial government.  The province, in spirit of its limited 

financial capacity, has taken on a dramatically increased role in 

providing income support to farmers. 

 

They don't seem to say that the income support . . . So that's 

what they're saying, that it's increasing dramatically: that is 

why we feel the federal government must provide the 

additional support that is so badly needed by Saskatchewan 

farmers. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture has responded to that.  Maybe you 

should have kept the old GRIP format, and we wouldn't need to 

be begging from the federal government.  Just because you're 

too cheap to pay up doesn't mean farmers should do your dirty 

work and write to the federal government.  Do your own job.  

That's the only response we got from him.  Now that's serious. 

 

Now that last comment, Mr. Speaker, I've got a comment I 

want to make about that, but I'm not going to make it just yet: 

the province, in the spirit of its limited financial capacity, has 

taken on a dramatically increased role in providing income 

support to farmers. 

 

I have a comment I'm going to make about that a few minutes 

later.  I have, Mr. Speaker, some quotes that I'd like to put on 

the record.  Mr. Speaker, it's pertaining to the . . . And I think 

it's important.  It's why we're into this mess here we're in here 

now -- this impasse.  We're into it because of a closure motion.  

That's why we're here.  So I'm not going to go and repeat the 

ones that, Mr. Speaker, that the member from Estevan and the 

member from Thunder Creek did.  But I want to read some of 

them. 

 

The member from Humboldt: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, we are here in this debate because this 

government, I believe, is drunk with power as well.  They are 

so consumed with themselves, so consumed with their 

friends, and so consumed by the power that they wield, that 

they just refuse to allow the democratic process to work.  

They simply just do not respond to democracy in a traditional 

way in this province because they are so drunk with the 

power that they hold. 

 

And that's August 7, 1989. 

 

 It sets that arrogant attitude, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 

I think the reason they're doing this is because every time 

they do it it becomes easier, it becomes more accepted by the 

people of the province.  Once it's done, then the people they 

think will say, well it's been done before, then they'll accept it 

a little easier next time and the next time and the next time. 

 

August 7, '89. 

 

(1645) 



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1965 

Well as I said in the beginning of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, 

that shows you the arrogant government we've got here because 

this was done after the House came in on . . . and, Mr. Speaker, 

I see the -- and which I shouldn't be looking at him; I should 

still stay looking at you, you're much better looking, Mr. 

Speaker -- the Minister of Finance.  I will turn this way or this 

way.  He's the one that is just shaking his head at me now as if 

this is wrong.  But I'm right when I said that the House came in 

on early March of 1989 and went out in 170 days later.  And 

that the closure Bill came in on August 4. 

 

So let's don't say that they aren't an arrogant government, Mr. 

Speaker, because they are.  Any time you get a . . . and that was 

after 80 hours of debate.  And we only had less than six hours 

of debate.  In fact it was less than five, from 3 o'clock -- quarter 

to 3 till 5 o'clock and then at a quarter to 9 we had closure on 

the interim supply Bill.  Never, ever, has that happened in the 

history of the Commonwealth.  Never, ever, has it ever 

happened. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, the history of the Commonwealth goes back 

a long time, I understand in England, about 700 years and on 

record.  And England goes back about 700 years and I had an 

individual when I was in Bismarck here two weeks ago tell us, 

that they said a Bill like this, that he is sure because it was 

checked out when they had this problem in Quebec, that it's 

never happened in the British Commonwealth in 700 years -- 

700 years. 

 

I have another quote that I'd like to read, Mr. Speaker: this 

debate, Mr. Speaker, is about a government with its own 

agenda, agenda that is not in the best interests of the people and 

that is not good for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well let's just stop there for a moment, Mr. Speaker, because 

maybe this individual is right.  Maybe that Bill that we're 

talking about wasn't right for the people, but the people should 

have had their say.  Just like this GRIP Bill that I'm asking for 

finances and a commitment of make a deal with Ottawa where 

it is one-twelfth of this money.  There's no difference.  It's 

there.  And he should be providing for it. 

 

That means they're going to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, with a forked 

tongue.  It means they're going down there asking for money or 

writing letters but don't mean it and don't want it because they 

know they're not going to get it because they didn't provide in 

their budget.  They didn't even provide. 

 

This debate is about muzzling the opposition, Mr. Speaker.  

Muzzling the opposition -- something that this government is 

not reluctant to do because we've seen related examples of how 

they've muzzled other people who have effectively spoken out 

against their policies, their cutbacks and their harsh and cruel 

tactics, Mr. Speaker -- August 7, 1989. 

 

Another thing I wish to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 

this motion violates the very spirit of democracy.  Imagine 

these here hypocritical people saying that in 1989 and turn 

around and muzzle us after less than five hours.  And we only 

had one speaker on the GRIP motion 

the other day and we got muzzled.  So, Mr. Speaker, if the 

people in this province don't realize they soon will, because I 

tell you, the member from Kelvington-Wadena will see how 

much this ambition this here 10 people on this side have to get 

the message out over the next four years.  And I will guarantee 

you that there will be very, very few people that saying these 

terrible statements will be re-elected to this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe I do have a quote from Moose Jaw, but I'll 

just take a check.  I'm afraid there isn't.  But I do have one 

more here.  This is one more here: 

 

 That is why, Mr. Speaker, I find this piece of legislation so 

abhorrent.  He doesn't have the right to decide how long I can 

speak in this legislature.  He doesn't have that right.  The 

people of Saskatoon South have elected me to speak for 

them. 

 

August 7, 1989 Hansard.  So I say again, you don't have the 

right.  You just don't have the right as a government to tell me 

whether I can or cannot speak in this legislature.  The people 

will decide that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have another one here: 

 

 . . . this is a government afraid of words, afraid of words and 

afraid of ideas, afraid to let opposition MLAs, elected by 

their constituents to speak for them, do just that in these 

legislative chambers, the chambers of the people . . . 

 

August 7, '89 Hansard. 

 

This PC government with this motion has said formally and 

officially with their closure upon closure motion they said: if 

you dare to oppose us, if you dare to criticize us, if you dare to 

speak against us, we will eliminate your right to speak.  Now 

isn't that got to be some statement, Mr. Speaker?  We will 

eliminate your right to speak.  Isn't that got to be a statement 

and a half.  Since when do we not have our right? 

 

The members opposite that are chirping at me now, they all 

have their right to speak.  At least I gave the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena a bouquet for getting up to speak.  But 

where are the rest of you people?  Where's the member from 

Moose Jaw that could speak for 12 and 15 hours?  Where is he 

now?  The front benches have muzzled him and says:  no you 

can't speak.  There is the House Leader and the Minister of 

Finance . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  In case the member has forgotten, we 

do have a motion before us that relates to interim supply.  And 

I've listened very carefully for the last 10 minutes and he has 

not related at all what he said . . . he was doing all right at the 

beginning, but lately he has not related it at all to the motion 

before us.  So I ask him to get back to the motion. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I do appreciate 

you, Mr. Speaker, bringing me back on the topic because I will 

say I was getting carried away.  But I enjoy getting carried 

away once in a while in here, Mr. Speaker. 



1966 Saskatchewan Hansard August 4, 1992 

And I will go back to the Minister of Finance now. We'll go 

back and discuss a little more about this here GRIP and why 

there wasn't a provision for more money for the farmers in that 

one-twelfth.  We'll never find out, will we?  I'll say to our own 

caucus here, we'll never find out because they won't answer 

any questions.  We can't get any answers from them. 

 

I mean even when he was able to answer, from quarter to three 

last Thursday to quarter to nine that night, which was five 

hours, he had a right to answer and he wouldn't answer one.  

And I'm asking, Mr. Speaker, I'm asking, will . . . I'm hoping 

that when this member, when this Minister of Finance gets up, 

that he will answer some of the questions.  He's had a chance. 

He's had his office, and his MAs (ministerial assistant) had a 

chance to go through the Hansard and see the questions that I 

asked yesterday. And I expect an answer to them.  I expect an 

answer.  At least not be arrogant like you did yesterday, Mr. 

Minister; that when three of us spoke yesterday -- three of us -- 

and we could . . . we were going to keep on. 

 

Well we thought for sure that you . . . Mr. Speaker, I'll address 

my remarks through you to the Minister of Finance, that we 

thought for sure that we'd better not have 10 speakers because 

it's going to be hard for him to remember all these answers.  So 

we had three -- we had three people speak. And then we sat 

down and thought for sure he'd get up.  No way.  He wouldn't 

get up.  He didn't get up.  He almost did.  I seen him put his 

hand on his desk, he was going to get up, but he got the nod 

from the House Leader and he sat back down in his chair.  I 

seen it, Mr. Speaker.  I've been around here long enough to 

kind of know what goes on and how . . . dispositions of people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do want to make a comment, and this comment 

that I'm going to make will probably cause a problem in this 

legislature.  But this individual that wrote . . . that drafted this 

letter to the producer in this province and sent this letter out to 

all the farmers in Saskatchewan -- there'd be thousands of them 

going out.  And it says in here, and I want to repeat it:  the 

province, in spite of its limited financial capacity, has taken on 

a dramatically increased role in providing income support to 

farmers. 

 

Now whoever drafted that letter, whatever bureaucrat in this 

province drafted that letter, absolutely lied to every farmer in 

this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. Order.  The member, on two 

accounts, is out of order.  Number one, the subject matter that 

he is referring to has absolutely nothing to do with what we 

have before us.  And secondly, I will ask him to withdraw the 

words "lie" that he has just made. 

 

And he knew before he said it, that's what makes it so sad.  He 

said that he was going to be out of order and then goes ahead 

and does it.  And I'm asking the member to -- he knows better 

than that -- and to withdraw those words that he has just put 

before the legislature. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  I want the member, 

without any comment, to withdraw the words that he just 

spoke, that the bureaucrats lied to the legislature.  Withdraw 

the statement without any comment. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Can I, Mr. Speaker, have you had . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- No, you cannot.  You either withdraw the 

statement or you don't.  I'm asking the member to withdraw the 

statement.  He knows it's unparliamentary.  He said so himself 

before he even made it, that it would be unparliamentary.  I'm 

asking the member to withdraw the statement that people lied 

in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, when you check Hansard 

you'll find I didn't say that and I will not take that back. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to ask the member . . . The 

member knows that we do not use the word "lie" in this 

Assembly.  He made the statement to this Assembly, that what 

I am going to say is probably going to get me into trouble.  

That, I think . . . I'm paraphrasing, but those were his words.  

So he had knowledge of what he was going to say was 

unparliamentary. 

 

I'm simply asking him -- he knows better than that -- I'm asking 

him again to please withdraw those words.  You know that 

they're unparliamentary; you said so yourself.  I'm asking the 

member from Arm River to simply withdraw those words. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I did not say it in that manner and I felt that 

I'm right to say that in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, when I'm 

talking about somebody lying outside the legislature. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  I've asked the member 

to withdraw those words.  I'll give the member one last 

opportunity to withdraw those words, otherwise I will name the 

member under rule 28.  I ask the member to withdraw those 

words. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, my last comment is that 

whoever drafted that letter lied to every farmer in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right.  Order.  The member leaves me no 

choice.  And therefore under rule 28 I will name you, Gerry 

Muirhead, and I ask you to leave the Assembly for the rest of 

the day. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The interim supply Bill 

that we are dealing with here today is something that, as I said 

yesterday, is a very legitimate thing that the government should 

be asking for. 

 

And it's also legitimate that we have the opportunity to ask 

questions about interim supply Mr. Speaker.  But we haven't 

had that opportunity.  We haven't been given the opportunity to 

ask questions of the minister.  We all had a number of 

questions.  Everyone in the opposition had questions with 

respect to the areas of their critic responsibility; that they 

would like to be able to ask questions of the Minister of 

Finance on this. 
 

The Minister of Finance is asking for something in the order of 

$400 million from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan  



August 4, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1967 

and we think it's relevant that we should be given the 

opportunity to ask some questions about where he intends to 

spend that money.  But we simply haven't been given that 

opportunity. 

 

As the rules of this debate would be, we would only be given 

individually one opportunity to ask a question.  One question, 

we'd have to sit down, and then we would lose our opportunity 

to ask further questions. 

 

And that simply isn't the way a democracy is supposed to work, 

Mr. Speaker.  It's supposed to be grievance before supply; an 

opportunity for us to ask questions before it's voted on and the 

money is appropriated to the Minister of Finance. 

 

We had questions, and a number of questions, Mr. Speaker.  

Various members on this side of the House have asked a 

number of questions and none of them have been answered.  

The Minister of Finance simply refused to answer the 

questions.  He didn't bring in . . . he brought in his officials and 

we weren't able to ask a single question. 

 

We wanted to ask questions about economic diversification and 

trade -- what they planned to do in that area.  What they plan to 

do with the Piper Aircraft deal, what they plan to do with Saska 

Pasta, what they plan to do with the AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) agreement, what they plan to do with meat 

packing plants at Moose Jaw and Saskatoon. 

 

SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), 

through this minister of . . . the House Leader, lent the packing 

plant in Moose Jaw six and a half million dollars.  We haven't 

been able to ask a single question in this interim supply Bill 

about that deal -- not a single question.  We weren't able to ask 

questions about Impact Packaging in Swift Current . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 5 o'clock, this House 

stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 

 

 


