




















































Hansard: April 27, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 

 April 27, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 3 p.m. 

 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that I have 

received a communication from the private secretary to Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 

open the second session of the twenty-second legislature at 3 

p.m. today, the 27th day of April, 1992. 

 

3:04 p.m. 

 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 

the session with the following speech: 

 

Mr. Speaker, 

 

Members of the Legislative Assembly: 

 

It is my privilege to welcome you, on behalf of our Sovereign, 

Her Majesty the Queen, to the second session of the 

twenty-second legislature of Saskatchewan.  I invite you to join 

with me in extending best wishes to Her Majesty, Queen 

Elizabeth II, as she celebrates the 40th anniversary of her 

accession to the throne. 

 

A Mandate for Change 

 

We come together today, in the spring of 1992, a time of 

renewal, to set a new direction for Saskatchewan.  The people 

have given my ministers a mandate for fundamental change. 

 

A community that lives beyond its means will not long prosper.  

People want my government to get their financial house in 

order. 

 

A community that has lost faith in the elected representatives 

will not flourish.  People want my government to be open, 

honest and fully accountable. 

 

A community without compassion will not know true progress.  

People want my government to be fair and compassionate in all 

its actions. 

 

A community divided will not succeed.  People want my 

government to rekindle the Saskatchewan spirit of community 

and co-operation. 

 

My government must set a new direction for Saskatchewan in a 

time of unprecedented economic challenge.  It has inherited an 

overwhelming debt that threatens our economic stability today, 

and jeopardizes our hopes for economic recovery tomorrow. 

 

Working together, we can meet the challenge.  We can rebuild 

Saskatchewan, turn our economy around, and provide a 

brighter future for ourselves and our children. 

 

Putting Our Financial House in Order 

 

My ministers are determined to restore common sense and 

competence to the management of the public treasury.  

Government must learn once again to live within its means. 

In recent years government spending has been out of control.  

The result has been deficit upon deficit, eating up more of our 

annual budget simply to pay the interest on past excesses.  

Every dollar that goes to pay the interest on borrowed money is 

a dollar that cannot be spent to create jobs, improve our health 

care, educate our children or provide some other vital service. 

 

Today, Saskatchewan people are burdened with the highest per 

capita debt in the nation. 

 

A family which lives on borrowed money too long, loses its 

freedom to make spending choices and limits its ability to plan 

for the future.  So too with a society.  If we fail to get the 

provincial deficit under control, we will soon lose the financial 

freedom to spend what we choose on vital public services, and 

we will cripple our ability to plan and invest for the future. 

 

Our children did not create this debt.  We have no right to 

burden them with it. 

 

In a few days, my Minister of Finance will present a budget 

which will demonstrate a new determination to control 

government spending and to reduce the deficit. 

 

Open, Honest and Accountable Government 

 

People want government to be more open, honest and 

accountable.  To this end, my ministers appointed the Financial 

Management Review Commission to "open the books" and 

provide an independent audit of the province's financial affairs.  

Its comprehensive recommendations will improve 

government's accountability for the expenditure of our tax 

dollars.  Many of those recommendations which require 

legislative action will be dealt with in this session. 

 

My government will amend The Provincial Auditor Act to 

ensure the early release of the Provincial Auditor's annual 

report, and to improve the Provincial Auditor's access to the 

books of all Crown agencies. 

 

Amendments will also be made to The Financial 

Administration Act to require the early release of Public 

Accounts. 

 

During this session, members of the Legislative Assembly will 

also be asked to adopt a code of ethical conduct that will set a 

high standard of behaviour to which all public office holders 

should aspire. 

 

Further, a new members of the Legislative Assembly conflict 

of interests Act will be introduced to provide strict guidelines 

for all elected representatives in the performance of their public 

duties. 

 

The public wants individual elected representatives to have a 

stronger voice in government's daily decisions.  All-party 

legislative committees will be revitalized to give private 

members a stronger role.  In addition, a special select 

committee on democratic reform will be established to conduct 

with the public on ways to make the legislature more 

accountable to the people. 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1992 

A truly democratic society respects the rights of all minorities.  

During this session, my government will introduce 

amendments to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code to 

increase the independence of the Saskatchewan Human Rights 

Commission and to make the code more consistent with 

protection offered in other jurisdictions. 

 

Jobs and Economic Opportunities 

 

In spite of Saskatchewan's financial problems, there is reason 

for hope and optimism.  Local businesses continue to do well 

in today's competitive market-place and continue to create jobs 

and opportunities. 

 

The Spar Group is adding 60 employees to its plant in Swift 

Current, thanks to new multimillion dollar contracts to supply 

national retail chains with a line of hardware supplies. 

 

Harvest Meats in Yorkton, which produces a line of processed 

meat products for retail food stores, is enjoying record sales 

here and in the United States.  Its plant now employs more than 

one hundred people. 

 

In Weyburn, 540 investors have contributed more than $1.4 

million to encourage Advanced Test Technologies 

Incorporated to move to that city to manufacture electronic 

circuit board testing equipment.  The plant has the potential to 

create 95 jobs. 

 

A new furniture manufacturing company, Palcu Industries, has 

just been announced for Saskatoon, with the potential to create 

35 to 40 jobs in the first year of operation. 

 

In total, there are currently more than 700 companies which 

have expressed an interest in either relocating to Saskatchewan 

or expanding their operations here.  If these businesses proceed 

with their plans, they have the potential to create or maintain 

more than 16,000 jobs. 

 

My government is trying to encourage new economic 

development in every region of our province, but changes are 

required to make government's role more effective.  Today 

there are 27 different government departments, agencies or 

Crown corporations offering over 200 separate programs or 

services to business.  This results in duplication, frustration and 

lost productivity. 

 

My government will be streamlining economic development 

programs and services in the coming months to make them 

more effective and accessible. 

 

My government will improve opportunities for communities to 

come together to support their own economic development 

initiatives.  Amendments to The Community Bonds Act will, 

for the first time, make co-operatives eligible for financial 

support.  Other amendments will strengthen the review and 

approval process for community bond projects. 

 

My government will also use Crown corporations to help 

stimulate economic development.  SaskPower is currently 

evaluating nine proposals from private industry for the 

development of co-generation power projects.  These 

projects have important economic development potential for 

rural communities. 

 

SaskTel International continues to sell its telecommunications 

expertise in the global market-place, with important contracts 

in Europe, the United States and the Pacific Rim. 

 

My government will introduce the Saskatchewan Energy Act in 

this session to give out natural gas transmission and 

distribution utility the statutory power to carry out its mandate 

more effectively. 

 

Saskatchewan is Canada's most trade-dependent province.  

Nearly 40 per cent of our economic output is for export.  My 

government believes that Saskatchewan needs a new 

international trade policy to protect our jobs and export 

markets.  A number of international trade concerns currently 

cloud our economic prospects. 

 

The Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement is a source of 

economic disruption and uncertainty.  Canadian exporters 

continue to be subjected to trade harassment by American 

competitors. 

 

The GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 

negotiations still underway in Europe will have a profound 

effect on Saskatchewan's economic future.  Yet the federal 

government has done little more than provide provinces with 

after-the-fact briefings on its negotiating positions. 

 

Similarly, the proposed North American free trade agreement, 

with the United States and Mexico, offers Saskatchewan few 

benefits and much cause for concern.  Ottawa continues to 

bargain with limited involvement from the provinces. 

 

My government is determined to change this.  If the national 

government wants provincial assistance in implementing 

international trade treaties, the provinces must be involved in 

the negotiation and ratification of such treaties. 

 

Economic recovery must truly be a community-wide effort.  

The Premier's Economic Action Committee, with 

representatives from business, labour, agriculture and local 

governments, among others, will be appointed to advise and 

assist in the economic rejuvenation of Saskatchewan. 

 

Agriculture and the Economy 

 

Long-term stability for our farm families is central to our 

economic recovery. 

 

The first step is a strong and dependable income stabilization 

plan.  The federal-provincial farm safety net programs -- GRIP, 

gross revenue insurance program, and NISA, net income 

stabilization agreement -- are a beginning, but not sufficient. 

 

Shortly after taking office, my government appointed a 

producers' committee to review these programs.  While the 

federal government would not allow a major overhaul this year, 

Saskatchewan did secure approval for a number 



April 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

of important improvements. 

 

My ministers recognize that much more needs to be done for 

the 1993 crop year.  Negotiations are underway to try to put 

GRIP on a more realistic cost-of-production formula, to 

increase Ottawa's share of the cost, and to reduce producer 

premiums. 

 

My government will continue to pressure Ottawa to live up to 

its responsibility to protect agriculture from global commodity 

price wars.  An additional cash payment of $500 million is still 

owing to Canadian farmers to cover grain price deficiencies 

from the 1990-91 crop year.  My government is pleased that 

the recent first ministers' conference on the economy gave 

unanimous approval to the need for continuing deficiency 

payments from the federal treasury. 

 

My government recognizes that while international prices are 

the root cause of today's problems in agriculture, the severe 

debt load suffered by many farmers is making matters worse.  

Therefore action will be taken based upon the 

recommendations of the Farm Debt Advisory Committee. 

 

The committee's recommendations include a mandatory 

six-year lease back program for farmers who surrender their 

farm land in payment of debt.  My government is discussing 

these recommendations with farm organizations and lenders.  

We will be introducing appropriate amendments to The 

Saskatchewan Farm Security Act in this session. 

 

Protecting our Environment 

 

Economic development must reflect the need to sustain a 

healthy environment.  My government is committed to 

sustainable development. 

 

My ministers look forward to receiving the conservation 

strategy for sustainable development in Saskatchewan, the final 

report of the Round Table on Environment and Economy. 

 

The environmental charter of rights and responsibilities Act 

will be introduced to guarantee public access to environmental 

information and protection for people who report 

environmental accidents or environmentally hazardous 

practices. 

 

My government will present a comprehensive proposal to 

ensure that Saskatchewan will again have the best 

environmental assessment process in the country.  An 

independent Environmental Assessment Commission will be 

proposed to administer a more open and effective assessment 

process for major projects.  The commission would also have a 

mandate to prepare an annual State of the Environment Report 

for the province. 

 

My government will introduce amendments to The Parks Act 

to increase the amount of land committed to provincial parks 

and protected areas.  These initiatives will add over 215,000 

hectares to the Saskatchewan provincial park system.  

Amendments will also be made to The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act to transfer an additional 607,000 hectares of 

Crown land to the 

protection of this Act. 

 

Quality of Life 

 

In this era of financial restraint, the challenge for government is 

to find innovative ways to provide improved services to people.  

Governments must learn to do more with less.  Public services 

like health care and education are essential to our quality of 

life, but we must constantly search for new, more efficient 

ways to use the tax dollars spent in these vital areas. 

 

July 1, 1992 will mark the 30th anniversary of medicare in 

Saskatchewan.  Our province pioneered medicare.  Now we 

must lead the way in developing the next generation of 

medicare. 

 

For too long people have thought of our health system only as a 

way to deal with sickness.  That approach assumes an 

ever-increasing need for costly, hospital-based care. 

 

Our view of health care must become much broader.  The 

wellness approach stresses the need to improve our collective 

well-being by enhancing our social and physical environment, 

adopting healthier life-styles, working to prevent disease and 

disability, helping the elderly to live more independently, and 

encouraging people to be more responsible for their own state 

of health. 

 

The wellness approach will also place an increased emphasis 

on community-based programs and services.  Where possible 

we will provide care for residents in their homes and 

communities so that they can be close to the support of friends 

and family. 

 

To mobilize the full value of our human, technological and 

financial resources in support of the wellness approach, we 

must increase integration and co-operation among our 

facilities, programs and health care professionals.  In this 

regard, my government has already begun to unify the various 

health boards in Saskatoon and Regina under new, integrated 

city health boards. 

 

As we plan for the next generation of medicare, we must also 

determine how we can best make use of our limited health 

resources. 

 

To that end, a Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission will evaluate the benefits and costs of health 

procedures, technologies, programs and agencies, and identify 

options for improving Saskatchewan's performance. 

 

To increase community involvement in health care reform, my 

government will appoint a provincial health council.  This 

council will give consumers, health providers and community 

leaders an opportunity to contribute their knowledge and 

experience to the reform process. 

 

The rapidly changing global economy also requires new 

approaches to the education of our children.  Learning has 

become a lifelong commitment.  My government will work in 

co-operation with Saskatchewan families, 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1992 

communities, educators and business to help provide new 

structures and creative responses to fulfil the vision of lifelong 

learning. 

 

Change is required.  Our province has a high-school drop-out 

rate of more than 30 per cent, a lack of industry-sponsored 

training programs, and a high out-migration of university 

graduates.  No less than in health care, Saskatchewan requires a 

community-wide effort to help our education system adapt to 

the changing needs of the 1990s and to increase lifelong 

learning opportunities. 

 

My government will create a Saskatchewan education council, 

bringing together parents, educators, business, labour, 

community groups and the appropriate federal and provincial 

government agencies to advise on improvements to our 

educational system. 

 

An inquiry into the university education will be appointed soon 

to review university structures and programs, to ensure that 

they meet the needs of both students and the community.  A 

complete evaluation of the structure and programs at the 

Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology is 

already underway. 

 

My government will also explore new ways of using distance 

education to improve access to educational opportunities for 

residents of rural and remote areas. 

 

Initiatives with aboriginal organizations will improve equity 

and access for aboriginal students.  A new institute, the 

Dumont Technical Institute, federated with the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology, will be created to 

enhance skill training for Metis people. 

 

Putting People First 

 

While my government is committed to financial restrain, it 

understands that its actions must be based on the principle of 

fairness and compassion.  We must protect the most vulnerable 

in our communities. 

 

Ten years ago Saskatchewan had one of the lowest child 

poverty rates in Canada.  Today we have one of the highest.  

One child in five in Saskatchewan grows up poor. 

 

My government is committed to tackling poverty.  The cost of 

children growing up on the outskirts of hope is too high, both 

in terms of human potential and increased demands on 

taxpayers.  Hunger and nutrition programs will be enhanced in 

co-operation with local communities. 

 

My government is also reviewing all income support programs.  

This involves co-operation among departments so that health, 

education, housing and other programs complement each other.  

My ministers will co-ordinate provincial initiatives with 

existing federal programs and will be working to form new 

partnerships with local communities and non-governmental 

organizations.  The goal of my government is to develop a new 

social safety net to meet the changing conditions of the 1990s. 

Breaking the poverty cycle also means creating opportunities 

for training and employment.  Employment and training 

programs will be consolidated to help those in need receive 

on-the-job training, upgrade their education, and make 

long-term career plans.  More training programs designed 

specifically for women are required since over 30 per cent of 

people on social assistance are single-parent women. 

 

Poverty is also a national issue that requires the collaboration 

of all levels of government.  A national poverty initiative is 

required so that ministers responsible for income security can 

develop, on a co-operative basis, a national plan to reform 

income security policies. 

 

The challenge of the 1990s is to use our scarce tax dollars as 

effectively as possible to help those in need.  My government 

will conduct a full review of all seniors' programs, in 

consultation with seniors' groups, to work toward a guaranteed 

minimum level of support for seniors. 

 

Putting people first also demands that we take positive steps 

towards achieving equity for women, while dealing forthrightly 

with the consequences of gender inequality. 

 

My government is proud that four of its portfolios are held by 

women -- the highest representation in Saskatchewan's history.  

My government has already appointed 580 people to 

government agencies, boards and commission of which 36 per 

cent are women and 6 per cent are of aboriginal ancestry. 

 

But we are far from satisfied.  We will achieve gender balance 

on government agencies, boards and commissions in the 

coming months, and we will work to increase aboriginal 

representation, recognizing that aboriginal people now 

represent about 12 per cent of the provincial population. 

 

Aboriginal people strengthen Saskatchewan's rich cultural 

identity.  My government recognizes and will promote the right 

of Indian and Metis people to self-determination and 

self-reliance, respecting also their right to define, apply and 

practise their own cultures, customs and traditional community 

values. 

 

The Saskatchewan Metis Justice Review Committee and the 

Indian Justice Review Committee have reported, 

recommending changes relating to youth justice, policing, legal 

representation, sentencing alternatives, court services and 

corrections.  These changes will improve the relationship 

between Indian and Metis people and the justice system and 

represent an important contribution to the achievement of 

self-determination. 

 

My government is committed to settling outstanding treaty land 

entitlements.  A proper and efficient process will continue to be 

exercised in order to demonstrate the sincerity of our 

commitment. 

 

During the 1980s, the problems of Saskatchewan's northern 

residents were virtually ignored.  My government will reach 

out to northern communities to find ways to provide jobs, 

adequate housing and 



April 27, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

educational opportunities for the people of the North. 

 

A new northern works program will be established.  It will 

employ about 150 Northerners in at least 9 communities.  

Seventeen northern communities are currently without 

conventional water and sewer systems.  To meet urgent health 

concerns, my government will provide additional resources to 

develope safe drinking water supplies and improved sewage 

disposal systems in the North. 

 

Forty per cent of the current housing in northern Saskatchewan 

is in need of repair.  The province will be working with 

northern communities to provide affordable and adequate 

housing.  Construction of new homes and renovation of 

existing homes will also create employment opportunities for 

local people. 

 

The construction industry labour relations Act will be 

introduced to modernize labour relations in the construction 

industry.  Amendments will be made to The Occupational 

Health and Safety Act to better protect working people on the 

job site.  These amendments address the recommendations of 

the Occupational Health and Safety Council following its 

public review of the Act. 

 

Further, my government will introduce amendments to The 

Pension Benefits Act which will enhance minimum standards 

and protection for workers and their pensions. 

 

The Minister of Labour has appointed a Trade Union Act 

Review Committee to review collective bargaining legislation 

and the general state of labour-management relations in the 

province.  The committee has equal representation from labour 

and employer organizations.  This co-operative approach will 

help develop a more positive work-place atmosphere in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Further, it's the intention of my government to conduct a 

comprehensive review of The Labour Standards Act to ensure 

that the minimum working standards required by this 

legislation are appropriate for workers in the 1990s. 

 

A Strong Saskatchewan is a Strong Canada 

 

My government notes that our nation will celebrate the 125th 

anniversary of Confederation on July 1 of this year.  My 

government also notes that Canada 125 celebrations are being 

held in Saskatchewan throughout the year -- celebrations that 

allow our citizens to proclaim that they are proud to be 

Canadians. 

 

More than ever, these are critical times for our nation.  My 

government is an active participant in intense discussions 

involving the federal government, the provincial and territorial 

governments, and aboriginal peoples to achieve a renewed 

federalism that can unite Canada. 

 

During this session, my government will ask the legislature to 

appoint a standing committee on the Constitution.  The purpose 

of such a committee would be to receive resolutions from the 

Canadian parliament or other provincial legislatures proposing 

constitutional amendments, gather public reaction, and 

recommend appropriate action to our legislature. 

 

Conclusion 

 

The legislative plan my government has outlined here today is 

a major step toward achieving its objectives for this term of 

office.  This plan: 

 

 - begins the task of deficit reduction; 

 - sets a new standard of open, honest, and accountable 

government; 

 - provides hope for the disadvantaged; and 

 - renews the Saskatchewan spirit of co-operation and 

community. 

 

My government will ask Saskatchewan people to judge its 

success over its term of office by whether it has restored 

common sense and competence to the management of the 

public treasury, whether it has restored public faith in the 

ability of politicians to serve the public interest, whether it has 

given new hope to the less fortunate, and whether it has 

brought people together. 

 

My ministers are confident that as long as Saskatchewan 

people work together to solve the challenges we face, we will 

meet these objectives and prosper. 

 

The Estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1992 will be 

submitted.  I leave you now to the business of this session, with 

full confidence that you will favourably discharge your duties 

and responsibilities. 

 

May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 

guide the legislature in all its deliberations.  God save the 

Queen. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3:35 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Pro Forma Bill 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

move that a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 

Introduction of Pages 

 

The Speaker: -- I wish to inform the Assembly that the pages 

for this session will be:  Richard Brimble, Trevor Davies, 

Adèle Friess, Cheryl Konanz -- she was not able to make it 

today -- and Colleen Yanush. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 1992 

The Speaker: -- I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to 

prevent mistakes I have ordered a copy of the speech of Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Speech from the Throne 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I move, 

seconded by the Deputy Premier, the member from Regina 

Dewdney: 

 

 That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Tuesday, April 28, 1992. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 

House Leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 

after first having been perused by Mr. Speaker, that he do 

appoint the printing thereof, and that no person but such as he 

shall appoint do presume to print the same. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: -- Before putting the question on the 

adjournment motion, I do want to acknowledge the band that 

has been playing for us.  The music that you have been 

listening to this afternoon is provided to us by the Ed Lewis 

Brass Quartet.  They are playing under the direction of Dr. Ed 

Lewis.  Our thanks to the band for a fine performance.  You 

will have the opportunity to hear more from these excellent 

musicians later this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- At this time I would like to invite you to the 

open house which will take place immediately following the 

Chamber ceremony. 

 

The Legislative Library, the cabinet room and the Chamber 

will be open for you to visit.  You are also invited to visit the 

display galleries and attend a performance by the St. Margaret's 

Musicians from Moose Jaw in the main rotunda at 4:30 today. 

 

Guided tours are available and refreshments will be served in 

the Legislative Library and the rotunda. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 3:41 p.m. 

 


