




















































Hansard: July 08, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1335 

 July 8, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Clerk: -- According to order, I have reviewed the following 

petition pursuant to rule 11(7), and it is hereby read and 

received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse the action of closing the Elbow 

School. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure and 

privilege today to introduce to you and through you to 

members of the Assembly, His Excellency, Ambassador Wen 

from the People's Republic of China who is with us here today.  

Along with his His Excellency Wen is Mrs. Wen, and also Mr. 

Bi who is the second secretary of China. 

 

They're with us here today to look at economic development 

projects in Saskatchewan and relationships between our 

province and the People's Republic of China.  As members will 

know and many members of the official opposition, that the 

long-standing goodwill between China and Saskatchewan is 

being enhanced today and we look forward to doing many 

projects as we have in the past. 

 

I want all members to join with me in welcoming His 

Excellency and group here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to join with 

the Government House Leader in welcoming the ambassador 

and his delegation to the legislature today. 

 

I had an opportunity to have breakfast with the ambassador 

yesterday.  And we reminisced and talked about the many 

opportunities that we've had in Saskatchewan to host people 

like Mr. Wan Li who is chairman of the People's Congress, and 

have delegations come into the province and exchange 

information and have successful projects between 

Saskatchewan and Canada and the People's Republic of China. 

 

So I want to welcome the ambassador here and also say that he 

and his colleagues are welcome back in the province of 

Saskatchewan at any time in the future. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, 

and fellow members of the legislature, I want to take this 

opportunity to commend our Premier on the leadership role that 

he has shown in the present 

constitutional negotiations. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- His attitude of co-operation or honourable 

compromise was obviously an important and very much 

needed example of leadership. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in a country that has so much going for it 

that it is hard to believe that we could be on the brink of 

throwing it all away.  Around the world Canadians are highly 

regarded for our accomplishments but also for our 

consideration of others.  We are seen as a peaceful, sensible, 

and co-operative nation, and by and large I believe that to be an 

accurate reflection of Canadian people. 

 

The constitutional debate has too long been used for political 

manipulation and means of power brokering or one-upmanship.  

To that end our country's leaders up to now had done a poor job 

of reflecting our wishes and concerns in attempting to amend 

the constitution. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Canadians are tired of the process of 

smoke-screens and hidden agendas.  The Canada conferences 

that were held last winter prove that if people enter into the 

debate with a sincere desire to listen to others and resolve to 

overcome barriers, and problems can and will be solved. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time is up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  While we 

contemplate new partnerships to make us stronger nationally, I 

would like to share with you that last evening I was honoured 

to be present and bring greetings to the Chinese ambassador to 

Canada, Ambassador Wen and Mrs. Wen. 

 

Ambassador Wen tells us of our strength and the partnership 

we have developed with the People's Republic of China.  Last 

night at New Canton restaurant the ambassador was met by all 

of the Chinese associations and groups in Regina, by special 

visitors also from Moose Jaw and Balcarres.  And it's the first 

time that all of the groups have been together.  The people of 

Chinese heritage in Saskatchewan add strength to our business, 

academic, and multicultural community.  We are richer for 

their presence and their contribution to the life and work of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yesterday Ambassador Wen and Mrs. Wen toured a 

Saskatchewan farming operation and an elevator site.  Today 

they have been introduced to you by the minister responsible 

for Economic Diversification and Trade.  And they will also 

visit a potash mine and be going on to Saskatoon.  With the 

tour of the potash mine I think it is significant and suggestive 

of the special relationship that has developed in recent years 

between China and between our province. 

 

Potash is one of our major resources and one of the keys to our 

economic development.  It is a commodity much in 



1336 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

demand in China and as such is a real sign of a growing 

relationship. 

 

Our trade and resources such as potash has also led to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

bring to your attention and to the attention of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, a wagon train which is moving through south-eastern 

Saskatchewan. This wagon train and trail ride retraces the 

footsteps of the Boundary Commission of 1872 and the path 

taken by the North-West Mounted Police as they moved west 

into western Canada in 1874. 

 

The wagon train started on Saturday from Coulter park in 

Manitoba where they had arrived last year from Fort Dufferin.  

And they will proceed on to Roche Percee near Estevan.  And 

next year they hope to carry the wagon train on to Wood 

Mountain.  This year there are 31 wagons and over 200 people 

participating in this event. 

 

On Monday I had the opportunity to meet with and to address 

the group at Winlaw Park south of Gainsborough.  Another one 

of the guest speakers that were there, Mr. Speaker, was State 

Senator Orlin Hanson from North Dakota. 

 

I'd like to congratulate the committee on all the hard work they 

have done in making this a success.  And especially I would 

like to congratulate Mrs. Olive Murray of Estevan and Mr. 

Mike Bartolf of Oxbow for the hard work they have put into it.  

I wish them well on their journeys and good weather.  And I 

just hope that Mrs. Olive Murray's horse remembers to head 

west rather than east, as it did on Saturday.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we talk a lot about 

co-operation.  And some might say we talk about it too much.  

I would say not so, Mr. Speaker.  In my home city of 

Saskatoon, three important events show that the spirit of 

co-operation isn't a mere slogan, but rather it's a prescription 

for community action. 

 

The Partnership, which is Saskatoon's Downtown Business 

Improvement District board, has been working with 

individuals, businesses, clubs, and tourist organizations to 

make Saskatoon the place to be this summer.  In the words of 

the song by a not-so-young rock group: it's a hot time summer 

in the city in Saskatoon. 

 

First, The Partnership and the Star-Phoenix co-operated in 

staging the second annual Grand Prix go-kart races.  These 

go-karts are about the size of field mice and they go as fast as 

mosquitoes on a hot summer night.  I was privileged to drive in 

one of the races, Mr. Speaker, but due to the dastardly driving 

manoeuvres of Kent Smith-Windsor, the executive director of 

The Partnership, I wasn't able to win. 

For my second example of co-operation in Saskatoon, I need 

only mention the Saskatoon Jazz Festival which also took place 

last week in Saskatoon.  They have an array of talent every bit 

as varied and creative as any we'll see in this country.  Indeed, 

the Saskatoon Jazz Festival has become the beacon for the 

musically hip all across Canada. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this coming weekend The Partnership is 

also organizing the Player's Ltd. Powerboat Championships.  

For the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Serby: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Recently I 

had the opportunity to address approximately 500 Kinettes and 

Kinsmen at the district convention in Yorkton. 

 

The Kinsmen Foundation, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan was 

established in 1971 to assist Saskatchewan people with 

physical, mental, and social disabilities.  The major thrust of 

the foundation is the last-resort funding for programs and 

quality of life issues for people who are disabled.  Telemiracle 

16 in March of this year raised some $2 million which will be 

spent in 1992-93. 

 

The foundation, in partnership with the Department of Social 

Services, funds approximately 30 per cent of the sheltered 

workshops in our province, activity centre construction, and 

provides basic furnishings for group homes.  Each year the 

Kinsmen Foundation provides another 1.5 million to support 

agencies, organizations, and individuals as a funder of last 

resort. 

 

Today we see the Kinsmen Foundation working in all of our 

communities across Saskatchewan, like SCEP (Socialization, 

Communication, Education Program) Centre in Regina, 

Cheshire Homes in Saskatoon, the Red Deer nursing lodge in 

Porcupine, Prince Albert homes, just to name a few. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask all members of this 

Assembly to join with me in applauding and commending 

Governor Rossler of the Kinsmen, and Kinettes in this province 

for the work that they do in enhancing Saskatchewan and the 

quality of life in our province.  Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate the Hon. Darrel Cunningham and 

the Saskatchewan Water Corporation . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Scott: -- . . . for the responsible stand and 

forward-thinking position in announcing that Saskatchewan 

should not be an exporter of water on a major scale.  Not only 

in Saskatchewan but in Canada as a whole, our fresh water 

resource is one of our most 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1337 

precious resources.  We need to manage, utilize, and protect 

this important resource for today and future generations. 

 

In the past we have not placed much importance on our water.  

For an example, it was not even on the negotiating table in the 

far-reaching Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement until the 

serious oversight was quickly and loudly brought to the 

attention of the free trade negotiators by concerned Canadians.  

There was widespread suspicion and considerable evidence that 

the Rafferty-Alameda dams project was a part of an overall 

future water diversion and export project. 

 

I am sure that none of us think we should sit on significant 

fresh water resources while our friends to the south are dying 

of thirst.  However, I believe that Saskatchewan's policy on 

water export should clearly identify that our water is valuable 

and will not be squandered and sold at fire-sale prices and 

wasted. 

 

What we need is a water-use policy in Saskatchewan.  Such a 

policy should include all aspects of water use, management, 

and conservation, including wetlands, ground waters, lakes, 

and rivers.  And we also have to look at pollution and 

contamination. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Good afternoon to 

you and members of the legislature.  I direct, Mr. Speaker, my 

questions to the Minister of Health.  Madam Minister, I believe 

even you will find it hard to deny that you, your Premier, and 

all of your NDP (New Democratic Party) colleagues sold 

yourselves as champions of the health care system during your 

term in opposition and particularly during the election period. 

 

Every time the former administration, meaning us, attempted to 

streamline the health care system the NDP -- led by you, 

Madam Minister -- sounded the death-knell and trotted out 

inflamed rhetoric and exaggerated claims that this was the end 

of medicare in Saskatchewan.  Madam Minister you did that.  I 

am sure you are familiar with your own cries of protest, 

Madam Minister, but even your own barrage of political 

inflammatory won't recognize that fact. 

 

Madam Minister, I ask you: since you have gained power a 

short eight months ago you have done more to dismantle the 

health care in this province than any previous . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member has talked 

well over a minute and I still have not heard a question from 

him.  Would he please put his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister I 

ask you: because you have dismantled health care more than 

any other administration in the history of this province, 

wouldn't you consider this a complete breach of faith, another 

broken promise to the citizens of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, in the last budget we 

increased the funding for home-based services by some 20 per 

cent; something that should have been done in the last 10 to 12 

years when they were in power, but they refused to move on it. 

 

We established boards in Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert 

which have gone a long way already to increasing the 

co-operation of health care institutions and health care workers 

in those cities, and which have gone a long way to increasing 

the efficiencies in the health care system.  And we'll be seeing 

more from these boards in the years to come.  It has been 

considered a very positive move in Regina, Saskatoon, and 

Prince Albert. 

 

We have done a number of things in the health care area.  For 

example, the setting up of a utilization commission that will 

take a look at the services that are available to Saskatchewan 

people and whether or not we're getting the best services and 

the best procedures for the taxpayers' dollars. 

 

We have done this, Mr. Speaker, in a short period of some 

eight months or whatever the time period is since November.  

We have done all that.  It has been positive reform in the health 

care system.  It's been viewed by health care workers as being 

necessary, and they're simply very pleased to see a government 

taking some leadership. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

you have done a number of things to the health care system of 

Saskatchewan.  You have cut funding.  First time in the history 

of Saskatchewan that I know that that has happened and that is 

in spite of the rhetoric that you said you would never do that, 

Madam Minister. 

 

You, coming back to my original line of questioning, use scare 

tactics.  The greatest public relations gimmick of the decade, 

Madam Minister -- you used mediscare.  You would go about 

scaring the sick, the elderly, believing that the big, bad Tories 

would take away their nursing homes or prescription drugs or 

access to hospitals.  You told them that you would increase that 

kind of funding and that people wouldn't have to worry about 

health care under an NDP administration. 

 

Well we reduced the level of coverage for prescription drugs.  

You said people would have to chose between . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I think the preambles are getting much, much too 

long.  I would ask the member to please state his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, Madam Minister, can you tell 

this Assembly what other promises in health care you intend to 

break? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, there have been a 



1338 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

number of things that have been introduced into the hospital 

system in the last few months, since this government has taken 

power, that were long overdue.  For example, the movement 

towards more community-based services, more home-based 

services, and more day surgery. 

 

Not only will this save the people of Saskatchewan a fortune in 

terms of health care costs, but it will also improve the quality 

of health care services in the long run as we have the 

opportunity to develop health care reform in this province. 

 

I want to say that this government wants to create a 

high-quality health care system that is more efficient than the 

one that we've had in the past, that contains costs, and that 

moves towards more health promotion and disease prevention. 

 

This government has been left, this government has been left 

with a huge debt -- a legacy of debt by the former government 

-- some $15 billion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, every time hospital budgets 

were held or were increased at the rate of inflation by us as the 

former administration, you jumped in the front of the cameras 

and screamed, foul.  In fact, you trotted out the NDP mediscare 

manual and said that people were going to die because we were 

only giving small increases to the health budget. 

 

And that's truly amazing, Madam Minister, because once you 

scared people into believing your rhetoric and getting them to 

vote for you, you turned around and gut funding to hospitals 

and nursing homes. 

 

Madam Minister, another broken promise.  Will there be any 

promises you made in health care that are going to be kept by 

your bungling and inept government? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, 

when the members opposite were reducing funding to health 

care, they had no plan.  They had no plan and they had no 

strategy.  It was simply a question of going in and providing 

hospitals with inadequate funding.  The difference between 

their government and our government is that we are working 

on developing and implementation of a long-term strategy, and 

that began in November of 1991, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are developing a long-term strategy 

to deal with the institutional sector in Saskatchewan and to deal 

with home-based services, Mr. Speaker -- long overdue in this 

province, and something that is recognized right across this 

country by every single province.  The direction that 

Saskatchewan is going, the rest of the country is going as well, 

Mr. Speaker.  But they are still 15 years behind the rest of 

Canada in their thinking. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, let me correct you on one 

point.  This opposition, while in government never reduced 

health care funding -- never, never. 

 

Madam Minister, perhaps one of the most infamous mediscare 

tactics was uncovered during the Assiniboia-Gravel by-election 

where your Premier, now Premier, sent out a letter to the 

constituents saying that if the Tory was elected we would close 

all five hospitals in the Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  And I know 

the anxiety that that created amongst the sick and the elderly, 

the anxiety. 

 

I worked in that by-election.  I was partly responsible for 

defeating your candidate and giving the citizens of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg a good Christmas present in the form 

of Jack Wolfe.  Madam Minister, can you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Will the members please allow the 

member to ask his question.  And I wish the member would put 

his question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I will certainly put 

the question. 

 

Madam Minister, can you tell this Assembly, given your 

funding cuts, given your record of breaking promises, can you 

tell us whether you now intend to close any nursing homes or 

rural hospitals in this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, what this government 

intends to do is to come forward with a long-term strategy, 

which we have been talking about over the last several months, 

that will see us move towards the integration of health care 

services on a small district basis -- not the size of the Murray 

Commission districts but on a smaller basis.  The health care 

sector . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I have just interrupted the 

members to allow the member to ask a question.  Now I have 

to stand up and ask the members to allow the minister to speak.  

Could we please allow the minister to answer the question. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are going to be improving the health 

of Saskatchewan people through the implementation of a 

long-term strategy that requires community involvement and 

community input into co-ordinating and integrating services on 

a small-district basis.  We are not going to get involved into 

their silly politics which simply is to try and make an issue out 

of something that doesn't exist, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A new question to 

Madam Minister.  You, Madam Minister, are the ones that have 

created the issue, and that is what we are exploring here in this 

question period this afternoon. 
 

Madam Minister, let me ask you then a very simple question, 

and it requires a very simple answer.  And I'm sure you're 

capable of doing that, Madam Minister.  Is it not true, as we've 

suspected all along, that your wellness model, your wellness 

model is merely a cover-up for 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1339 

breaking yet another promise, that it's a sham, that it's a 

charade, that it's a cop-out, Madam Minister? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Let the minister answer the question.  

You've asked a question; let the minister answer it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, no wonder this province 

stood still in the health care area for the last 12 years.  The fact 

of the matter is the movement, the wellness approach, talks in 

terms of moving towards more community-based services, 

towards more co-ordination and integration of services, 

towards more disease prevention and health promotion.  That's 

what we've been talking about.  That's what we mean by 

wellness.  We mean a completely integrated approach in a very 

broad sense.  That is what the rest of Canada is talking about, 

Mr. Speaker.  That is the direction that health care is moving 

across this country, and we're asking the members opposite to 

get off their dead horse and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  A simple question, 

Madam Minister, a simple answer, no preamble.  Is your 

wellness model not a façade under which you will be closing or 

radically changing rural hospitals in our province? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- No it is not a façade, Mr. Speaker.  What 

the wellness approach is intended to do is to improve the 

quality of health care for the people of Saskatchewan.  It is a 

direction that we have to move in terms of the health care area.  

There is no question about that. 

 

The members opposite can say what they want.  They can play 

the games that they want.  The fact of the matter is, is that the 

wellness approach will improve the quality of health care for 

the people of Saskatchewan over the long-term period. 

 

Reform however, Mr. Speaker, does take a long time.  It 

doesn't . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Obviously, Madam Minister, a preamble is 

necessary to get some answers out of you.  You say playing 

games.  You, Madam Minister, are the ones that are playing 

games with your promises and then your broken promises 

where you are doing exactly what you always said that you 

would never do, Madam Minister. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I want you to admit that you have plans 

-- you have plans, Madam Minister -- to close or convert rural 

hospitals in Saskatchewan in direct contradiction to the many 

promises that you made prior to and during the election.  Will 

you admit that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

we will be coming forward, I would imagine fairly shortly but 

it will, you know, I don't know . . . I can't give the legislature a 

time frame, with some information as to what we will be 

asking communities and districts to do, which is to get together 

and organize their health care services on a district basis -- 

perhaps about the size of a home care district.  That is what our 

thinking is. 

 

However we will want to be consulting with local communities 

about what their health care needs are and how we can best 

meet their health care needs.  So we see this process as being 

developmental, as being community oriented, as being 

consultative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we will in the months to come be going out 

and talking to communities about all the range of health care 

issues that affect us today.  We'll be talking to them about what 

sort of facilities they feel they need; whether they need 

improvements here, whether their facilities are performing the 

functions that they want them to perform.  It will be very 

consultative; there'll be a lot of community involvement on this 

process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You talk about time 

frame, Madam Minister, that you're not able to share with us 

this afternoon.  Well I hope to, as critic, help speed up that time 

frame a little bit as we go along here. 

 

Madam Minister, the issue that I'm raising right now is a very 

serious concern for rural Saskatchewan, indeed all citizens of 

Saskatchewan.  And I would ask you to give us the straight 

goods on the question that I'm asking you. 

 

Now I know it's difficult for you to come up with those kinds 

of answers while you're busy eating crow.  But, Madam 

Minister, will you confirm -- will you confirm, Madam 

Minister, that in closing or converting these hospitals that many 

rural jobs will be lost; that nurses and physicians may be a 

thing of the past in many rural communities, Madam Minister?  

Will you confirm that and tell us how many? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, when we talk about eating 

crow, I want to remind the members opposite there's only 10 of 

them sitting on that side of the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- They are eating crow on the $15 billion 

deficit that they left this province and virtually bankrupted the 

future of our children.   And if they aren't, they should be.  

Because I get the distinct feeling as I sit in this legislature 

every day and listen to them that they are trying to absolve 

themselves of any responsibility for the horrendous situation 

they've left the people of Saskatchewan in, in this province. 

 

And they should be ashamed of themselves.  Through their 

mismanagement and incompetence, they have created a debt 

that makes it necessary for this government  



1340 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

to take steps in many areas that are very difficult decisions. 

 

And I want to remind the members opposite that this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

will you tell us which of the hospitals will be closing? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I have said repeatedly in 

this legislature -- not just today but on other days -- we are 

going to be going out to communities and talking about their 

health care needs and involving them in the process of health 

care reform.  That's what we will be doing, Mr. Speaker.  So I 

want the members opposite to know that clearly. 

 

I am answering the question that we will be talking to 

communities about what . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I asked you, Madam Minister, when will we 

know which one are the ones?  You're refusing to answer. 

 

Madam Minister, will you also confirm that you have been 

studying the concept of placing doctors in salaried positions 

instead of the fee-for-service arrangement that we've had in the 

past, that we've had since the inception of medicare?  Can you 

confirm that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are having negotiations with the 

medical profession with respect to what kind of forms of 

payment would be acceptable and that could be implemented in 

the province.  We have no intention of moving to a salaried 

system where all doctors are put on salary.  We are, however, 

exploring alternative forms of payment, which we have spoken 

about before in this legislature even when we were in 

opposition.  So we are having discussions with the medical 

profession in that regard. 

 

I also want to say this.  That right across this country -- right 

across this country -- provinces are exploring alternative forms 

of payment for the medical profession.  They are 

experimenting with them in other jurisdictions.  And I think it's 

time for Saskatchewan to once again show a little leadership, 

have discussions with the medical profession . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

don't believe in the last 15 or 20 minutes this afternoon that 

you've been giving the citizens of Saskatchewan the straight 

goods.  You've been dancing and side-stepping and twisting in 

your attempt not to answer the questions that I'm asking.  And I 

think I'm asking very legitimate questions. 

 

But, Madam Minister, will you confirm, in direct 

contradiction to statements that you made while you were in 

opposition, that you will be firing all health boards in the 

province and will implement a regionalized health care system, 

and that contrary to your opposition to such an idea, you will 

be giving these new districts taxing powers?  Would you 

answer that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, that is just simply 

ridiculous.  We are not going to be firing any health care 

boards.  What we will be doing is this -- I hope here's what we 

will be doing -- is that we will go as we did to Saskatoon and 

Regina and Prince Albert and we will be talking to people 

about the possibility of forming one board, which they did in 

Saskatoon and Regina. 

 

That will not necessarily mean that the remaining boards no 

longer exist, but through the input from these facilities and 

from these communities, we hope to come up with one board 

instead of 500, as there are in the province, one for each small 

district.  I think that's a good idea. 

 

Your own Murray Commission said that there should be 

movement in that direction.  Everybody in the health care field 

knows we should be moving to some sort of co-ordination and 

integration on a district basis.  It's just a question of how large 

these districts should be.  We believe they should . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you brought up the topic of 

the Murray Commission, and I know and I have a lot of quotes 

on you, Madam Minister, and your complete opposition to 

what the Murray Commission was recommending, your 

complete opposition.  And I tell you we've got your quotes.  

You're on record as opposing many, if not most, of the 

recommendations on the Murray Commission. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, will you admit now that you have done 

a complete flip-flop from your days in opposition; now you are 

looking at the Murray Commission and saying, oh, by golly, it's 

not so bad, we're going to implement those recommendations?  

Will you confirm that, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are 

simply hopeless.  I indicated here that it's their Murray 

Commission that recommended organization on a very large 

district basis.  My next statement was, was the debate was over 

the size of the district, and we disagree with Murray's district 

sizes.  And we have said that repeatedly, and we say that today.  

We think the organization should be on a smaller basis, Mr. 

Speaker, on a smaller basis.  The members opposite know that.  

They know what our criticisms were with respect to the Murray 

Commission.  And they're right that we did have a lot of 

criticisms with respect to the Murray Commission. 

 

With respect to taxation, I want to say this, because that was in 

the member's former question which I didn't have a chance to 

address . . .  

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1341 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you know full well that the 

issues that I have been raising this afternoon are exactly those 

that you are planning and scheming to implement.  Madam 

Minister, individuals are so appalled by your bungling that we 

are in command of a lot of the information that you're talking 

about. 

 

And I'm just going to say to you, Madam Minister, like your 

NDP crop insurance plan only works if there's a good crop, 

your NDP wellness plan only works if you are well.  That is the 

fundamental issue at stake here. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I ask you, I ask you if you have a plan 

that is going to be divulged to the public of Saskatchewan 

soon.  And if so, when?  When are you going to do that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is 

that we have been meeting with stakeholders as we develop the 

wellness approach.  We've been meeting with stakeholders on a 

regular basis.  We will be coming forward with a ministerial 

statement when we have that information together.  It is not 

going to be a blueprint or a plan that's imposed on the province.  

It will require a lot of community consultation and input. 

 

We will be coming forward.  It is not a blueprint that is 

imposed on the province.  It will set goals and guidelines and 

general directions, Mr. Speaker, that we will want the 

community to give us input on and to discuss.  And we will be 

coming forward with that hopefully in the next few weeks. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act, 

repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make Consequential 

Amendments to Certain Other Acts resulting from the 

Amalgamation of the Surrogate Court and the Court of 

Queen's Bench 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to move first 

reading of a Bill to amend The Queen's Bench, Surrogate Court 

Act. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

amend The Education Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

questions put by members, item No. 40, I hereby supply the 

answer. 

 

The Speaker: -- The Government House Leader supplied the 

answer. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Why is the Government House 

Leader on his feet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Before orders of the day, I've got a 

couple of motions dealing with absence from the legislature, I'd 

like to move -- or one of them. 

 

The Speaker: -- We'll have to return to that.  Does the member 

have leave to return? 

 

Leave granted. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Granting of Leave for Members to attend Conference 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

 That leave of absence be granted to the hon. members for the 

constituencies of Lake Centre, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and 

Arm River from Monday July 20, 1992 to Wednesday, July 

22, 1992 inclusive for the purpose of attending the 

Midwestern Legislative Conference in Bismarck, North 

Dakota. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Referral of Estimates and Supplementary Estimates to the 

Standing Committee on Estimates 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move: 

 

 That the Estimates and Supplementary Estimates for the 

Legislative Assembly, being subvotes 1 to 3, 5 to 7, 20 to 23, 

and 26 of the vote 21 for the Provincial Auditor, being vote 

28 be withdrawn from the Committee of Finance and referred 

to the Standing Committee on Estimates. 

 

This is a standard motion that we pass at this point every 

session.  If the members opposite want to take a moment to 

look at this, we would agree to that.  This is a standard motion 

of referral that happens each session. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, if it's in order, I would suggest 

to the House Leader, Government House Leader, that he bring 

it forward tomorrow and then we'll have time.  Because I don't 

think it will be creating any kind of a problem if that happens.  

On that basis we'd provide leave at that time for him to do it. 

 

The Speaker: -- I'm not quite certain what we do under these 

circumstances.  Do we just defer it?  All right. 



1342 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

Leave not granted. 

 

(1415) 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Last night, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw the Premier of Canada deal with the 

establishment of rules under which this country will live.  The 

people there came to a compromise to establish those rules. 

 

And it is relevant, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of this 

province throughout the entire process of negotiating the rule 

changes, said no.  No one must impose deadlines.  No to 

deadlines is what he was saying to the people of Saskatchewan 

and to the people of Canada, no artificial deadlines.  We must 

not have our hands tied and our minds boggled with time 

constraints that immobilize the ability of people to participate 

in the democratic process. 

 

But what about when it comes to establishing rules for this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker?  What about then?  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is why we are here debating and discussing the rule 

changes that are suggested under the second report of the 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 

Because you see, Mr. Speaker, we feel that there is a direct 

alignment to the philosophy that would govern the decisions 

that we would make in establishing the rules that we would run 

our country under through a constitutional agreement and what 

we are doing here in this Assembly to establish rules under 

which our democratic process will operate here in the province 

of Saskatchewan.  There has to be a direct link in the 

philosophy of how rules apply throughout democracy, from 

one level of government to the other, whether that be from the 

municipal level to the provincial level or to the federal level. 

 

When we are told that we have immediate deadlines and there 

will be no compromises, then the process cannot work any 

easier for us here than it would at the federal level.  The rules 

by which this Assembly live are simply too much more 

complex for the government, and it would appear then that the 

rules that make up the constitution of this country . . . our rules 

are so much more difficult to compromise on than the 

constitution.  That's what we're being told in essence when we 

look at what is happening. 

 

But that shouldn't have to be, necessarily. Because quite 

frankly, Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely absurd.  The rules to 

govern how we will administrate democracy in the province are 

really fundamentally no different than the rules that would be 

required to run the federal government and the nation as a 

whole. 

The government would have us believe that the length of time 

for bell-ringing is more difficult to deal with than the issue of 

aboriginal government or Senate reform.  How can that 

possibly be?  Think about what that says to the people of this 

country.  Bell-ringing is more difficult to deal with than the 

issues that we have watched played over our television news 

media for the last number of years. 

 

This is no more difficult than that.  This is no more difficult 

than sitting down and negotiating a reasonable approach to a 

consensus on any issue that might face us at any time.  This is 

not the end-of-the-world, earth-shattering issue that everybody 

has to have solved by force, by deadlines, by drama, by the big 

fist of power.  This is rather a very simple and ordinary kind of 

rule, in our context. 

 

True, we have held on to a rule here that is somewhat different 

than the ones used in other jurisdictions.  And true, it may be 

time that we sit down and discuss rule changes just as we did 

last winter before this Assembly began its work.  But as I 

pointed out last evening, Mr. Speaker, doing it half way 

through the session under time limits, duress, and threats of 

power being thrust upon us, is not fair, is not right, and is not 

democratic. 

 

It would appear that the government would have us believe that 

the length of time for bell-ringing is more difficult to deal with 

than the very big issues of our country; that when the issues of 

the country can be negotiated before the television cameras of 

this country over a long period of time, we must use the force 

of power and the limitations of time to solve this problem here 

because it's too hard to solve. 

 

The government would have us believe that, Mr. Speaker, but it 

is simply not true.  It has simply become a fact of life that this 

government has a need, an immediate need to save face on one 

particular issue that it needs to ram through the courts.  They 

need to tamper with evidence in order to win a court trial, and 

they are therefore ramming this thing through, not thinking for 

a moment of the distant ramifications that can come out of 

what they are about to do. 

 

Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I wonder how the members 

opposite will think about this in, say, three years time if they 

happen to lose the next election and find themselves in 

opposition with this change having been made.  I suspect that 

they will suddenly start to think the opposite direction at that 

point and say that they wish they had this tool to work with in 

opposition.  If that weren't true, Mr. Speaker, why would so 

many of these same people have made such a dramatic case for 

this issue in days gone by? 

 

And I want to refer you to a quote from Hansard of some of 

the members.  I believe the one that I'm quoting is from 

Rosemont on July 1, 1989: 

 

 . . . the intent of this rule change has much the same kind of 

intent as the intent to deny certain citizens their right to 

participate in the democratic process. 

 

Now that's what that member, who presently is elected, thought 

in 1989.  I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if he won't think 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1343 

exactly the same thing when he comes back to opposition in 

three years time. 

 

Could it be possible that this government thinks that we will 

take this rule away while they are government and then just 

before an election reintroduce the rule so that they can use it 

for themselves later.  It's a distinct possibility, Mr. Speaker, by 

the very fact that so many things have been said by so many of 

the elected members in the government about preserving this 

very fundamental part of our democratic procedure here in the 

province. 

 

The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, that if they were so 

dedicated to this premise and this proposition in days gone by, 

I cannot see how reasonable men could so dramatically change 

their opinions and their minds except for personal, selfish, 

governmental reasons, governmental reasons to ram through 

their agenda and then move back to providing the options of 

good opposition for the future when they become opposition. 

 

Well perhaps this process entrenches them so deeply into 

government as dictators that no one can ever defeat them again.  

How far will this kind of thing go?  Does it go so far that a 

government in Saskatchewan might unilaterally decide never to 

have another election?  It makes you wonder. 

 

This same member from Rosemont, I quote again from 

Hansard: 

 

 . . . this motion before the House tonight (and he was talking 

about one exactly like this, Mr. Speaker), this motion to limit 

the use of bell 

_ringing, is a motion which denies not just the members of the 

legislature but, more importantly, denies citizens their rights 

to participate in the democratic process of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now isn't that a rather revealing bit of news from Hansard, that 

here we have an elected member in the government, a 

government now that wants to do exactly the opposite. 

 

And I tell you, Mr. Speaker, no man can change his philosophy 

to that extent in so short a time.  Because the fact of life is you 

can change a man's philosophy but you can't change his 

character.  And this man has portrayed his character in his very 

words because he took 13 hours of this Assembly's time to 

totally, completely, and absolutely ingrain into the minds of the 

people of this province exactly what his character was and is, 

and that cannot change. 

 

So the members opposite are doing what they are doing in this 

Assembly today for the purpose of expediency, the expediency 

of supporting their front benches, a front bench that feels that 

they have to do anything, whatever it is, to save face.  No 

matter how terrible it might be to the democratic process, they 

feel that  saving face is more important than democracy itself.  

And that in itself, Mr. Speaker, is a frightening and scary 

situation. 

 

The same member went on in 1989, the member from 

Rosemont, defending democracy and the principles that 

we talk about today.  And again, he said: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, that's what this debate is all about.  That's what 

this debate is all about.  There is absolutely no hesitation or 

doubt in my mind that that is what we are doing here tonight.  

We are defending the rights of citizens to participate in the 

democratic process, unlike the members opposite, who would 

deny the citizens the right to participate in the democratic 

process. 

 

Very revealing, Mr. Speaker, how these arguments could have 

suited the purposes of these same people in 1989, and today we 

stand here with their commitment, their commitment to do 

exactly the opposite, to tear down the very democratic 

structures that they fought and battled so hard themselves to 

preserve.  What can be the price that these people are 

demanding of the province in order to destroy the fundamental 

basis of the democratic process under which this Assembly has 

worked since 1905? 

 

That's when we became a province, a democratic part of this 

nation.  Way back in history we have established a firm 

commitment to the democratic process of a Legislative 

Assembly where both sides of the House have some rules to 

work by and some ability to put input into the progress and 

development of our province. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, is not like the dog catcher's job where he 

sees a mongrel on the street and must go out and catch him 

before he bites somebody.  We're talking about a situation here 

of democracy and development of a provincial plan, a direction 

of travel that we take in the course of our business as a 

province.  There is nothing so immediate or so dramatic that it 

has to be done tonight or tomorrow morning in order to save 

our province.  That's not the way provincial politics works. 

 

In provincial politics, in the long run, we run a direction on a 

slow, gradual path down a road of direction that we choose as a 

group of people collectively to take.  The philosophy of the 

NDP is to take a direction to the left in philosophy, and that is 

fair ball.  The electorate of this province knew that they were 

electing socialists when they elected them, and they knew what 

they were going to get in that general, long-term plan. 

 

They did not expect that this government, this group of people, 

would turn viciously on the democratic principles that guides 

us into an evolutionary process by which we develop over the 

long haul.  They did not elect a government, Mr. Speaker, who 

was about, secretively, to invoke a revolution on our province.  

And with the kind of changes that we have encountered, that is 

exactly, Mr. Speaker, what we have. 

 

(1430) 

 

Out in the country, all through the cities, people are feeling the 

frustration of seeing a government that they thought was going 

to play by the rules, the old, long-established standard of 

democratic principles, suddenly turned vicious and invoke a 

revolutionary change upon them. 

 

Look at those changes that prove that point.  The 



1344 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

government was elected on a platform that said they would not 

increase taxes, they would provide more services, they were 

going to treat folks better.  We've got three pages of service 

industry increased charges; we've got tax increases.  All of 

these things have been changed that form a revolutionary 

approach to our government and to our long-term development 

in our province, rather than evolution.  Because the changes 

came too big and too fast to be called evolution or the kind of 

democratic process under which our province has grown and 

developed in years gone by. 

 

I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that some of our former 

parliamentarians must indeed be rolling over in their very 

graves.  To think that we would come to the point in a 

relatively peaceful time in our world stage where in the 

province of Saskatchewan we would see the government, for 

blind, selfish reasons of getting one Bill passed, would destroy 

the very fabric of democracy that they themselves built in this 

province. 

 

And I'm not saying to you, Mr. Speaker, that the committee 

was all wrong in its determination to examine the rules.  And 

I'm not even going to say that changing the bell-ringing would 

be all wrong.  But it is all wrong to do it this way, at this time, 

and without giving the opposition some reasonable democratic 

tools to work with in its place.  And the tools that we are 

offered are not reasonable in place of the power of the 

bell-ringing as a rule and a tool for oppositions. 

 

I don't know, in all honesty, Mr. Speaker, how you would 

measure the weight of one tool against the other and come up 

with a really fair and conclusive answer.  But I do know that 

you can only make this kind of change through a long and 

rather laborious deliberation in a process of discussion and 

deliberation. 

 

And I make the very same arguments, Mr. Speaker, that the 

Premier of this province has made in the constitutional debate 

-- a debate which, incidentally, is coming to some rather 

pleasant and favourable conclusions at this very time. 

 

It is rather ironic that the very Premier that advocated taking a 

slow and reasonable approach in the federal scene is now a part 

of the group of provinces and the country that have seen some 

tremendous success in the development towards an 

agreed-upon constitution in this country. 

 

He preached, advocated, and lectured the people of this country 

through our news media for the past several weeks and months 

about these very same principles on a national basis that 

exactly translate and relate to what we're talking about here 

today -- the changing of the rules under which we live and 

under which we will develop our democratic process. 

 

There is really no difference, except for the size of a province 

compared to a country.  No difference between the rules of a 

constitution that govern and run our country and the rules 

under which we will operate a province.  No difference 

between that and the rules that run a town council or a rural 

municipality.  Each jurisdiction must, in a peaceful society, 

have rules to guide them. 

And everyone who knows anything about history will 

recognize that over a period of time there has to be changes.  

Things don't stay the same.  Everything has to change from 

time to time.  And, Mr. Speaker, I don't think there's anyone in 

this opposition that believes that we can go on for ever without 

changing the rules in this Assembly. 

 

I don't believe that as a councillor or a reeve of a municipality 

for a number of years that I have ever thought that the rules that 

we run our municipal meetings under would never change.  

And that is a fact of life; they do change. 

 

The municipalities presently are having their very Act, through 

the rural development that they operate under, being put to 

several changes through this very Assembly.  Those changes 

are quite immense in size of numbers.  I believe that the Act is 

probably about an inch deep in pieces of paper, and the 

amendments that are suggested for change of those rules under 

which rural development and rural municipalities will be 

guided for the next few years comes to several, several pages. 

 

And the process, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that some 

people may think that because we have a new government of 

only eight months or so of age, and some folks might say, well 

they put together that rather lengthy group of changes and 

amendments to the Act in a kind of a hurry, the reality is, Mr. 

Speaker, that those changes were made over about a year and a 

half period of time or even more.  Because the former minister 

of Rural Development, Neil Hardy, started that process, and it 

was a process of negotiation and yes, co-operation. 

 

Those rule changes for municipal government were arrived at 

by negotiating with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities), municipal reeves and councillors, and 

administrators played a very heavy role because they are of 

course the ones that do the work of running the computers and 

keeping the books in the municipal offices.  So they have the 

technical knowledge -- the knowledge that many people rely 

heavily on in this province. 

 

They all contributed and they all came to a consensus.  And as 

one of the members from the government, Mr. Speaker, 

pointed out a while back, there is a difference between 

consensus and agreement because you can never have total 

agreement on everything; that's just human nature.  When you 

have 299 municipalities involved in rule changes, you would 

never get everybody to agree on everything. 

 

But the term consensus means that more or less you agree 

because you take something that you want and get it, and you 

give something that you didn't want quite so much in return for 

an exchange of something else to the other folks.  That's what 

consensus is about. 

 

And basically what Mr. Hardy had was a consensus for those 

rule changes.  There's only one small piece in that Bill that 

wasn't his work, and I'm not going to go into that here today 

because that has nothing to do with our debate.  But other than 

that, it was a consensus on rule 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1345 

changes. 

 

And I'm suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly must 

approach rule changes in exactly the same way -- a consensus 

through debate, through discussion, through study, through 

meetings, through private meetings, through public meetings, 

and then go back to the drawing board and do it over again, and 

keep on doing it until you get it right.  And if it takes a year, so 

what?  So what if it takes a year, or two years even, in the 

provincial context? 

 

What great calamity will befall us if we don't solve this 

problem today or tomorrow?  Will the province stop running?  

Absolutely not.  Will the hospitals all shut down?  Certainly 

not.  There is absolutely nothing in this province that can't go 

on just as it did before.  Even the business of this Assembly, 

Mr. Speaker, could go on as normal.  There is no reason why 

we couldn't go on to the regular orders of the day and perform 

the duties of this administration and continue to do all of the 

other work that is to be done. 

 

It just simply is not a crisis situation to change the rules.  That's 

absolute nonsense.  It is not a crisis.  We can do it this winter, 

we can do it over the next year, and we can put together a 

package of consensus that is time-tested and traditional, where 

the Rules Committee has always agreed in consensus to the 

change. 

 

We can go back and stop this process of setting precedents and 

of breaking the very fundamental cords that hold this Assembly 

together.  And that cord is an understanding that there is a 

gentleperson's approach.  Gentlemen must have agreements. 

 

Today we have a lot -- and fortunately a lot -- of women in our 

province that are taking an interest in our political system.  Just 

this morning I had a call from a lady in my constituency who is 

becoming very political in her thinking.  And it makes me so 

very happy to see the people out in the country that used to just 

take care of the homes and their families and kind of closed the 

world around them now taking an interest in our province. 

 

She told me to continue to ring the bells.  And I explained to 

her that we don't ring the bells on every issue, every day.  She 

was quite surprised, for example, to find out that as an 

opposition we felt we had a responsibility not to ring the bells 

as a tool of opposition to everything that we found to be 

objectionable. 

 

And when I explained to her how many pressure groups there 

are in our society that each individually feel that they have the 

most important problem in the world and how many times we 

would actually be out ringing the bells, if we in fact used that 

tool on every issue, she was actually quite amazed at how 

many times we would find ourselves with nothing happening at 

all.  And by the end of our conversation, she agreed that the 

kind of restraint we have used was reasonable and she 

suggested that we should continue to ring the bells.  So I only 

won half of the argument. 

 

But you can at least, Mr. Speaker, appreciate that folks out in 

the country are listening to what's going on, understand what's 

going on, and know what is at stake. 

In a country that has enjoyed peace and relative prosperity 

compared to other countries in the world, a lot of folks tell me 

that there is total apathy out in the world around us, that people 

don't know what politicians are doing, people don't care what 

they're doing.  That's simply not true. 

 

The folks out there do know what's going on and they do know 

what is at stake.  And many of them remember the stories of 

their grandfathers and their grandmothers or their 

great-grandmothers and great-grandfathers who came to this 

country and told them about the kinds of repression in their 

countries that they were so glad to escape from.  They may 

have a variance of philosophy in direction to run this province 

from one extreme to the other, but they always, always 

cherished the fact that they were in a country where we had 

democratic rules where people who disagreed could sit down 

and discuss under a set of rules how to make changes. 

 

The basic fundamentals of the things they escaped are 

discussed in the attempts to change the rules here today. 

 

As I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, the bell-ringing in itself is not 

the important issue because at the moment it is tied to another 

issue -- a need for our government to win a court battle.  But 

the people out there are very frightened by our attempts to 

change this rule when it might in fact turn us back to the type 

of lack of democratic process that their forefathers left their 

homelands for in order to come here. 

 

They came here to be free of those things.  They didn't want to 

suffer through 70 years of socialist communism in Russia.  

They didn't want the tyranny of Hitler and the European scene 

of the past.  They wanted to have a free democratic society 

where people who disagree would have the right to stand up 

and speak their piece even if the rest of the folks didn't agree 

with it. 

 

And that's what democracy is all about, that's what this 

Assembly is all about, and that's what the rules that this 

Assembly works under is all about.  If we don't have rules that 

are consistent to play by, we cannot be good players.  And if 

the game is democracy, we cannot have a reasonable outcome 

at the end of the day in our democratic process if the rules are 

tainted. 

 

And the rules and the process are definitely tainted here in the 

process that we're going through today.  It is not changing the 

rule of bell-ringing, but the fact that you're taking arbitrarily 

this power away from the Assembly, that makes people 

sceptical as to whether or not we can ever operate in harmony 

again. 

 

We've asked ourselves this question through the evening last 

night: how can we put a semblance of order back into this 

Assembly, that is based on mutual trust? 

 

(1445) 
 

Now some folks out in our television land will say, that's a 

hee-haw.  There was probably never any mutual trust between 

the NDP and the Conservatives.  But I wish to argue that point 

because it is my firm belief that while we oppose one another 

philosophically, while we have a role to play and a job to do in 

opposition just as the other 



1346 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

members have a role and a job to do as members of the 

government, there are people in this Assembly of total 

credibility in terms of being people who will make a deal and 

stick to it. 

 

These people are certainly the highest quality, highest calibre 

people in this province.  If they weren't so, the people of this 

province would not have elected them.  They are people of 

integrity.  Every one of them, Mr. Speaker, is an individual of 

the highest integrity, moral fabric, or they wouldn't have been 

elected.  And people with integrity and with moral fabric are 

the kind of people that you can depend on to honour their share 

of a contract. 

 

The gamblers in the world would call us welshers if we didn't 

stick to our end of the bargain.  And that may be an appropriate 

word for those members in government who quickly pass by 

this issue and say to the world that we are no longer going to 

honour this contract. 

 

Because, Mr. Speaker, that's what we are talking about here.  

We're talking about a contract, a verbal contract between 

oppositions and governments to follow a set of rules that are 

jointly agreed to under a consensus of agreement.  The deal 

making is done in the committee.  The trading, the 

old-fashioned horse trading bargaining process.  I'll give you a 

little bit if you'll give me a little bit, and then we'll come 

together and agree on a set of rules that we'll work under. 

 

The member from Rosemont some years back said, and I quote 

from Hansard: 

 

 The argument I will now make for some period of time, Mr. 

Speaker, is this:  is that this bell-ringing, this motion to limit 

bell-ringing, inhibits the citizenry of Saskatchewan to 

participate in the affairs of their government, and that far 

from having bell-ringing as an anti-democratic exercise, the 

only anti-democratic exercise that we see here in the last 

several weeks has been this government's attempt to silence 

the opposition and inhibit citizens from participating in the 

democratic process. 

 

A member of this very government defending the very 

principle that his government now would take away from the 

other opposition.  Are his words, Mr. Speaker, not as true today 

as they were in 1979?  Am I to suspect that this individual was 

not sincere in his deliberation of that very spirited and very 

deeply committed opinion? 

 

I believe he was being honest.  I believe that he said what he 

felt then.  And I have a hard time, Mr. Speaker, believing that 

this individual would have changed his mind on the 

fundamentals of democracy even to this very day, even to the 

extent of being a member of a government, even to the extent 

of having to save face. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this individual expressed an opinion that was set 

deep in his mind and deep in his heart.  And he said it for 13 

hours.  Nobody would stand in this Assembly for that length of 

time discussing, debating, and trying to win the argument of 

the day if he wasn't firmly committed to what he believed in.  I 

can assure you that after this very 

short few minutes that I've been here, no one would put 

themselves physically through that. 

 

There is no great pleasure in standing on your feet hour after 

hour, as your feet ache and your mouth goes dry.  It has to be 

something you believe in, something that you feel is more 

valuable to yourself and to your society than your own personal 

comfort. 

 

I want, Mr. Speaker, to quote a bit more of these because I 

think it's important that the same arguments be weighed and 

considered in this precedent-setting adventure as were 

considered in the last time that it happened in this Assembly.  

It's only fair that the people who make the final decision have 

all of the arguments available to them, have all of the 

statements made so that they can consider all of the evidence 

and weigh it in the balance of the scales of their justice. 

 

And certainly it will come to that in the end, Mr. Speaker.  In 

the end there will come a decision as to whether or not the 

arguments for taking the bell-ringing out in this manner are 

more heavily weighted than the arguments against it.  And 

someone will have to make that judgement.  And the scales of 

justice, rather than the scales of mercy, will prevail in this 

instance. 

 

I want to quote further from this member back in 1979 as he 

debated the issue of whether or not the bell-ringing should be 

stopped.  He said, and I quote: 

 

 I think any fair and honest observer of politics in this 

province realizes that this motion to limit bell-ringing 

tramples on the right of freedom of speech. 

 

And I'm not sure, in all honesty, Mr. Speaker, how his mind 

would have worked on that statement, but it does bring to mind 

in my thinking the reality that in all probability he is right.  

Freedom of speech happens to be the acts upon which you get 

people to listen to you.  So speaking words is not necessarily 

the only way that you get people's attention.  You might in fact 

sit in the other side of this House and pretend to go to sleep to 

express to the person speaking that he is not interested in what 

is being said.  That in itself is a spoken statement; it's called 

body language. 

 

So freedom of speech can be tampered with if you are impeded 

upon and not allowed to express your body language or to 

express your feelings through some physical act.  And here the 

physical act of course would be the ringing of the bells, which 

everyone knows is the process upon which people simply leave 

the House and not return.  They may in fact stay out for a few 

minutes. 

 

And I guess the tool that opposition has here, Mr. Speaker, may 

have been stumbled upon quite by accident.  I expect that it 

was originally designed that the bells should ring for a few 

minutes to in fact call people from their offices, when one day 

someone in the opposition realized that if you simply didn't 

come back, the bells could ring for ever.  I guess that 

realization was discovered by the past NDP Party, because they 

of course were the first to put the bells to a prolonged ringing 

period to express their freedom of speech. 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1347 

And perhaps if that never had happened, it might have been 

better for our Assembly in the long run.  But it did happen, and 

it is a reality now.  It's a tool that we have used in the past; it's a 

tool that we will continue to use until it is traded off for 

something else. 

 

And it can be traded, Mr. Speaker, for something else.  But it 

can't be just sacrificed like a sacrificial lamb and allowed to die 

because along with it dies the democratic principle of people 

who oppose what the government is doing, to come to the 

opposition to use whatever tools are available to make the 

government see a different side of the story, whatever the issue 

might be. 

 

This individual in 1989 went on in his debate, and I quote: 

 

 That's all I have to say on the question of the right of freedom 

of assembly, Mr. Speaker, because it was enhanced by 

ringing the bells. 

 

The right of freedom of assembly -- that's what he was talking 

about, and it was enhanced by the ringing of the bells.  And 

that principle, Mr. Speaker, has not changed today, if that was a 

principle that weighed in any way in the decision made at that 

time to end the debate by not taking away the right of 

opposition to ring the bells. 

 

And you will recall, Mr. Speaker, that the government of the 

day did in fact decide to drop the issue and allow the 

bell-ringing to remain as an opposition tool. I don't know if 

they worked very diligently to try to find a way to exchange 

that ringing of the bells with some other tool for the opposition.  

I wasn't here, and I don't know.  I suspect there may have been 

some attempts. 

 

But I suggest that no matter what happened there, we must try 

harder now and we must try again.  And we must do it over the 

next several months.  And if it can't be accomplished in the 

next several months, we must stick to it and continue to work 

on it until we've resolved the problem.  But we must do as the 

Premier of this province has said.  We must do it without the 

restrictions of time limits.  We must treat it as he has suggested 

the constitutional talks of this country must be treated.  We 

must treat it with seriousness, and we must treat it with all of 

the respect that is required to preserve the integrity of this 

Assembly. 

 

Back in 1989, this individual from Rosemont went on in his 

lengthy deliberation to say, and I quote, even the very 

operation of this legislature was enhanced by the bell-ringing: 

 

 And for the life of me, Mr. Speaker, I cannot see how it is 

that democracy is strengthened by this motion and that 

limiting the bell-ringing is somehow anti-democratic just on 

using what we have come to regard as basic civil liberties -- 

as basic civil liberties.  All those things -- the right of 

freedom of speech and the right of freedom of expression and 

so on and so forth -- all those things have been enhanced by 

what we in the opposition did. 

 

If that were true, Mr. Speaker, in 1989, how could it not 

be true this year, this day, in this Assembly?  If those 

arguments carried the weight necessary for a judgement to be 

made that it would be wrong to withdraw the bell-ringing from 

oppositions at that time, what then has changed in our society 

and in our Assembly or in our democratic process that would 

eliminate the weight of those statements in today's judgement? 

 

Absolutely nothing has changed that I can see in the 

democratic process that we use.  Our country is not at war, 

other than for some peace-keeping actions in our NATO (North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization) commitments through the United 

Nations. 

 

We are not greatly threatened with a lack of food or clothing in 

our country, although there are individuals who certainly have 

some problems.  But that hasn't changed, although the 

percentages are a little bit up.  It hasn't changed, Mr. Speaker, 

so dramatically to change the evidence presented then as being 

no longer valid.  Nothing has changed dramatically enough to 

make the arguments of 1989 invalid in this Assembly today. 

 

Certainly there are a lot of folks with a lot of greater problems 

and we hope that this government will take care of those.  But 

without the tools of an opposition to work with, there will be 

very little chance that we as an opposition will bring those 

grievances to the attention of this Assembly. 

 

And that's really what it's all about, being in opposition, Mr. 

Speaker.  It is about our responsibility, our responsibility to the 

job that we were given, not by choice but by the voters, the 

responsibility of opposition given to us through the election 

and that responsibility to bring forward to the government the 

needs of the people, especially the needs of the people that are 

not listened to by the government. Because most folks when 

they have a problem in our society that deals with the 

government, go to the minister in charge of whatever 

department they are having the problem with.  When they don't 

get due satisfaction or some kind of resolution, they then come 

to opposition. 

 

(1500) 

 

That's how the process is working.  I believe that's the way the 

process should probably work.  First you go to the person in 

charge and ask him to fix your problem.  If he doesn't fix it, 

then you go to the opposition.  Then the opposition comes into 

this Assembly and uses the rules of the Assembly to bring 

those problems to the attention of the government so that all of 

the members, not just the minister in charge, are aware of what 

is happening.  Because the minister in charge may choose 

simply not to tell the rest of the folks. 

 

We also use that tool to inform the news media.  We also use 

that tool to allow the television camera in our Assembly to pick 

it up and to play the information to the world.  And then it 

becomes public knowledge.  And that's the way the system 

should work.  And that's why we have a good democratic 

approach to government, because we have tools that allow 

oppositions to work, just as we have rules that allow the 

government to work. 



1348 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

But we must have rules that force government to listen to 

people's problems.  Eliminating those rules then is a destruction 

of the free speech and the democratic process of individuals. 

 

And so the gentleman that made these statements in 1989, 

while he has the misfortune of sitting with the wrong party, 

certainly made some wise comments and some wise arguments 

into the deliberations of that day. 

 

I want to use another quote from this individual, Mr. Speaker, 

because it's so very important that the views that he expressed 

be weighted into the deliberations of this process: 

 

 What he did, Mr. Speaker, (and I'm quoting) was brought this 

motion forward which would limit, and I think I've outlined 

in rather broad terms, but also in terms which everybody in 

this province can understand, brought in a Bill which would 

limit the functioning of this House, the functioning of us as 

members, and the functioning of the citizens of this province 

to engage in the democratic process. 

 

I almost wish I'd written that myself, Mr. Speaker.  Because no 

matter which party this individual represented in a partisan 

sense, he represented the feelings of all people who hold near 

and dear to their hearts the principles of democracy. 

 

I've been told that this particular member has made a lot of 

statements that weren't agreed with in this Assembly over the 

years, but I cannot disagree with what he said there.  And if 

that intelligent type of statement was weighted heavily in the 

judgement of a decision back in 1989 on this very same type of 

issue, then it must weight heavily in this day as well.  Because 

the motion before us is similar for all intents and purposes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me in my hand, copies of Hansard 

that run from 1571 on the page number of Hansard right 

through to 1593 -- many, many pages of arguments made by 

members of this Assembly to try to sway the government of the 

day in 1989 into making a decision not to take away the tools 

of opposition. 

 

I haven't read every page of this yet.  I haven't had time to get 

through it all last night.  But certainly it is very interesting to 

note that we are dealing with exactly the same kind of issue 

today.  And so many of these arguments that were used must 

have weighed on somebody's conscience enough to make them 

think that they wouldn't go ahead.  Because the final result was 

that the tools that were going to be taken away from opposition 

at that time were in fact left in place. 

 

My point, Mr. Speaker, is that if those arguments were strong 

enough then, they surely must be strong enough now.  And 

even though the partisan direction of the government in charge 

is different, the philosophy of the democratic process must 

remain the same.  I cannot believe that the members of our 

government do not believe in the democratic process.  They 

must believe in it because they went to the polls to be elected 

just as each and every one of us has done. 

There is no way that I can believe that they would go to all that 

trouble to get elected to the democratic process, to have the 

right to use this Legislative Assembly to help to contribute to 

the directional growth and development of our province, 

secretly thinking in their minds that they wanted to destroy it 

all.  That simply doesn't make sense. 

 

They can't want to destroy the very fabric of this institution and 

the very fabric of this Legislative Assembly and the very fabric 

of our democratic system.  Nobody that went to all that trouble 

could want to tear down the very thing that we are all fighting 

so hard to get to, which is to have a seat in this Assembly, the 

right to free speech in the Assembly to discuss and debate the 

issues that come before us. 

 

Back in those days the member opposite, and I quote again, 

said: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, that's what this debate is all about.  That's what 

this debate is all about.  There is absolutely no hesitation or 

doubt in my mind that (this) that is what we are doing here 

tonight.  We are defending the rights of citizens to participate 

in the democratic process, unlike the members opposite, who 

would deny (the) citizens the right to participate in the 

democratic process. 

 

He went on.  I'm told it took 13 hours for him to deliver this 

speech and I most certainly, Mr. Speaker, do not think that I am 

going to try to equal the presentation of evidence to that extent.  

But if there is that much evidence to be weighed, then it is 

incumbent upon us as an opposition to present that evidence so 

that those people who are in charge of making the final 

decision will have all of that to consider. 

 

Let it never be said that when the final decision was made it 

was made because the people who were required to make that 

decision did not have all of the facts, all of the arguments 

presented before them.  Because it would be just like having a 

trial where one side presented its evidence and the other side 

was denied the right to present theirs, and the judge would have 

to make his decision based upon hearing only one version of 

the story. 

 

And that wouldn't be fair.  It couldn't work.  And in our legal 

process we have established long-term rules that make it 

incumbent upon the judge to listen to both sides of the story 

before he makes his decision. 

 

I'm not sure, in this situation, Mr. Speaker, who the judge is.  

I'm not really sure who in the government will make this final 

decision.  I expect the Premier will weight heavily in that, but I 

don't know that.  I really don't know who's in charge of this 

government.  I don't believe that anybody in Saskatchewan 

truly understands where the power in our present government 

is, but it must lie in the front row somewhere. 

 

And those people in that front row, if they are going to be the 

judges, should in all fairness have all of the evidence to 

consider.  And they must consider not a hastily put together 

second report of the Special Committee on Rules 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1349 

and Procedures.  They must have all of the arguments that 

relate to the reasons why a hastily put together document like 

this cannot work and have the shortfalls pointed out.  That's our 

job in opposition, and that's what we are doing -- pointing out 

the shortfalls of this hastily put together document, a document 

that has some relevance and some sense to it, but was done too 

hastily at the wrong period of time and cannot work for the 

benefit of this Assembly. 

 

I read to you last night most of the report and commented on 

some of the things that were in it that would be offensive in the 

long run.  And as a conclusion, we must reiterate how some of 

these things in reality are going to affect the future of this 

Assembly.  For example, we say here that the ". . . Committee 

recommends the following amendments to the Rules and 

Procedures and further recommends that the said Rules take 

effect on the date this report is concurred in by the Assembly." 

 

The member opposite would like to join the debate.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I'm really hoping that he will.  As we go into this 

debate, it is my firm belief that members of the government 

should participate in this debate and let known to the people of 

Saskatchewan their views on this issue.  I certainly invite these 

members to join me in the debate and to let everybody here 

know exactly where they stand, how they feel about this type 

of an approach. 

 

I believe the electorate of this province has every right to know 

exactly where everyone stands.  And so I would challenge, Mr. 

Speaker, every member of this government to stand in his place 

in order and make a statement to the public on exactly where 

they stand on this democratic principle and how they stand on 

connecting it with a farm Bill that will tamper with evidence in 

a court.  What is their position?  How do they feel about that 

approach to democracy? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think that these folks really should stand up in 

this Assembly and tell the people of this province where they're 

coming from and where they expect to take this province in the 

future.  And what they think about this issue can be very 

revealing as to what kind of people the government really has 

in it.  And whether or not they should be re-elected next time 

could be based fundamentally on their approach to what is fair 

and just in this particular issue. 

 

I think I could personally decide how I should vote on an 

individual who states his opinions on this particular issue as it 

connects to the farm Bill and the whole ramification of how we 

came to be here through the past three or four weeks and why 

we are here today. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about these rule 

changes.  It says, "That the Rules and Procedures of the 

Legislative Assembly be amended by adding the following 

after 36.1 . . ." 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member that he 

went through the list last night in detail.  And if he repeats the 

same thing again, I will rule him out of order. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your 

observation.  It wasn't really my intention to repeat, so 

prejudging what I was going to say won't necessitate your 

interference, I hope.  But I did want to in conclusion 

re-emphasize a couple of the points, you see.  And in order to 

make sure that as we conclude that these points are considered 

more heavily than the rest of our debate, we must somewhat 

repeat a list of those things that we want to have judged as we 

go into the process. 

 

It says that we are going to limit the bell-ringing on 

non-debatable motions, on motions moved without notice, and 

in Committee of the Whole or Committee of Finance.  And I 

find, Mr. Speaker, as I bring attention to this portion of this 

report, that it will be extremely difficult -- not impossible but 

extremely difficult -- for the Assembly members to operate in a 

functional manner under the restrictions that are placed in this 

document. 

 

I'm not saying it isn't a good point to start from.  If we're going 

to negotiate some kind of a settlement in the future, certainly 

we must consider a starting point.  And that's what this 

document should really be.  It should be a starting point for the 

debate and the negotiation, an ongoing negotiation to bring a 

resolution to the difficulties that we have with the differences 

that people feel that there are between us with regards to rules 

and rule changes. 

 

It's a good starting point.  But I feel that 10 minutes, for 

example, as is referred to in one of the sections as being the 

period of time that you would have to be back into the 

Assembly, might be practical and realistic in a small Assembly 

where you have smaller numbers of people, where you have 

less physical floors separating you in the building. 

 

For example, in Prince Edward Island the entire Assembly is 

on one floor.  I was there a few years back.  I was amazed at 

the difference.  And quite frankly, I guess when you only have 

100,000-plus people you really don't need a very big provincial 

Assembly.  And they certainly don't have.  They have a small 

Assembly, no bigger than the opposition size here for the 

whole group that comes in there.  And in their context I expect 

that if they rang the bells for 10 minutes everyone that has an 

office on that floor -- and I think that they all do, they're all 

relatively close together -- 10 minutes is lots of time to get 

there.  But it could conceivably be almost impossible for the 

members in this Assembly to gather in 10 minutes under any 

circumstances. 

 

(1515) 

 

And then you must consider the extremes of circumstances that 

certainly our government members themselves must go 

through, and those extremes, Mr. Minister, are situations . . . 

for example, today we have a delegation here from China and 

the ministers responsible for those areas, I think, are required 

under the terms of protocol to be with those folks. 

 

And if we were to enter into a bell-ringing for an important 

vote on an important issue, is it really fair for this Assembly to 

expect those people to rudely stand up and say, I got to run 

now.  We got to get over there.  Sorry, boys.  Go back to 

China.  See you later.  Goodbye.  I'm running up there. 



1350 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker.  That's not the way we conduct 

ourselves in a civilized country and in a civilized Assembly. 

 

And so I quite frankly think that you have to look at making 

that a half an hour instead of 10 minutes. 

 

You might say that's nit-picking.  But the reality of life is that 

when you formulate this rule it's going to go into effect and 

people are going to have live with that. 

 

So let's discuss what's fair and reasonable.  Let's come to some 

consensus where the people that represent our group on the 

committee have the opportunity to come to our caucus and 

discuss with us what exactly the changes are going to be and 

how they will affect us.  Then I, as person not on the 

committee, have an opportunity in the democratic process to 

advise the vice-chairman of that committee, one of our 

members, that I feel that 10 minutes is not enough.  And I can 

give him my arguments just as I've done here today. 

 

And I can explain to him how I might think 30 minutes would 

be better and he then can take that information back to the 

committee and discuss it with the folks there.  And they might 

actually say, well looks okay to me.  We'll do it that way. 

 

Or they might say, not.  Maybe they'll decide 20 minutes 

because that's sort of half way between.  Instead of 10 minutes 

or 30 minutes, we'll do it for 20.  And that might serve the 

needs of everyone quite nicely.  And we would have had a 

consensus on that and we would have worked to try to make it . 

. . to try to make it develop into a workable plan. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we aren't doing that today.  Today we are 

having this report jammed down our throats as the laws and the 

rules that we will work under for the next umpteen weeks, 

months, and maybe years.  In a flash out of the sky, we are 

going to have a new set of rules to work under here.  And this 

new set of rules is not workable -- in the short term or the long 

term. 

 

It saves the government's face on a government farm Bill one 

time this year, and after that it destroys the democracy of this 

entire province.  And that is not right and it cannot be allowed 

to happen.  We've got to do something to wake these folks up, 

Mr. Speaker, to make them pay attention to the needs of the 

province, the democracy of our province. 

 

I have to apologize for raising my voice, Mr. Speaker, but 

occasionally my friends in the government side have a 

tendency to doze off and I would hate to think that I was 

making all of these good arguments without their paying strict 

attention to the needs of those things that we have to have 

considered in this debate. 

 

You will wonder why we get concerned about losing one rule.  

And you will say, folks are heavily weighted against you 

because bell-ringing has become a rather obnoxious thing in 

people's minds. 

 

The reality is that if it is presented to them in a negative 

way, the people of our province being common, reasonable 

people, will take that position.  But if you present to them the 

arguments and the realities of why these rules are required, 

they start to change their mind.  Public opinion is no longer 

fixed against bell-ringing. 

 

I'll give you one example of an issue.  When the government 

decided to take away the FeedGAP from ranchers and farmers 

in this province -- there are a lot of people involved in the 

feeding industry, but not many in terms of the number of 

people in our province, probably more like a few hundred 

rather than a few thousand, or a hundred thousand, or a million, 

certainly a few hundred at best, but to those people losing that 

assistance from government with the subsidization that goes on 

throughout the rest of this country in agriculture and the rest of 

the world -- to these people this issue was a big enough issue 

that their livelihoods, their investments of their entire lives, 

financially and physically, is put in great jeopardy and 

probably will be lost.  And to them that's a big enough issue for 

us to ring the bells as an opposition to bring attention to their 

problems. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Did they phone you about it? 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes.  The member asked, did they phone me 

about it.  Absolutely.  I have had umpteen numbers of people 

call me on these issues, on these several issues.  In fact . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I want to remind the member from 

Shaunavon if he wants to get into the debate, there's ample 

opportunity.  He should rise and the Speaker will recognize 

him.  Otherwise I think he should give the member from Maple 

Creek the opportunity to continue. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I echo those 

words of inviting the member to participate in the debate.  I 

want all of the members to participate in this debate because it 

is important that they have a chance in the democratic process 

to express their views as I am doing.  And I appreciate this 

opportunity to express my views here today.  I only regret that 

we are having to do it today on this issue. 

 

But the process that we have that allows me to enter this debate 

and to bring forward my arguments is certainly a good process.  

It is part of that process of rules that we talked about in some 

length where members have to have tools to work with and 

rules to follow. 

 

I did mention I think, earlier today, that I had 408 letters on my 

desk.  If it wasn't today, it was yesterday.  And the member 

from Shaunavon will take note of the fact that if we had that 

many letters on our desk just from this past week, we certainly 

have communications with the people out in Saskatchewan. 

 

My telephone rings quite regularly now.  I must admit that at 

first when I got elected it didn't ring very often and I had some 

lonely days.  But no more.  I haven't got time to get to bed to 

sleep any more, for phones ringing and needs to write letters 

and answer folks who are fed up with this government, totally 

upset, absolutely at their last wit's end as to how to survive in 

this province economically or physically.  And they believe 

that this has become a 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1351 

corrupt and immoral government.  And I invite the member 

from Shaunavon to stand up in this Assembly and state his 

views on this issue.  Most certainly you should, sir. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the members suggested to me, what 

good is an opposition?  Even if you have tools to work with, 

the government outnumbers you 56 to 10 in this particular 

situation.  So what good are you doing? 

 

Well I'll give you one example, Mr. Speaker, for the folks out 

in Saskatchewan to ponder.  We rang the bells for 18 days on a 

farm Bill issue.  Prior to that, we were invited to ring the bells 

over the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, but we used our 

discretion and we said that even though this is extremely 

important -- very, very important to many, many people -- we 

as an opposition would not yet use that last-ditch tool of 

bell-ringing on that issue. 

 

But the farm Bill was so big and had so many complications on 

constitutional rights and the rights of contracts that we just 

simply had to use every tool available. 

 

And during that 18-day period of time something rather strange 

happened that the folks in this province should take note of.  

The government decided to make one small change.  They 

decided to do some damage control and they decided to 

reinstate the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, not as it was albeit, 

but reinstate it they said they would.  Not matched in dollars by 

the government, but the program and the system remains in 

place. 

 

Now the folks in Kindersley that had their jobs lost, who were 

going to be unemployed, have an opportunity to keep their 

positions.  The people who have their money invested will 

continue to earn interest on that money, and that money will be 

available to them when they retire.  It won't be matched in the 

future on future contributions -- and that, I think, is too bad -- 

but at least we've saved the structure so that in three years time 

when the government changes, we can reinstate the program. 

 

And that kind of damage control, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would 

not have come about if we hadn't been challenging the 

government as an official opposition.  The work we do here is 

important and it works.  Because public pressure will work on 

the most stubborn of governments if it's given enough time and 

enough people put their effort into it.  It can work and it does 

work.  Democracy is important and it is important that we 

preserve the rules under which democracy works so that these 

things can sort themselves out. 

 

I've heard a lot of people complain that they're unhappy with 

the fact that the Pension Plan won't be as it was.  But they are 

mildly thankful that at least some damage control was done and 

the program is still in place to keep their money so that it earns 

interest for the future. 

 

That's what the rule of opposition bell-ringing did for those 

folks.  Because I honestly believe if we hadn't been out ringing 

those bells for those 18 days, this being a new government still 

fresh with its stubborn opinions, as every new government will 

be, still not used to having to deal with public pressure, this 

new government would not 

have given that concession if it had not been for this official 

opposition. 

 

And that's important to the people of Saskatchewan.  And the 

rules of this democratic process have worked, and they work 

well.  They may need change.  We might have to sit down and 

discuss changing the bell-ringing in an orderly, planned fashion 

as the years go by and the months go by.  But doing it here 

under duress, under time constraints, under the heavy hand of 

dictatorial government demanding that we settle it now, that 

will not make this Assembly work.  That will not allow 

democracy to work.  It will not bring about the kind of 

harmony that you need to run an Assembly in a democratic 

country. 

 

We must put this thing aside.  Just as you, sir, said so many 

years ago . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 

Rosemont has suddenly decided to enter the debate after 13 

hours of arguing this very, very same question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- No.  It was the potash debate. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Oh, you were in a different debate.  Well your 

friends were into it for a long time, because I've got here a 

handful of pages of Hansard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members truly did say what they said in 

defence of this very issue.  They truly did say the things that 

they said because it is recorded for posterity in the Hansard of 

this very Assembly.  And the one thing that you cannot change 

is the words that you put on the paper in this Assembly.  

Hansard is for ever and your words are recorded.  And I 

admire you, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member truly does deserve credit for some of 

the intelligent points that he made at that time.  Obviously they 

were good points because the government of the day did in fact 

pull their paper.  They pulled their Bill; they didn't pass it.  

They allowed the opposition to continue to have the rules and 

the tools to work with. 

 

(1530) 

 

So his arguments must have been good ones.  That's why we 

repeat them.  That's why we congratulate him for having said 

the things that he did.  Probably the only thing that he did in 

opposition that was constructive, because certainly the things 

that happened after that were not. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I've made my point.  I think the 

folks in Saskatchewan have had a pretty good chance to 

understand where I've come from on this issue and how I feel 

about it.  And as my water glass is empty, I think I'll thank you 

for your time and allow one of my fellows to get up and discuss 

some of the issues that are at stake. 

 

Now we have some members in the government that have 

expressed a desire to let the folks know how they stand on 

these issues, even though they had 30-some-odd pages in 

Hansard from before.  Even though they have had a long time 

to say things before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do encourage them 

to get up and let the people of Saskatchewan know what they 

think.  And I want to thank you for your ear. 



1352 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to today provide 

for you and for this Assembly some of the rationale as to why I 

think that the motion made by the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs is not a good motion.  I want to tell you why I 

voted against it in committee, and I'm going to also outline to 

the Assembly why I think it should be dealt with in a different 

fashion than what we have here today. 

 

I want to begin by stating that the work of the committee, the 

Rules and Procedures Committee of this Assembly, was 

constituted on the willingness of individuals to participate on 

the basis of consensus.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have 

witnessed the process evolve through the period of time that we 

studied the different rule changes and the methods that we 

used, I want to point out to this Assembly that what we did and 

what the officers of this Assembly did is they took and went 

back in a period of time and took all of the suggestions that had 

been made for rule changes through the process of time.  They 

took those individual rules and the things that they would like 

to see addressed.  They took those individual items and laid 

them before us and our committee. 

 

As we did that, Mr. Speaker, we became involved in some 

lengthy discussions.  And you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were a 

part of that committee, and you involved yourself in that 

committee.  And you did a lot of discussing in that committee 

as well as other members.  And through the process of these 

meetings . . . and I think the report says that there were some 

40 hours spent in time given to the process and the procedures 

of the Legislative Assembly and how we could make a better 

opportunity for the public to participate, how we could better 

enhance the opportunities for individuals in this Assembly to 

participate, and how we could provide to the people of 

Saskatchewan an example of leadership that would enhance the 

position of the people of this Assembly.  And it was a 

deliberation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that took a considerable 

amount of time to bring items into focus. 

 

I want to point out that there were a number of items there that 

dealt with some very significant reforms, some individual 

significant reforms.  And I want to point out too, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that the role of government involved in the discussion 

through the Speaker as the chairman became involved in this as 

a part of a working to gain consensus, gain consensus over 

matters of concern to the members in that committee, but also 

matters that were a concern to members that are no longer here.  

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people had brought 

forward . . . the officers of this Assembly had brought forward 

the information as it related to the conduct of different 

meetings prior to this year, had brought forward those items 

that needed to be addressed or dealt with in a very precise and 

concise way. 

 

What we did, when we sat down and talked about them, there 

were certain items that we said, well we cannot possibly gain 

consensus in these areas.  There were items that we put aside 

on that basis.  There were items, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we 

said if we can't gain some reasonable amount of compromise in 

some of these areas, then we're going to put them aside and 

deal with 

those that we can gain some consensus with compromise. 

 

And then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our House Leader said that -- 

and I believe everybody agreed with him -- that we said that 

the individuals who had concerns would be not only 

acknowledged but they would be allowed to express that 

opinion freely.  And that opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was 

given the honour of being accepted as a part of the discussion 

for reasonable gain of compromise in dealing with how this 

committee should work.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was how this 

whole process began. 

 

And from that, I want to point out to the members of this 

Assembly, from that we gained some very, very important 

changes.  A trial period for changes in this Assembly, 50 sitting 

days, we will review the process that we have here; we will 

review all of the guidelines.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

was the basis by which we put together the rules and the rule 

changes of this Assembly. 

 

As we studied it, it became aware to all of those people that 

were in the committee, that there were certain things that there 

was not going to be a consensus on.  And one of those items -- 

and I clearly remember it -- one of those items, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, was bell-ringing.  It was an item that was there, it was 

discussed, and there was no consensus, so it was put aside. 

 

Today we are speaking on that motion.  And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, it concerns me a lot when I see the members of this 

Assembly being asked to consider this motion that we couldn't 

gain consensus on.  And, Mr. Speaker, I am here to say, that as 

the House Leader said in that committee over and over again, 

we may not get consensus if we don't have consensus in all of 

the things that we're proposing to provide to this committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is clearly, in my mind, what was anticipated 

to be done.  It was clearly in everyone's mind that that was the 

process that was going to evolve, and that was the process to 

reach a conclusion. 

 

I want to go back from that point, Mr. Speaker, and go back to 

prior to the election when other members of this Assembly, and 

some of them were sitting on the opposition side at that time, 

placed before the Assembly some of the things that should be 

considered . . . placed before the Rules and Procedures 

Committee some of the things that they felt should be dealt 

with.  And that list, Mr. Speaker, was there for a very, very 

important reason. 

 

And the reason was that the government of the day could not 

gain consensus from the membership of the Rules and 

Procedures Committee to deal with the items that were before 

it.  And therefore, Mr. Speaker, clearly, clearly beyond any 

shadow of a doubt the decision by the government at the time 

was that they should not bring those forward because they 

didn't have a consensus by the individuals who were on the 

committee to deal with approving the process to have rule 

changes. 

 

There was no consensus.  There was no compromise.  There 

was not even a willingness to compromise.  And members of 

the now government, who were opposition at that time, were a 

part of that group.  Although I was not 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1353 

there on that committee at the time, I know that that discussion 

took place. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we have looked at the kinds 

of things that we have brought forward to us today, we have a 

motion here that is not based on consensus.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, as we have outlined with previous speakers and the 

points that they have made, we have consistently brought 

forward items and observations made by individuals on the 

other side of the House that constantly and consistently point to 

the fact that the motion, the very same motion brought forward 

today in this Assembly, was exactly the same motion brought 

forward in 1989. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did the Assembly do with the 

motion at that time?  Mr. Deputy Speaker, what they did with 

the motion at that time is they referred it to the Rules and 

Procedures Committee.  That is the process that they followed.  

That's the process that provided an opportunity for freedom of 

debate, no time constraints, an opportunity to discuss, a 

willingness to participate, a willingness to have consensus 

build, and a willingness to have some sort of compromise in 

dealing with the situation as it presented itself. 

 

And what have we got here today, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  We 

haven't got any willingness to compromise.  We have no 

willingness to participate in a discussion.  We have, from the 

government to this Assembly, received an ultimatum.  We've 

received an ultimatum that says, you either fish or cut bait, one 

or the other.  You either decide you're going to go with three 

days and that's it, or you're done.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

precisely where we're at today. 

 

We're at an impasse because we haven't been able, in 

committee, to reach consensus.  And the reason . . . and it 

underlies all of the issues that we have dealt with here today 

and yesterday.  It deals with the issue of a very important piece 

of legislation, a piece of legislation that is going to alter, alter 

and change the very facts of history.  That's why we have this 

motion here before us today. 

 

It is in my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very, very serious 

discussion that we're having.  And what are we having here?  

We have absolutely no participation on the part of individuals 

opposite except the member from Regina Churchill Downs.  

We have had absolutely no participation, no involvement in 

discussion, no willingness to participate in arriving at 

consensus.  You either take it my way or out you go.  That's the 

decision by this government in relating itself to the kinds of 

things that we have presented to this Assembly and the things 

that they have presented to this Assembly in the last two days. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of this, all of this flies in the face of 

working this Assembly to make process and evolving kind of 

thing for rule changes, a process where compromise and 

consensus are reached.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, the undercurrent 

of all of this has suspicion written all over it.  It has suspicion 

written all over it because over and over and over again, the 

Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Rural Development, 

the minister from . . . the Associate Minister of Finance, and 

others, the Minister of Economic Development, have 

repeated over and over again they are going to have no change 

in the format of the 1992 GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) program that they've outlined here for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

(1545) 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people from across this province 

have called in my office and in other members of this 

Assembly, their offices.  They have told me they have talked to 

other rural members of this Assembly.  And I can pick them 

off, I can pick them off one at a time.  And I will later on, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, tell you which ones they've been calling, 

because they've told me. 

 

Number two on that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that they 

have been calling individuals in this Assembly and saying to 

them, I'm your supporter and you don't listen.  What are we 

going to do? 

 

I have said to them, tell them over and over and over and over 

again.  Maybe some day they will understand that the changes 

to the GRIP program of 1992 are not what the farmers of this 

province want to have.  And when is the concern going to 

express itself in a decision by the members of this Assembly 

who are on the government side, to participate in this debate? 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, they're cowards, every one of them.  They 

don't go out into their constituency, they don't go out to listen, 

they don't go to RM (rural municipality) meetings, and, Mr. 

Minister, they don't speak in this Assembly about what their 

constituents are telling them.  I have to express on their behalf 

what their constituents are telling them. 

 

And they don't have any functional, reasonable, rational way of 

coming to this Assembly and standing for what their Minister 

of Agriculture is standing for.  Their Minister of Economic 

Development, their minister of Crop Insurance, none of them, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, are standing here and defending the role 

of those three members, nor are the ministers of the Crown in 

this Assembly -- none of them. 

 

Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, none of them have the courage.  

None of them have the right to speak in this Assembly because 

they've been told by their cabinet to be quiet.  They have been 

told, every one of them, toe the line or out you go. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the people of this 

Assembly and especially to those urban members who are here 

who perhaps could learn a thing or two about real politics out 

in rural Saskatchewan, that they're going to be gone anyway.  

And that, Mr. Speaker, is an actual fact.  And I believe that 

right down to the core of my boots.  That, Mr. Speaker, is there 

because they don't understand and they're not willing to 

participate in this debate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if individuals on that side of the House 

had the courage, they would tell their Minister of Agriculture: 

excuse me, sir, but you are slightly out of line.  My constituents 

have been telling me.  As a matter of fact, they did tell him, all 

of them told him, all of them told him on the lawn of the 

legislature here when members of 



1354 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

this Assembly thought that they were going to get a fine, nice 

party. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture was 

booed when he tried to tell them, oh it's not my fault.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, there were decisions to be made.  And it's 

obvious to me that the decisions that were made on the part of 

individuals in the government side and executive branch of this 

Assembly, that those people clearly, without a doubt, have a 

serious problem in understanding what the rural part of this 

province is all about.  They don't understand it at all.  Or even 

worse, they understand it and are doing it anyway.  That, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, is even worse. 

 

I want to go back to the basis of building a consensus on the 

Rules Committee.  We had a number of very, very serious 

concerns about various things that were to be presented as a 

part of a report to the Assembly.  I'll just raise one of them.  

One of them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have no flags in this 

Assembly.  We have no flags at all in this Assembly. 

 

And Mr. Speaker said to us, if there isn't consensus or 

agreement, we will not put flags in this Assembly.  We on this 

side of the House said, put a Canadian flag in there, put a 

Saskatchewan flag in, and let's have an ensign, the Mother of 

all Parliaments, and recognition of Her Majesty as she stands 

and watches over us here, to put a flag up with three flags -- the 

British flag as a representative of Her Majesty the Queen, the 

Canadian parliament who we are directly under, and the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

We wanted to put them up here, display them for the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan to see.  But no, but no.  Members 

of the government at the time said, we only want the Canadian 

and the provincial flag.  And we said, well you know, it would 

be kind of nice if Her Majesty could have her flag standing 

here in Assembly as well. 

 

And I want to point out to the Assembly here, the decision was 

made that, because we couldn't agree, the rule would stay the 

same.  And it did.  And that, Mr. Speaker and members of the 

Assembly, is the reason why it isn't on the Rules and 

Procedures Committee for adoption.  That is the reason why 

you see no flags in this Assembly -- because there was no 

consensus.  There was no compromise, and therefore nothing 

was done. 

 

I'm going to refer back to this motion that we have before the 

Assembly.  Unilaterally without any question, unilaterally 

without any doubt, the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) 

Carlton put the motion forward in the Rules and Procedures 

Committee and said that's the way it's going to be. 

 

There wasn't a willingness to compromise.  There wasn't a 

willingness to even suggest a compromise.  There wasn't even a 

willingness to say, where are your points to be considered?  

And when we went through, no.  They said we can't do that. 

 

So we had another meeting another day later, or a few days 

later.  And again no willingness on the part of the government 

and the committee members on the part of 

the government to say, okay, if we can't gain consensus, then 

we will deal with it in another way. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think there is only one reason for 

it.  The government members of this Assembly want to put 

before this Assembly a Bill that would say things that exist 

didn't exist, and things that didn't exist will exist.  And that's 

what GRIP '92 Bill in this Assembly will do.  It will say to this 

Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will say to this Assembly 

that we sent a letter out to the farmers of the province of 

Saskatchewan to say we sent you a notice of change of the 

contract before the March 15 date.  And we will establish a fact 

of law in this Assembly that says it was deemed to have been 

sent, and it was deemed to have been done.  But underlying, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it never happened. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what else could be deemed to have 

happened that didn't happen?  We could say, for example, we 

could use the Saskatchewan bonds that just have been sold.  It 

was said that it was 7 per cent interest rate, but the government 

here in its wisdom and its power could come to this Assembly 

and say, we're going to deem it was only two or maybe even 

only one. 

 

Why should we honour the contracts of those individuals who 

provided that investment opportunity in the province of 

Saskatchewan to bring to this Assembly and say, I don't have to 

listen to what contract I signed with these individuals.  I don't 

have to listen to that at all because I can make the law in here 

to change it outside this House. 

 

On the basis of a contract, I don't think you'd have a leg to 

stand on.  I don't think you should have the conscience to do it. 

 

But what we have here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is precisely that.  

We have precisely laid before you exactly what your problem 

is.  And I think beyond a shadow of a doubt, it's here because 

of incompetence on the part of the Minister of Agriculture.  I 

think it's incompetence on the basis that the Minister of Rural 

Development, in co-operation with the Minister of Agriculture, 

did not provide the opportunity for farmers in the province of 

Saskatchewan to become involved, but also to become 

involved in a way that would change the GRIP program to deal 

with it in the way that they wanted to have it done. 

 

All of that says to me that underlying here we have a political 

agenda that says that we have a responsibility to change the law 

to say that contracts will be broken for 50,000 farmers.  And 

we will do that unilaterally in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a difficult, a very difficult time accepting 

that sort of thing.  We have in this Assembly a rule change 

being promoted.  And the rule change, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

will say, or is saying that we will limit the time that the bells 

can ring.  There is only one reason.  There is absolutely only 

one single, solitary reason why that is in here today, and that it 

is tied tightly, as tightly as the executive branch of this 

government can tie it, to the GRIP Bill.  It is tied absolutely 

and totally to that. 

 

We have had reports from everywhere.  Most people will 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1355 

say to you, whether they're in urban centres or rural, they will 

say, I don't like bell-ringing, but I don't like breaking contracts 

even more.  And that's what they're going to do -- 50,000 of 

them.  Gone. 

 

What's next, I ask this Assembly? What's next?  We have a 

very, very large burden of debt in this province on unfunded 

pension liability.  What's next?  Is it the nurses?  What's next?  

Is it the teachers?  What's next?  Is it the SGEU (Saskatchewan 

Government Employees' Union) unfunded liability?  Oh no, 

they might not get it because those are our supporters and they 

pay for my union halls and all that sort of thing.  What's next? 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our responsibility as members of 

this Assembly is being curtailed by the very fact that we have 

not got the freedom to stand up and speak nor to defend what 

you people are doing and controlling the executive branch of 

this government.  That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is exactly why we 

are debating this motion here today.  Because there isn't a 

willingness on the part of the executive branch of this 

government to participate in discussion and compromise and 

consensus. 

 

I was very . . . and I have always been struck by the willingness 

of various provinces to participate in the debate as it relates to 

our constitution.  I have always been struck by the premiers of 

this province working together to draw a single conclusion for 

the benefit of this country to make it grow and become viable.  

I have always thought it was important to do. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reason Canada is, is based on 

consensus and compromise.  There is no doubt in my mind that 

when Upper and Lower Canada were discussing the basis for 

Canada as a country, compromise and consensus was the 

reason that brought it together.  Nothing else. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I stand here today in this 

Assembly and ask the members of this Assembly to say that 

this motion is ridiculing the very essence of the Rules and 

Procedures Committee to say compromise and consensus are 

wrong -- we will do it unilaterally -- in my mind says that you 

are wrong. 

 

(1600) 

 

As the leaders of Upper Canada and Lower Canada talked 

about the value of compromise and consensus, they said to 

themselves, there is more that we can be together than separate.  

And as the Maritimes put their stamp of approval on that, they 

said there is more that we can be together than separate.  And 

as we come across western Canada we have regions in western 

Canada that said, there is more that we can be together than 

separate.  And all of them said it was based on consensus and 

compromise.  Consensus and compromise, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, have been a part of the process of this country, of the 

parliamentary system, through the years of its history.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, we have an example here of it just eroding in 

this motion that we have before this Assembly today. 

 

That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, causes me a great deal of concern.  

It causes me a great deal of concern in a number 

of areas, and I want to point some of them out.  It was a 

privilege for me in 1977, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be a part of 

the Saskatchewan rural association . . . municipal association.  

And I was a director for the municipalities in the south-west 

part of the province of Saskatchewan.  And while I was there, I 

was nominated to receive Her Majesty's Silver Jubilee Medal.  

And I received it.  I was even tempted to wear it today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, but I didn't because I'm not supposed to 

exhibit anything here today. 

 

But I thought of wearing it today and saying to this Assembly, 

look, the basis of consensus and compromise in the province of 

Saskatchewan and in this country, this great country of ours, is 

established by the fact that we have those two things brought 

forward in every parliament on every Commonwealth country 

in this world.  We have consensus and compromise established 

as a part of the role that Her Majesty plays and the role that the 

Parliament of Canada plays and the role that this Assembly 

plays. 

 

But what have we got here?  We have a unilateral change in the 

kinds of things that are done by this Assembly.  And I think it's 

wrong.  I think it's absolutely wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

In 1989 the decision was made by the government at that time 

-- and I was a part of that government -- that we will not 

change the rules unless we can do it with consensus.  There 

was no consensus.  Maybe it was the participants that were 

wrong, maybe it was the people involved in it that were wrong, 

maybe the clash of the personalities was wrong. 

 

But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we have here today, without 

any doubt in my mind, is a unilateral change on the part of a 

government that has decided and fixed itself on tearing the very 

insides out of rural Saskatchewan.  There's no question in my 

mind about that at all.  And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 

matter of very, very serious concern to me. 

 

I have tried to outline for the Assembly here today what I 

believe to be a matter for consideration by this House, by the 

officers of this Assembly, and by the Speaker of this Assembly. 

 

I want to point out to the members of this Assembly a number 

of other things that concern me.  There were some things that 

we dealt with in the Rules Committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

that said to us, we will compromise.  And we did this because 

there was strong support on the government side for putting in 

Committee of the Whole and Committee of Finance the use of 

lap top computers in this Assembly. 

 

Government members said, we want to use them.  We've got 

them.  It gives us time to think about some other things than 

just having to listen to dry, boring speeches.  And . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Minister, they're going to get 

better, so you better stay here and listen. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I'll be right back. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay, we'll wait for you.  However, the 



1356 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

decision was made on compromise from this side of the House 

that members opposite would be able to use them.  And if you 

remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the time we were talking 

about it, we said to the committee: that's fine; we'll allow that 

to go because we'll compromise what we think we should be 

doing here.  And we agreed, and we reached a consensus on 

what we should do. 

 

Some of the things dealt with process in this Assembly.  And 

again, the very fact of private members' day and changing the 

whole format of private members' day was based on consensus 

and a willingness to participate and a willingness, I must say, 

on the part of government to change its agenda to control 

private members' day.  I'll give them that. 

 

But what we did in that committee is, we said we will not talk 

any more about changes in the bell-ringing because there are 

consistently the opposing views in this.  The government will 

always say this and the opposition will always say that.  That, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is where we're at.  And that, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is why members on this side have a problem with it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the role of the Rules Committee I believe 

was seriously curtailed a number of times, and I want to point 

them out.  I want to point out the time that we made the 

decision on television in this Assembly and how to deal with 

those items of business that did not demonstrate a classic, 

legislative visionary kinds of things.  And people could say 

maybe make some jokes about members of the Assembly.  

They could write satire and say, this is what happened to this 

guy.  And we had a strong lobby by the media, saying that's not 

fair. 

 

And I can recall the day that pressure was brought on me as 

vice-chairman of this committee by the member from Regina 

Victoria who said to me: would you be prepared to amend this?  

I said: what is it?  And he had a motion he placed before me -- 

five minutes before he personally placed it before this 

Assembly.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was wrong.  It was wrong 

then.  It's wrong today.  I don't do those things that way and I 

hope I never see it done again. But lo and behold here we have 

it done again. 

 

We have a motion before this Assembly that says, 3 days, 10 

minutes.  Well I think we got a problem.  I think we have a 

very, very serious problem.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the time I 

expressed some irritation about it, and I was.  And I think today 

I am still of the opinion that it was wrong.  I haven't changed 

my mind about it.  I wouldn't have minded encouraging the 

member to do that if the process had been done right. 

 

Now comparing that to the meeting that we had last week -- 

Thursday -- of the Rules Committee called by the chairman.  

The members of the opposition, led by the member from P.A. 

Carlton, decided to unilaterally put a motion forward indicating 

that this was all that there was there and that was the limit to 

the extent that they were going to go.  And, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, our House leaders have been in discussion at various 

times in this Assembly, among the other functions that they're 

doing, trying to negotiate a resolution. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier and the Leader of the 

Opposition have even discussed it.  Is there an option for 

change?  In the context of Canada, the Premier of 

Saskatchewan says that consensus and compromise have 

reached an agreement on the constitution.  And he comes home 

and he railroads.  He comes home and forces through the 

Assembly his will that he forces and torques down on the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Today it's farmers, tomorrow it's whoever -- whoever you 

choose.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will point out the fact that 

the 25 people who sat on the opposition side, when I was in the 

government side in this Assembly, told me over and over and 

over and over again that the rights of the opposition are 

enhanced and provided the benefit to the stability of the 

government by given an opportunity to ring the bells.  I have 

that from every speech that was given in that long debate that 

we had.  I could reiterate over and over again the points of 

view made by individuals in trying to convince the government 

that they should not put that rule forward and vote on it. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, what changed these people's minds?  

What gave them an opportunity to bring to this Assembly a 

motion that will abolish the bell-ringing as a tool for defence 

when there are Bills before this Assembly that we cannot 

accept? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The thirst for power. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And as my colleague says, it is a thirst for 

power.  And I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that tomorrow it 

will be another thirst for power and the next day another thirst 

for power.  It doesn't quit until you recognize that the people of 

the province of Saskatchewan need to have a logical, 

reasonable government based on consensus and compromise 

themselves.  That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the reason why we're 

talking about this motion.  That's the reason why we want to 

have you understand that we must have some compromise and 

consensus on this motion before us today. 

 

We cannot expect, nor can you expect, that we will agree with 

everything that you do or say.  But I want to point out to this 

Assembly that we have consistently . . . even though we have 

disagreed adamantly about certain areas that you have brought 

forward in this Assembly -- we have disagreed with you, 

emphasized it in debate, focused our attention in voting against 

those items, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not made a 

serious application of the ringing of the bells in those areas 

unless we think they're totally wrong.  And there is only one 

that has stuck in my mind in this Assembly so far that is that 

way. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I visited the farmers all across 

this province last year and this year, I realize that it is difficult 

to reach consensus.  But I will point out to the people of this 

Assembly that we had a rural tour in the last two weeks of 

June.  We had a rural tour in the last two weeks of June with 

the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities that not 

one single member of the government was at. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Shaunavon was 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1357 

not at those meetings.  The member from Shaunavon was not at 

those meetings.  Neither was any other rural member at those 

meetings.  Neither, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was the minister at 

those rural meetings.  And he's the minister responsible for 

Crop Insurance.  And he was not there to listen for what the 

people had to say about one of the Bills that this bell-ringing 

came to the focus on.  It came to the floor of this House 

because . . . this motion has come to the floor of this House 

because of their incompetence in delivering the system to start 

with. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out a number of other 

things that I think are in this that cause us a problem.  I want to 

point out to the Assembly that in the Rules Committee meeting 

that we had last Thursday, the motion was brought forward.  

We got an extension to this week Tuesday, and what happened 

on Tuesday was this.  The government didn't bend and the 

Speaker brought forward . . . the chairman of the committee 

brought forward the motion as a part of a motion that would be 

approved in this as a second report of the Special Committee 

on Rules and Procedures. 

 

(1615) 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we raised the point, that don't we have 

anything to say to it?  There are certain things in this that we 

don't agree with.  To say that we have consensus on the basis of 

what we have in this report, I believe, is wrong.  We said that.  

We've pointed that out, Mr. Speaker, on many occasions.  We 

said, why put a preamble to it that is going to irritate us?  Why?  

Well the committee said, go ahead and do it.  Again no 

compromise, no consensus; unilateral decision, we'll go with it. 

 

And what happened?  This report was prepared before we even 

got to the meeting.  That concerns me a lot.  And it's bothered 

me a lot since I had to vote against it.  Mr. Speaker, I think that 

that's a very . . . it causes me a great deal of concern. 

 

There are some other things that cause me a great deal of 

concern in relation to what was done.  Why the hurry?  The 

court has extended itself indefinitely to hear the case.  The 

court has decided that they're going to take the time to look at 

what's going on.  And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't think that 

this legislature should do anything else but wait and see what's 

going to go on.  Because I believe that the function of this 

Assembly is to provide leadership, not retroactive, regressive 

legislation that is going to cripple the opportunity of farmers in 

a court. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think the haste with which we were forced 

back into the Rules Committee, I think was wrong.  I think that 

it was wrong because of the way the executive branch corralled 

the members of the committee and said, you got to do this.  

There's no other way. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, I think is wrong.  We based the decision 

on changes in the rules on compromise and consensus.  And 

now we have one that says, unilaterally, we're going to change 

it.  We're going to cut it to the quick.  We're going to change it 

and make unilateral decisions that don't compare or correspond 

with compromise and consensus.  I think that's totally wrong. 

I think it's wrong for a number of reasons.  One of which, Mr. 

Speaker, is that in a setting of a provincial legislature the 

checks and the balances on appropriating and grievance before 

supply, all of those issues, those items before this Assembly 

have only one avenue of scrutiny and that is through this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker -- and that is through this Assembly 

and the opposition, given the opportunity, to adequately 

scrutinize and observe what's going on in the executive branch 

of this government. 

 

And I know it and am convinced of it that it should be your 

responsibility as a member of this Assembly, even if you are on 

the government side of the House, to analyse and scrutinize the 

work of the executive branch of government.  You are shirking 

your responsibility to your province, to Her Majesty and her 

representatives, and to the members of this Assembly, and to 

your constituents if you are not scrutinizing the operations of 

the executive branch of your government. 

 

If you take away that freedom from me to do the same thing, 

then you are also doing it to the people of Saskatchewan.  If 

you do it to the members of the Assembly, who're you going to 

go do it to next?  That's the basis for this Assembly to operate. 

 

What have we got in other areas?  Let's take the Canadian 

government for example.  We have a balance between the 

branch of government and the executive branch, the 

parliament, and the Senate.  We have a balance. 

 

How many times have you had the Senate hold up debate in the 

Parliament of Canada?  Many, many times, Mr. Speaker, many 

times.  In fact, on one occasion, we were asked as a part of this 

group in this Assembly to vote for a change in the constitution 

as it related to the voting procedures of parliament so that they 

could move a money Bill.  Because the Senate would not allow 

that Bill to go through.  Those are balances and 

counter-balances to have the executive branch of government 

remain responsible to the citizens of the country. 

 

In the parliamentary system, Mr. Speaker, there are very few 

checks and balances.  The only checks and balances that you 

have is the capacity of the opposition to speak in a way . . . that 

is going to function in a way that is going to be described as a 

competitive role in this Assembly.  It's the only way you're 

going to have the executive branch of government held 

accountable. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion is being breached right 

here.  In my opinion, it is wrong to do what the executive 

branch of government is doing here today.  I find it disgusting. 

 

I want to point out to the members of the Assembly that I have 

been frustrated by an opposition that dealt with us in a harsh 

way.  And to say that I wasn't frustrated, it probably was . . . 

that is limiting the volume of frustration that I felt.  Anger 

probably would be a better word.  And I don't think that the 

feelings that you have are any different than the ones that I had. 

 

However, I'll tell you what we did.  We gave, we gave the 

opposition, the opportunity to refer that motion to the Rules 

and Procedures Committee.  That's what we did. 



1358 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

An Hon. Member: -- You brought in closure. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, Mr. Speaker.  The member from 

Saskatoon Haultain, whatever, Eastview-Haultain, he says we 

brought in closure.  No, Mr. Speaker, we did not bring in 

closure on the motion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know 

we did, but that was on the basis of a decision that was reached 

in a Rules Committee, on the basis of the decision that was 

reached in our Rules Committee on consensus that those rules 

would stay the same. 

 

This one was put aside because we couldn't gain consensus.  

And at the time, in 1989, what we did is we gave it to the Rules 

Committee to study and evaluate and come to a consensus on. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is a fact.  If you go back and you will 

find out that that is absolutely true.  They gave it to the Rules 

and Procedures Committee.  They referred it to them to provide 

the time for compromise and consensus to form.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is a fact. 

 

Now what we have, when there is an impasse in a Bill or 

legislation being brought forward, we have an impasse.  

Because you feel strongly one way and we feel strongly 

another way, there is an impasse.  Just like there was in 1989, 

Mr. Speaker, an impasse on your position and an impasse on 

my position.  It was a philosophical debate between two 

diametrically opposed parties. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not wrong.  I think that's constructive 

for the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  What is a 

tragedy, Mr. Speaker, is that today we have a unilateral 

decision based on the decision by the government to say that 

we will force this down their throat.  We will not take no for an 

answer. 

 

Why didn't they bring it forward in this kind of sense when we 

had our committee meetings prior to the Assembly sitting?  

Well I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that they didn't think 

it was necessary.  I will suggest to you that they didn't think it 

was important enough to discuss, to raise in profile, to say to 

the other members of the committee that this is as important as 

the sitting hours, it's as important as the television guidelines, 

it's as important as orders of business on private members' day. 

 

And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that if we have in this Assembly 

the continued decision on the part of the government to 

unilaterally change this rule, we have a very, very serious 

problem in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to this Assembly that this 

morning, this morning we wrote a letter, the House Leader here 

wrote a letter to the House Leader of the government and said, 

can we have an opportunity to discuss this to allow this to go 

back to committee and say, well maybe we could have 60 days 

and start talking about the difference between 3 and 60. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, nothing was done about it.  In fact the 

response was in a very, very negative way, opposite to that -- 

nothing based on consensus; nothing based on compromise; not 

a willingness to discuss. 

Mr. Speaker, we have stood in this Assembly since yesterday at 

1:30.  And we have stood in this Assembly and presented 

argument after argument about the components that we think 

are wrong in you presenting this motion.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

don't think it's realistic to consider that none of the members of 

the government wouldn't have an opinion on this.  I think that, 

Mr. Speaker, it's incumbent on some of the people opposite to 

talk about it. 

 

And now I want to relate just some of the things that the 

member from Churchill Downs, Regina Churchill Downs, said 

in how he made his presentation as he presented the motion to 

this Assembly.  And I just find it very, very difficult to believe 

that a man would stand in his place and tell this Assembly that 

this was a good thing to do.  In 1989 he spent hour upon hour 

upon hour telling this Assembly and the members of this 

Assembly how wrong it was to have a motion brought forward 

by the government to cease ringing the bells. 

 

He stood in this Assembly and did not tell the truth about what 

he was saying.  He didn't.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, if I could use 

the other word, he even did that in presenting his arguments.  

That is what he did in this Assembly. 

 

As a matter of fact, he decided somewhere along the line that 

he was going to support the Minister of Agriculture in his 

bungling of the GRIP Bill.  That's what he decided to do.  By 

making that statement he changed his mind.  He said, I'm going 

to support the Minister of Agriculture in all of his bungling and 

fumbling.  I'm going to support him even though he is wrong. 

 

And the member from Regina Churchill Downs, if he had the 

courage, would go back and read his own script and find out 

from Hansard what he said in 1989. 

 

I don't know how people can switch like that.  I don't 

understand that.  I really find that difficult to understand.  In 

respect to this, I'll just use another example, Mr. Speaker, that I 

find interesting -- his stand on harmonization.  He flip-flopped 

on that.  He flip-flops on how he's going to present this motion 

before this House -- 1989 he says one thing, 1992 he says 

another; 1991 he says one thing, 1992 he says another. 

 

(1630) 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, out in my part of the world, is not 

telling the truth.  One of the times he's not telling the truth.  

How could he believe both?  I find that even more disgusting 

than anything that I have heard.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is why 

I am against this motion being brought to this Assembly today.  

I am against it for that reason. 

 

There are other things that I want to point out as I go through 

the items that we have here today.  I want to point out some 

things that have been said by individuals in this Assembly, and 

quote from the debate that was held in relation to the motion 

before us today, in 1989. 

 

The member from Humboldt -- a quote, May 29, 1989: 

 

 When we talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1359 

motion before us to limit the number of hours the bells can 

ring in this legislature, to limit the effectiveness of the 

official opposition, we have no option but to stand up, each 

one of us, and voice our opinion on behalf of the people of 

Saskatchewan to this government's high-handed, arrogant, 

undemocratic method of running government. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, was a quote from the member from 

Humboldt.  That's what he said then.  On May 29 again: 

 

 . . . I'm not doing this for my own political purpose; I'm doing 

it because the people of Saskatchewan, the feeling that we 

have for the people of Saskatchewan must be heard, their 

concerns must be heard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the members of this 

Assembly again today the reason why this is being rammed, 

jammed, forced down the throats of the members of the 

Assembly is because of the incompetence of the member from 

Rosetown-Elrose who couldn't handle anything.  He couldn't 

handle anything in the livestock industry.  He couldn't handle 

anything in the grain industry.  What's he going to botch up 

next?  That's the question. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- The highways. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- And my colleague says the highways are next.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, he couldn't run anything and he's 

demonstrating it every day.  More and more as we see him 

dealing with items, he can't handle anything. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind the member -- 

he may have forgotten, it's been such a long time -- that we are 

on a motion that's moved by the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs that says that the second report of the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures be now concurred in.  And 

I have read the report very carefully and what he is on right 

now has nothing to do with the report, and I remind him to get 

back to the motion that is before us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out 

to the Assembly that the competence of the minister is the 

reason why this motion is before the Assembly here today.  I 

believe, I honestly believe the only reason, absolutely the only 

reason why this . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I want to remind the member 

that that may be his opinion, but that has nothing to do with the 

resolution that is before us.  Just because it's your opinion 

doesn't mean that that can be debated in the legislature on this 

motion. 

 

The motion before the Assembly is on concurrence on the 

report by the Rules and Procedures Committee.  Nowhere, 

nowhere in that report or in the resolution that is before us does 

that pertain to the Minister of Agriculture and Minister of 

Highways.  So I ask him to please get back to the resolution 

that's before this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The discussion here 

today is on limiting the ringing of the bells.  And in 

my opinion, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of this 

Assembly, that GRIP is the reason it's here.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the reason why this Bill or this motion is before this 

Assembly.  In my view, that's clearly what it is. 

 

And in the view of thousands and thousands of people across 

this province, the ringing of the bells is because of the Minister 

of Agriculture.  And that, Mr. Speaker, and to the members of 

this Assembly, is an absolute fact.  It is impressed on the minds 

of individuals across this province, and I'm only expressing the 

view of my constituents and the members . . . or the people 

who have talked to me about it. 

 

The limitation of time to get the Bill before the House is the 

reason why this motion is being debated here today.  

Absolutely no question in my mind and in the minds of 

thousands and thousands of agriculture producers across this 

province. 

 

The member from Humboldt said on May 29: 

 

 Why is the government trying to stymie the whole process by 

limiting bell-ringing? 

 

Why?  And we were talking about a philosophical difference, 

not an illegal action. 

 

On May 29 again: 

 

 . . . I'll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the present rule, the 

present rule in this legislature gives the opposition the 

opportunity to engage the people in an exercise known as 

participatory democracy. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, as I stand before this Assembly, is what 

you're taking away from this Assembly. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why I don't think that this 

government is dealing with this Legislative Assembly in a fair 

and equitable way.  They are not reaching the conclusion of 

limiting the bell-ringing to consensus and compromise like we 

have on every other rule change in all of the time that I have 

been in this Assembly.  There hasn't been a unilateral change in 

rules in this Assembly, I don't believe, in the history of this 

Assembly. 

 

And here we have, on the basis of someone's competence or 

incompetence, depends upon which way you view it, that 

individual is asking his caucus to support this motion.  We can 

only assume that.  We can only assume that because we have 

not heard one word contrary to that. 

 

And I want to point out to the members of this Assembly that I 

don't agree with the observations made by the member from 

Churchill Downs.  I don't believe it at all.  I don't believe that 

he's right today.  He was probably more right in 1989 than he is 

today. 

 

And what has changed?  The only thing that's changed, Mr. 

Speaker, is the fact that he is now in the treasury benches on 

the other side in the executive branch of government.  And he 

doesn't want even his colleagues to voice an opinion.  And in 

my mind, Mr. Speaker, that's wrong. 



1360 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

I believe that there isn't one of them that has the courage to get 

up here and say anything against or for what the Associate 

Minister of Finance has said.  I don't believe they have the 

courage.  Because they've all been told to keep their mouths 

shut.  And I think that that's wrong. 

 

So what we're doing here in a very real and sensitive way is 

we're telling the people of Saskatchewan what these people 

said.  This is what they said.  On May 29 the member from 

Humboldt said this: 

 

 Not only will this motion to limit the length of time that the 

bells ring, not only will it muzzle the opposition, an 

opposition who, like I said, gave the people the opportunity 

to speak, but it will also muzzle the people of this province, 

because if we have to depend on the media, we have to 

depend on general elections, what opportunity do the people 

of this province have to speak in between elections and if the 

media don't pick up their cause.  That is the role of the 

official opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the role of the opposition is to keep an effective 

balance of power in the executive branch of this government.  

That's what our responsibility is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is also the role of this opposition to challenge 

the executive branch of this government in its actions in 

relation to democracy.  It's the role of this opposition to 

challenge the executive branch, the cabinet ministers in this 

government, to be honest and forthright in dealing with the 

kinds of things that they have to deal with on a regular basis.  

And that means that we have to stop them.  We have to 

challenge them.  We have to correct them. We have to provide, 

on the basis of Her Majesty, the responsibility to have an 

effective government. 

 

And that's the reason why we are challenging, not only in the 

debate, but challenging the very essence of the motion before 

us today.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we are here 

discussing and debating this today. 

 

There's one other thing that concerns me, Mr. Speaker, and it 

concerns me a lot.  And I have stood in this House when the 

executive branch of this government had to deal with a very, 

very serious problem in the justice system.  It was not the 

justice system that was to blame.  It was the actions of an 

individual who was a part or could have been a part of that 

executive branch. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the role of the Attorney General at the time 

was to say that I have to exclude myself from the discussion 

because I could not only cause a problem of a relationship 

between the minister of Justice and the executive branch, but 

my role as a member of this Assembly.  And that, Mr. Speaker, 

was clearly a very, very difficult thing to do. 

 

And it is our role as a part of the opposition to make sure that 

that is kept on track.  And, Mr. Speaker, I believe, I 

fundamentally believe that the changes that we will make as a 

part of this motion will only provide an opportunity for the 

Minister of Agriculture to provide, as a part of evidence before 

a court, evidence that is contrary to law.  And I don't believe 

that that is right. 

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, on the part of this opposition, it is 

our responsibility to say to this executive branch, you have to 

do things legal.  You have to do things that are not only legal, 

but you have to do things that are perceived to be legal because 

you can't do it the other way. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I have been to countries in Africa and in 

Europe where precisely the opposite exists, where the control 

of the opposition is said to have no benefit to society.  The 

opposition has been told, we're going to curtail your 

involvement in the democratic process.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

see that as an example here today.  Without a doubt, I see that 

as an example of what we're debating here today and the 

motion that's before us. 

 

I find that very difficult to believe.  And as I stood and received 

the Queen's Silver Jubilee Medal in 1977 for responsibility for 

responding in a way in local government, I said to myself there 

is a reason why I need to defend the democratic process.  There 

is a need for me to stand in this Assembly and stand in this 

province and say to the people of the province of Saskatchewan 

that the role of the government is one thing, the executive 

branch is another, and the role of the opposition is the third.  

And, Mr. Speaker, we are having the executive branch of 

government cut down the role of the opposition in a very, very 

serious way here today. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is exemplified by the very fact that the 

executive branch of government will not allow even the 

back-benchers to get up and speak.  And I challenge the 

members from around this Assembly who are back-benchers in 

that government to take up the challenge.  And I want to point 

out to members of this Assembly that there are quite a few of 

you who ought to.  I'm going to talk about where I've been 

receiving encouragement from to keep the bells ringing. 

 

I have quite a few pages here from people across this province 

-- people who have called me who I have never, ever met 

before; people who have said, keep those bells ringing.  And 

for a number of reasons, Mr. Speaker.  It's not only the GRIP 

Bill that they say to me that you should keep those bells ringing 

for.  Do you know what else they say?  They're going to 

destroy our health care system.  Keep them ringing.  Don't let 

them continue to govern because they're going to completely 

destroy this province. 

 

(1645) 

 

And the examples are demonstrated every day.  We have 

examples of that from across the piece in all of the ministers 

that we have here today.  Mr. Speaker, I have people from 

Hanley calling me and saying to me, don't stop ringing the 

bells.  I have people from Eastend calling me and saying, don't 

stop ringing the bells.  As a matter of fact . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How is Ted doing? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- He's doing very well, thank you.  The 

question that should be answered, Mr. Speaker, is, how is the 

member from Shaunavon doing?  And the individuals who 

were his supporters from Climax who were  



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1361 

organizing the rally down at Shaunavon, I wonder if they're as 

strong supporters today as they were on October 21. 

 

And that, Mr. Member, and Mr. Speaker, is what we're talking 

about.  They're telling me over and over and over again, don't 

stop ringing the bells -- don't stop ringing the bells. 

 

And I'll tell you what.  When the people at Eastend find out 

their hospital is gone or the ones at Ponteix find out their 

hospital is gone, they're going to be ringing the bells.  They're 

going to be ringing your bells, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sorry, Mr. 

Speaker, I didn't want to include you -- the member from 

Shaunavon.  I want to tell the member from Shaunavon they're 

going to be ringing his bell, and they're going to be ringing it 

loud and hard.  That, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why we think 

that this limitation on the bell-ringing is very, very serious. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I'm going to talk about a phone call that I got 

from Golden Prairie, said keep ringing those bells. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where's Golden Prairie? 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, the member from Saskatoon asks, where 

is Golden Prairie?  Well I'll be.  Try going to the west side of 

the province some time and find out where some of these little 

towns are.  Do you want to know where Fulda is?  Ask the 

member from Humboldt.  Where is he?  Oh, there he is.  Where 

is Fulda . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes.  No, that's in the 

member from Kinistino's seat. 

 

Yes, I had a gentleman phone me from there.  He said, I've 

talked to my member.  He told me, he said, I can't change it; I 

can't get the government to change it.  I think it's probably best 

this way.  And what do we got?  He told me that he told the 

member from Kinistino, he said, keep ringing those bells. 

 

The second thing he told him, he said, as a matter of fact, you 

better go find yourself another job because in four years you're 

not going to be here.  That's what he said to me.  And he called 

me; I didn't call him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I sure did. 

 

And as a matter of fact, I got a call from a gentleman at 

Wynyard and he said exactly the same thing.  I got a call from 

a gentleman in Assiniboia, and he said, keep ringing the bells.  

I got a call from a family in Prud'homme.  Now which seat is 

that in? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Kinistino. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Kinistino.  Right.  Okay.  There you go again.  

Another one who said to keep ringing those bells. 

 

And will those people, those rural members from across this 

province, will they have the courage to stand up and say, I'm 

not going to limit the time of those bells?  In fact it would be 

even better if they would ask their Minister of Agriculture and 

their House Leader to withdraw the Bill so that it could be 

seriously talked about over the next year. 

That's what they're asking for. They want to have the Bill 

withdrawn, the process changed, and then, Mr. Speaker, that's 

what they want to have.  And, Mr. Speaker, they want to have 

that from all across this province.  I'll leave out the people that 

call me from my constituency, but there's a few of them that 

tell me to do this too. 

 

Let me talk about the member from Bengough-Milestone when 

I got a call from Minton.  Any of you know where Minton is . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it's Minton.  And they told me, 

keep the bells ringing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Bengough-Milestone would do 

well to go back to her constituency and ask the people, what do 

we want done with the GRIP Bill. 

 

Whose seat is Leroy in?  Is that Humboldt or Quill Lakes?  

Well, Mr. Speaker, that's another call that I got unsolicited by 

an individual who wanted to tell me to keep the bells ringing 

and get the Bill off the Table and be done with it. 

 

What about Southey?  Qu'Appelle-Lumsden probably, or Last 

Mountain-Touchwood -- that's what it is.  That's where Southey 

is.  I had a call from a gentleman at Southey and said, keep the 

bells ringing, get rid of the GRIP.  Get rid of the GRIP and the 

minister, as a matter of fact. 

 

What about Kamsack?  What about the family from Kamsack 

who called me and told me to keep the bells ringing?  

Brownlee, whose constituency is Brownlee in?  One of you 

fellows -- Brownlee?  Well they tell me, Mr. Speaker, they tell 

me, Mr. Speaker, that GRIP is supposed to be gone.  They 

probably called him too.  Anyway, what about Admiral?  

Whose seat is Admiral in? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  What about getting back to the motion 

that we're on? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- I've reminded the member several times that 

the motion before us is a motion moved by the member from 

Regina Churchill . . . order . . . is the motion moved by Regina 

Churchill Downs that the second report of the Special 

Committee on Rules and Procedures be now concurred in.  I 

have reminded the member there's nothing in that report on 

GRIP.  And to go . . . one more comment from the member 

from Wilkie and I will remind him of rule 28. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, on a point of order.  I have been 

listening very carefully as the member from Morse went 

through the litany.  I admit it's a litany because we have 

massive lists of this.  But he was talking about the people, Mr. 

Speaker, that had called him up and encouraged him to 

continue with the bell-ringing.  And he was giving us a sample 

of the calls across the province.  Now am I right, Mr. Speaker, 

in saying that you called him to order on that? 

 

The Speaker: -- I called him to order on discussing the GRIP 

program and as it relates to the Minister of Agriculture, has 

absolutely 



1362 Saskatchewan Hansard July 8, 1992 

nothing to do, has absolutely nothing to do with the motion that 

is before us. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the 

member from Shaunavon that the individuals from Admiral 

who have called me and told me to keep the bells ringing.  And 

that's from your constituency.  I've had calls from Climax, from 

Frontier, all the way across the south-west.  And they tell me, 

Mr. Member from Shaunavon, they tell me over and over 

again, keep the bells ringing. 

 

And I see that the member from Southey wants to participate 

too, or the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood who 

Southey is in his constituency.  They phone me and tell me, 

Mr. Member, that they want me to have the bells continue 

ringing. 

 

What about Cut Knife -- Cut Knife?  Cut Knife is another one 

where they phone me and tell me, keep the bells ringing. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You already said that. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I did not.  I know what I've said here, Mr. 

Member from Elphinstone.  They call me from Kisbey.  Whose 

constituency is Kisbey in?  They call me from Porcupine Plain 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Right.  I'm just reinforcing the 

opportunity from everybody across this province to participate 

in this debate. 

 

As a matter of fact, the member from Humboldt said in 1989, 

he said over and over again: allow the people to participate in 

democracy and allow this opposition to give a demonstration of 

the opportunity to give the executive branch of government an 

opportunity to govern in a fair and equitable way across this 

province. 

 

That's what they're asking us to ring the bells about.  Because 

they believe, Mr. Speaker, they believe over and over again, 

that the executive branch of this government is out of control.  

They believe that fundamentally, because it isn't only about 

GRIP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, you're right.  It isn't only because of GRIP.  

It's because of health care.  It's because of highways.  It's 

because of all of those things.  They think this executive branch 

is out of control because they want to take away and throttle 

the opposition in every way, shape, or form.  And by putting 

this motion in, they are doing exactly that. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the reason why this opposition feels 

the way they do.  And it is why the members from that side of 

the House, when they were over here, said exactly the same 

thing.  They said exactly the same thing over and over again.  

The member from Elphinstone, the member from P.A. Carlton, 

the members from Humboldt, all of them, the members from 

Saskatoon, the members who aren't here from Saskatoon, those 

people said it over and over and over again: give us an 

opportunity to speak out for democracy and we will. 

 

Somewhere along the line, Mr. Speaker, the executive branch 

has to be brought into control in this Assembly.  And it is the 

role of this opposition to do that.  And it is my role, as a 

member of this opposition, to convince not only 

this Assembly but everyone in this province that not only is the 

government wrong, the executive branch wrong, but who 

speaks for those people whose representatives sit on that side 

of the House and are told to keep their mouths shut by the 

executive branch of this government?  Who's . . . Oh, I hear a 

whole lot of groaning from the other side saying, now where 

are you . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've asked the members to 

please let the member have his say.  And if you wish to get up, 

I'll recognize you at another time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Speaker, the executive branch have told 

individuals on the opposite side, you can't speak to this motion.  

And I want . . . I challenge anyone to get up to do it.  Because I 

don't think you have the courage, number one.  Because you 

don't have the understanding of the situation in your own 

constituencies. You have no idea what it's going to do to hurt 

not only the farmers of the province of Saskatchewan, but it 

could also have a very, very serious impact on the executive 

branch of this government. 

 

The executive branch of this government, Mr. Speaker, is 

going to be held accountable by a court of law.  And when that 

is done it's not only going to be the opposition's responsibility 

to challenge them, but, Mr. Speaker, it will be the opposition's 

responsibility to keep them in a check and balance on how they 

handle that decision themselves.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 

reason why I agree that there should be some compromise and 

consensus built on the decision here. 

 

I'm going to raise one point to be an example of how 

compromise and consensus should work -- and I'm going to 

conclude with that, Mr. Speaker -- the decision by the Rules 

Committee at the time the consensus was reached on all of the 

rules that are there today.  There was a decision made by 

individuals in that Rules Committee that we would have flags 

in this Assembly or we would not have flags in this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you don't see any flags in this Assembly -- not 

because we didn't want them, not because the government 

didn't want them, but we couldn't reach an agreement on what 

they should be.  We couldn't reach an agreement on which 

flags there should be.  And so, Mr. Speaker, on the basis of that 

and the decision reached by the committee, no flags are in this 

Assembly.  And that, Mr. Speaker, was a decision based on 

compromise and consensus. 

 

We're not angry about it nor are we upset about it.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we are disappointed today in the very fact that we 

don't have consensus and agreement and compromise, which 

this whole country is based on. 

 

Canada was founded on the basis of compromise and 

consensus.  And here we have a unilateral decision by an 

overpowering government with an overpowering mandate to 

deliver for the people of Saskatchewan whatever they choose it 

to be.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is fundamentally wrong.  And 

Her Majesty is not being well served today by this discussion 

that you are purporting to impose on this Assembly, and that is 

the motion before this House today.  That, Mr. Speaker, is what 

I believe to 



July 8, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1363 

be a fundamentally flawed decision on your part.  And I 

believe you are going to regret, inevitably regret, the day that 

you ever brought this forward. 

 

That, Mr. Speaker, is why I believe that they should withdraw 

it and allow it go back to the Rules Committee where it was 

supposed to be in the first place.  That, Mr. Speaker, is where it 

should be.  And I say that today, and I said that in Rules 

Committee, and I will say it in rules committees again.  As 

vice-chair . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  It now being 5 o'clock, 

this House stands adjourned until 1:30 tomorrow. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 

 

 


