




















































Hansard: August 19, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2705 

 August 19, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

 To the Hon. Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

legislature assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost-effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever-increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true "wellness" model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability; 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have about, I believe about 10; and the first one 

here looks like all Regina address, Mr. Speaker.  I won't 

enlarge on them; they're all Regina.  The next one is from 

different towns throughout Saskatchewan, from Estevan, 

Regina, Qu'Appelle, Regina, mostly Estevan and Regina, Mr. 

Speaker.  The next one is . . . they look to be entirely 

Saskatoon.  Oh, there's some from Dalmeny, and the rest 

Saskatoon, Martensville, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next one is from Fillmore.  Regina addresses -- there's 

not a city on here but it looks like Regina addresses.  Yes, that 

looks like pretty well all Regina addresses, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The next one is for . . . well it looks like it jumps around the 

province.  There's Cut Knife, Lloyd . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've reminded members several 

times now of the ruling made by the former Speaker.  I want to 

draw members' attention to those rulings, one on April 15, 

1991.  And I will quote once more: 

 

 . . . I (will) bring to the hon. member's attention that she may 

read the prayer of the petition but not the entire petition 

because that is encouraging and engaging in debate. 

 

 Secondly, speculation on where people may live or not live is 

not a valid part of a presentation.  Again, to state only the 

essence of the petition, which means the prayer, and then 

present it.  I just draw members' attention to that. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right, Mr. Speaker.  If that's the way 

we're going to do it, that's fine.  I just can't read the addresses, 

so we'll just say the rest are all from Churchill Downs.  So I'll 

hand these over. 

 

And I have another petition, Mr. Speaker.  I have another 

petition.  And these are just from various places in Regina, but 

the prayer will be read by my colleague.  It's a different 

petition.  We have to double up on it if you want . . . Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have some 

petitions to lay on the Table for the Assembly's consideration, 

chiropractic care: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I have a couple of hundred names here 

virtually from across the province.  And I add this to the 

growing list now that accumulates to 11,000 petitioners on the 

chiropractic treatment alone. 

 

While I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also have a further 

petition here that says: 

 

 That in the 1991 general election, the voters of the province 

voted 62.62% to prevent the Government of Saskatchewan 

from paying for abortion procedures; 

 

 and that this margin far exceeds the support of any political 

party represented in the Legislature; 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

 and that the government is placing greater and greater costs 

on Saskatchewan people for an already financially stressed 

health care system; 

 

 and that it would be to the benefit of our democracy for 

governments to listen to the duly expressed will of the voters 

as well as to the benefit of our health care system to more 

judiciously husband our health care dollars. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have 6,000 names to add to the 30,000 that 

have already been put before this Assembly. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I also have two 

different sets of petitions and will be very brief in their 

delivery.  I'll only read the last paragraph on the chiropractors: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, I have people from Regina, Belle 

Plaine, Regina, Oxbow, Alida, Glen Ewen, Regina, Saskatoon, 

people all over the province of Saskatchewan, on chiropractic 

patients. 

 

And I also, Mr. Speaker, and I won't read the whole preamble, 

but simply say: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

And today I have people from Regina, Dilke, Lestock, Watson, 

Penzance, Briercrest, Estevan, Regina, Lipton, lots of Regina 

today on this particular petition, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have two sets of 

petitions.  The first is with respect to chiropractic care.  I will 

just read the last sentence: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners (may) humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

These petitions join the thousands that have been presented so 

far.  These are from North Battleford, from Rabbit Lake, from 

Maidstone, some are from Lashburn, Lloydminster, Neilburg, 

more from Lloydminster, Maidstone again, and Lloyd, several 

pages from Saskatoon, also from Wartime, from Prince Albert, 

from North Battleford, from Clavet, Martensville, some more 

from Saskatoon, and Sonningdale, Turtleford.  And some more 

from North Battleford and from Lloydminster.  I will leave 

these. 

 

The second petition, Mr. Speaker, is with respect to the petition 

in the last October's election: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I have several hundred names here and this joins the over 

30,000 names on petitions that have come into the legislature.  

These are from Regina.  They're also from Estevan and from 

Yorkton and Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have petitions to 

present as well.  The first one is with respect to the chiropractic 

treatment in the province, Mr. Speaker.  These ones are 

primarily from Regina, Moose Jaw, Regina Beach, mostly from 

the Regina and area, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the second petition that I have to present is with respect to 

the abortion funding in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from . . . each and every one 

of these are from Regina city. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have two sets 

of petitions, one on chiropractic care.  They come from Sheho, 

Yorkton, Saltcoats, Springside, Theodore, Regina, Marshall, 

Lloydminster, Maidstone, St. Walburg, Saskatoon, Unity, and 

North Battleford. 

 

I also have the petition here dealing with abortion and I have 

people from Regina, Strasbourg, Moose Jaw, Qu'Appelle, P.A. 

(Prince Albert), Liberty, and Moose Jaw.  And I want to lay 

them on the Table at this time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have two 

groups of petitions I'd like to lay on the Table today, Mr. 

Speaker.  They are in respect of the chiropractic treatment and 

also the abortion question. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the prayer has been read I believe, and the 

preamble, so I won't go into that.  But I'd like to point out that 

these petitions come from the north-west.  They take in North 

Battleford -- a lot of North Battleford, Meota, Vawn, Wilkie, 

Sonningdale, Turtleford, again Meota -- they take in a whole 

area up in that north-west side of the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And also on behalf of the abortion question I have several 

hundred names here.  And they are also representative of 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

all over the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I will just read the prayer: 
 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 
 

 As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I too have a couple petitions to 

present to the Assembly this afternoon.  Firstly a petition, a 

number of pages of petitions signed regarding chiropractic 

treatment, with signatures from Saskatoon, Cudworth, 

Colonsay, Moose Jaw, Dalmeny, Martensville.  I so present 

them to the Assembly. 
 

And as well, a group of petitions signed by individuals from 

Regina, Indian Head, Regina Beach, and a number of other 

areas in the southern part of the province regarding abortions.  

And I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

I so present them. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have as well, 

petitions today, about 300 names concerning the chiropractic 

thing.  I'll read the prayer: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from the government 

proposal to discriminate against chiropractic patients in 

charging them fees not assessed for any other medical 

treatment. 

 

And they're from all over the province, Mr. Speaker, just about 

every corner of the province. 
 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions dealing with chiropractic care in this province.  These 

petitions come from all four corners of the province, from 

Hudson Bay, Unity, Tompkins, to Lake Alma, Mr. Speaker.  

Since my colleagues have read the prayer, I will not read it 

again. 
 

I have another petition, Mr. Speaker, to present.  This is a new 

petition. 
 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 
 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 
 

 That Saskatchewan Producers are undergoing extremely 

trying financial times due to drought, grain prices and 

international trade wars and that 

they are being pressed further financially by the NDP 

government's decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel Rebate 

program and its coloured fuel policy; and, that to implement 

the government's coloured fuel policy will cost Co-ops and 

small independent fuel service stations thousands of dollars, 

leading to loss of jobs and businesses in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate the Farm Fuel 

Rebate program and that they cancel the coloured fuel 

program. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This petition comes from south-east Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, to you 

and through you to the Assembly, I would like to introduce 

some people who are in the Speaker's gallery, who are very 

special to me, and welcome them to the Legislative Assembly.  

They are Linda and David Kielbiski from Brantford, Ontario.  

David is my nephew.  They have not been to Saskatchewan -- 

at least David hasn't -- for many, many years.  And I don't think 

the rest of his family has ever been here although I may be 

wrong on that.  They also have their sons Jamie and Terry with 

them here.  And they're accompanied by my daughter Sharla -- 

she hates for me to have to say that in the House, I know, but I 

did it anyway -- and by also Brenda Bokshowan from 

Saskatoon. 

 

I want to ask the members of the Assembly to wish them well 

and an enjoyable visit in this Assembly and in Saskatchewan, 

and join me in extending a greeting to them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you, and through you to other 

members of the Assembly, members of the Saskatchewan 

Seniors' Association who were at the Legislative Building this 

morning for a meeting with me.  They are seated in your 

gallery.  It's my pleasure to introduce Mrs. Helen McMillan, 

the first vice-president, who's from Biggar; Ms. Vicki 

Maximniuk, who's the treasurer and is from Milden; Miss Pat 

Edwards, who's the secretary and is from Biggar. 

 

I would ask you to join me in welcoming them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Taxation Powers for Health Boards 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Rural Development, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

Minister, your colleague, the Minister of Health, has released a 

paper that suggests the possibility of adding a new level of 

government to levy property taxes in the province of 

Saskatchewan.  This concerns the new health boards, Mr. 

Minister.  My question is simply this: have you had 

consultations with the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities) on this dangerous proposal?  Have you 

discussed the matter with the ministers of Health?  And will 

you tell the Assembly the official position of the Department of 

Rural Development regarding this new tax burden on rural 

municipalities? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

With respect to the wellness initiative, the Minister of Health 

has had extensive consultations with SARM and with Mr. 

Kirwan.  Mr. Kirwan says he's optimistic about the changes 

and looks forward to working with the government in 

implementing them. 

 

I think one thing that should be made clear is the taxing powers 

in this province reside only with municipalities.  Any district 

health boards that are created, as the situation now exists, will 

not have taxing powers.  So there is no capacity in the system 

for any off-loading. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question again 

to the minister in charge of Rural Development.  Mr. Minister, 

I'm sure that you would want to take note of the fact that Mr. 

Kirwan has been quoted in the public media as . . . a simple 

headline:  Don't fund health plan through property taxes, 

SARM.  Is that your idea of consultation, to ignore what the 

people are saying and say what you want them to hear? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like to repeat again 

that with respect to the wellness model we have had 

consultations with SARM, with Mr. Kirwan.  He is willing to 

work with us.  I think what has to be understood is that as the 

situation now exists, the only taxing powers in rural 

Saskatchewan exist with locally constituted governments and 

municipalities.  Health boards will not have taxing powers.  So 

there is simply no capacity for off-loading as the situation now 

exists. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Minister of Community Services.  Madam Minister, the people 

of our cities already face an enormous property tax burden.  

The Minister of Health is now proposing to add to that burden 

by creating a new level of government that will have the power 

to tax property. 

 

Madam Minister, have you consulted with SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) on this 

proposal?  Have you discussed this issue with the Minister of 

Health?  And what is the official position of the Department of 

Community Services on the proposal to levy a new level of 

property taxes on home owners? 
 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

In fact, rather than creating another level of government in this 

province, what we are doing is reducing bureaucracies. 

Look at the situation in Saskatoon and Regina where there 

were several different boards in place, often working at cross 

purposes.  What we have done in my home town in Saskatoon 

is put one board in place to better co-ordinate the services that 

exist, to make the system more effective. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Madam Minister, no indeed, what the Minister of 

Health is proposing is another level of taxation on 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I'm wondering if you people and the Minister of 

Community Services have consulted with SUMA on new 

property taxes to fund health care. 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, my first point is we are 

not creating a new level of government.  We are reducing 

bureaucracies and red tape. 

 

My second point is that we have already made a commitment 

to groups like SARM that we will put together a working group 

of people from Health, Finance, and community organizations 

to look at revenue potential of the future.  So that before any 

changes occur, there will be broadly based consultation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of 

Education.  Madam Minister, you've heard the questions from 

my two colleagues concerning the new wellness plan.  Have 

you consulted with the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) on the proposed new property taxes which will be 

levelled to help pay for hospital care around this province? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could repeat what I 

said before.  There is simply, as the system now exists, no 

capacity for increased taxes resulting from the district boards.  

Any changes that occur in the long 

_term vision of the government will not be done by us.  It will 

be done on the basis of recommendations from the working 

group which will consult widely with those local communities 

out there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Madam Minister, I hate to dispute your 

facts but the hospitals already have the power to tax.  They 

have the power to already increase taxation on property around 

this province. 

 

When you go out and talk in the public, the property owners 

are already unhappy about paying property taxes to support 

schools.  They feel that is an unfair burden on property because 

it does not reflect income.  Now have you discussed this 

situation with the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association? 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, if I could correct what 

the member opposite is saying.  Right now out there we have a 

hodgepodge.  Municipalities are putting tax dollars into 

hospitals, into public health facilities, into ambulance facilities.  

Okay? 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

What we are saying is we want to put together a working group 

to look at the situation, to see if it is fair, if it does make sense.  

And that working group is going to work with local 

communities to recommend to us what is fair and what is 

reasonable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Question to the Minister of Education.  

SUMA has a concern probably on this one.  SARM has a 

concern probably on this one.  SSTA has a problem in this one. 

 

What are you going to do, Madam Minister, with a third school 

board?  Are you going to add that on top of all of this, in light 

of the kinds of things you're doing with health care and with 

education and municipal tax?  You're unloading all of this on 

the property tax, and now you're going to unload a third one.  

Are you going to continue to unload the third school board on 

the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  If I could 

say once again, we are not talking about new levels of 

government and no tax increases. 

 

But you know what?  You know what strikes me?  What we are 

talking about is fundamental change, long-overdue, 

fundamental change, and it's natural to fear fundamental 

change.  But you know, I don't think Saskatchewan people fear 

fundamental change.  They welcome it, especially when they 

know what it means.  And it means a better health care system 

in the end. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Telephone Rate Increases 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, to the minister for SaskTel.  

Madam Minister, I previously asked you questions regarding 

SaskTel's rate increases on telephone installations and your 

answers were unsatisfactory in this House and they were 

unsatisfactory to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

As you well know, in towns that it's costing hundreds or even 

thousands of dollars to hook up new installations.  Being that 

your government has backed down on other bad budgetary 

decisions like gravel roads, FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program), and the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, will you 

reconsider this bad decision which affects both rural and urban 

Saskatchewan alike? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite 

are aware from letters that I have written to constituents and 

users of telephone service in Saskatchewan, that we did make a 

move earlier in the year to greater cost recovery from telephone 

installations. 

 

We have asked the administration at SaskTel to review those 

increases and they are currently doing that. 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Could I call the Leader of the 

Opposition to order please. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- For what? 

 

The Speaker: -- The member from Moosomin wants to know 

for what.  He's been interrupting every minister that's been 

trying to answer a question.  That's why I'm interrupting him 

now.  I'm asking the Leader of the Opposition to please stop 

interrupting. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam 

Minister, even your federal colleagues recognize the hardship 

being imposed on Saskatchewan residents by these tax 

increases.  I would like to quote Ray Funk, the NDP MP for 

Prince Albert-Churchill River: Saskatchewan consumers are 

paying up to $5,000 to have telephones installed.  This in the 

P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald of June 16.  Five thousand dollars, 

Madam Minister. 

 

How do you justify the continuation of these taxes in light of 

the reversals on other budgetary decisions? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, I would just like to 

point out that provisioning charges or installation charges for 

telephones are not taxation. 

 

The example referred to was an extreme, an extreme example 

in a very remote location and the charge estimated to be levied 

was a very small fraction of the actual cost of installation. 

 

But as I said earlier, we have asked the administration to 

review the change in the provisioning charges.  We expect to 

come forward with a modified proposal . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the Leader of the Opposition 

have a question he would like to ask? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We're leading up to it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Well, it's taking him a long time to lead up to 

it and if he's got a question, I wish he'd get up and ask it. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may not call 

it taxes, but when money is taken out of the people's pockets 

and ends up in the hands of the government, to me that's 

taxation. 

 

Madam Minister, I've received a letter from an individual at 

Madge Lake who's neighbour connected up his telephone for 

$77 in February.  When he inquired about the same procedure 

in March, the cost was to be $629. 

 

Madam Minister, will you please change that policy now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I can only repeat that we 

will be coming . . . SaskTel will be coming forward very 

shortly with a modification of the schedule for installation 

charges. 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

The fee for service that's charged for installation of telephones 

in rural or urban areas is a very, very small fraction of the real 

cost.  It's highly subsidized and we must move forward to try to 

reach more compensatory rates.  We'll do it on a more gradual 

scale. 

 

I think that one of the reasons for this is the actions towards 

deregulation that the federal counterparts of the members 

opposite are foisting upon us.  That is the reason for these 

increases.  I think that the members opposite could join us, join 

us in prevailing upon the federal government to abandon their 

plans for deregulation in the telephone industry.  That would 

benefit all the telephone consumers in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Chairman, to the same minister.  Is 

she recommending to the people of Saskatchewan that they 

then hold off on getting their telephones connected?  Or will 

she be providing them with a rebate for those that have already 

had to pay these exorbitant fees? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Chairman, to go back in history 

some time, it was always, always the practice for SaskTel to 

charge the . . . to engage contractors and to charge the entire 

cost of installation to the consumer. 

 

In the 1980s when it became desirable because of new 

equipment for SaskTel to go to automated switching, to try to 

make . . . to give access to the rural residents of this province to 

high-quality telecommunication service so that they could have 

answering machines and fax machines, the individual line 

service was instituted, which gave a highly subsidized rate of 

$192. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Access to Cable TV Systems 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the minister responsible for SaskTel, with regards to cable TV, 

Madam Minister.  Some small towns have been given 

permission, Madam Minister, to retransmit TV signals in their 

communities.  This is granted through CRTC (Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission).  One 

in particular now would like to operate this service as a locally 

owned co-op, rather than as an individual. 

 

Now WI Cable from Edmonton provides a cable service in that 

community at the present time and has agreed to the transfer.  

However the CRTC is now refusing on the grounds that 

SaskTel is objecting.  Why would this be, Madam Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm not aware of this 

particular case.  But I would point out the CRTC is a federal 

regulatory body.  There has not been a public hearing held in 

respect of this particular case that the 

member opposite raises.  So whether or not SaskTel has raised 

an objection, they wouldn't have had an opportunity to do that 

formally because CRTC has not ordered a hearing. 

 

But I would say with respect to cable communications in rural 

Saskatchewan, that the recent investment of SaskTel in 

regional cable systems is a signal to rural Saskatchewan that 

SaskTel is interested in access by rural people to modern 

telecommunications. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, I 

detect a vagueness in your answer, and I want to assure you 

that while SaskTel may not have gone on any kind of a public 

record, I am on public record here today to notify you about 

this problem.  And we would like you to do something about it. 

 

I'll ask you straight-out: will you write to the CRTC and inform 

them that SaskTel has no interest in stopping a small 

community from running a co-op as opposed to a 

privately-owned transmission station?  That's simply what 

they've asked to do and I see no reason why SaskTel should be 

interfering.  If they are perceived to be interfering, would you 

straighten that matter out by writing a letter and correcting that 

situation? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, if the member opposite 

is prepared to provide me with the details of this particular 

case, and in particular the name of the town and the area, we 

might be able to be more precise in addressing it.  But I would 

point out that these operations are strictly under the control of 

CRTC which is a federal body appointed . . . membership 

appointed by the federal government, and Saskatchewan or 

SaskTel, which is not regulated as yet by CRTC, have 

absolutely no jurisdiction in this area. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Supplementary to 

the same minister: Madam Minister, I think you will realize 

that even though there isn't a formal position by SaskTel, the 

reality of life is that they would be recognized as a major 

player and any inference from them that they might be . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I'd like to ask the member from 

Prince Albert -- wherever -- Northcote, Prince Albert Northcote 

. . . I'd like to -- it's been so long since he has interrupted, I 

forgot the seat that he was from. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Probably if he showed up more often, you'd 

have more trouble with him. 

 

My question, Madam Minister, if I could get back to it, is 

whether or not first of all SaskTel is going to get involved in 

the cable TV business.  That would be, I think, one of the 

questions that people would ask naturally from your answers 

here today. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

And we also would suggest to you, as I was getting around to 

it, that if people perceive that SaskTel is getting into the 

business, they might not necessarily have to just come out and 

say that they want . . . or they might even make that suggestion 

impromptu, or in some way not official.  And that would stop 

the process of individual towns being able to continue with 

their rebroadcasting. 

 

So I think it's time, with all this confusion, that you do 

straighten this matter out, and I ask that you do that.  And I will 

give you the name of the town after this question period is 

over.  So could you answer that.  Is the TV business going to 

be the next priority of SaskTel? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry that there's 

confusion on the other side of the House, because there's no 

confusion on this side. 

 

And we've made it very clear and we were very proud to 

announce approximately a month ago the acquisition of 29.9 

per cent of Regional Cable Systems by SaskTel to ensure and 

to expand upon opportunities for rural Saskatchewan to have 

access to cable television through that system; and to have 

access to other means of communications including their fibre 

optics, which is a commitment to rural Saskatchewan, to access 

in rural Saskatchewan to modern telecommunications. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Rural Gasification Program 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 

for SaskEnergy responsible for natural gas. 

 

As the minister knows, when governments changed like they 

did in 1982 and 1991, there's sometimes a change of programs.  

And as we all know, that this government put the skids right to 

rural Saskatchewan when they ceased to fund people with a 

proper program for the natural gas program.  So I'd like to ask 

the minister:  will you inform us at what date did you cease to 

honour the commitments under the other program -- at budget 

time or at election time last fall or whenever, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to 

the member that what we did as one of the first items on our 

agenda was to put the skids to the privatization of SaskEnergy, 

that you people had on the works. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 

member opposite that the rural gas program, which the 

members opposite had put in place, was obviously very, very 

expensive for the taxpayers and consumers of gas in 

Saskatchewan.  It was costing as much as $12,000 per 

connection to the taxpayers in the rest of the province. 

 

And it was decided with the $14 billion debt that had been 

burdened on the people of Saskatchewan, that program simply 

couldn't be connected.  The program that is in place now for 

rural Saskatchewan gives a subsidy of $1,000 per connection 

by other taxpayers in the province for each connection that is 

made.  That's universal 

throughout the province.  And I think most farm families 

appreciate very much the subsidy that goes into the connection 

of gas from other taxpayers across the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, as usual the minister did not 

answer the question.  We knew, everybody in Saskatchewan 

knew, that you put the skids to every good program in this 

province.  Broke contracts.  You done it. 

 

But my question was, Mr. Minister . . . and I'd like to just for a 

second explain an example.  We have constituents . . . I have 

two constituents -- I'll use that example, Mr. Minister -- where 

they had an application in and accepted, had an application in 

and was accepted for rural gas prior to the election.  After the 

election they withdrew his application and he was no longer 

able to get any funding from the old program. 

 

My question was, Mr. Minister: when did you cease to honour 

those applications?  That's my question.  When did you cease 

to honour . . . or have you yet? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I say again that the 

ten-year program, when it came to an end last fall, was not 

renewed.  The simple fact was it was a ten-year program.  It 

came to an end. 

 

And because of the huge deficit -- the huge deficit that you 

know a great deal about, having been a minister in that 

government and made some of the very, very bad decisions that 

led to the $14 billion debt -- was the reason why the program 

couldn't be renewed and carried on.  It was the massive debt, 

both in the SaskEnergy Crown corporation and in the rest of 

government. 

 

Had you not left the burden of debt on the people of the 

province many programs could have been continued on.  But 

because of the waste and mismanagement of yourself as a 

member of the Treasury Board and of the member from 

Estevan, the great deal of waste and mismanagement, 

obviously people have to pay for it, and one of the programs 

that couldn't be continued was the rural gas program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, to the Minister: we know that 

program was in place and you know it, by about 1983 on.  And 

my question is not about your new policy.  I'm not questioning 

your new policy.  I'm asking you: if an individual has an 

application approved and in place prior to the election, are you 

honouring those applications under the old program or are you 

still . . . are you going to rip them off and let them pay your big 

price?  I want to know what day you ceased to honour the 

applications. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Well the member opposite, when he 

laughs at the end of the question, I guess shows how serious he 

is.  The fact that this question . . . this question has been raised 

by the public for the last nine months, has been raised by the 

members of our caucus for the last nine months, and has been 

explained, shows how serious you are about it, when you wait 

nine months 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

before you bring it to the Assembly. 

 

You're a joke.  And the question that you're asking, my friend, 

has been put to us many, many times by people who are much 

more serious about the issue.  The issue is that the program 

ended when it ran out, by your design, after 10 years.  It ended.  

It wasn't renewed. 

 

Now I want to tell the member clearly that the plan that is in 

place allows for a $1,000 subsidy -- a $1,000 subsidy for every 

connection that is made.  Your plan ran out that gave huge 

subsidies.  The new plan gives $1,000 for any connection that 

takes place anywhere in the province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1445) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

 

The Chair: -- Will the minister please introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm pleased to introduce on 

my right, Bill McLaren, the acting assistant deputy minister of 

the Department of Highways and Transportation and chairman 

of the Highway Traffic Board; and behind Bill, Dave Abbey, 

the manager of the legislation and safety branch and the 

legislative officer for the Department of Highways and 

Transportation. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

have been looking through Bill 40 and I will ask you and your 

officials to try to clarify for us exactly where your intentions 

are leading in this Bill. 

 

We'll go right back to the start here, I guess.  It says first of all, 

this is an Act cited as The Highway Traffic Amendment Act.  

And that I guess is clear enough to us. 

 

We go down to section 3 here.  Subsection 2(1) is amended by 

adding the following clause.  Before I go into the 

clause-by-clause description, Mr. Minister, maybe you'd like to 

just get up and give us an explanation of it, and you might be 

able to able to cut off a lot of my questions that way. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there are really four 

changes contemplated here in this housekeeping amendment.  

In section 77 it deals with the wearing of seat-belts, one, to 

clarify that seat-belts are to be worn over the shoulder and not 

in any other fashion, the shoulder straps. And the other is that 

there can be exemptions relative to the wearing of seat-belts for 

small children. 

 

The second feature is that in section 79 that if one registers a 

vehicle by wheelbase, then there is a weight limit beyond 

which one cannot go.  If one wants to load a vehicle beyond the 

weight limit of 5,000 kilograms, then the vehicle ought to be 

registered by weight. 

The third feature is the one that's received probably the most 

public attention; it has to do with the . . . well, the third feature 

is the housekeeping one in the section 81.8 and we'll deal with 

that.  It's simply a cross-referencing error in the Act. 

 

Section 93 is the change with respect to restoring the ability to 

charge the owner of a vehicle if an offence is committed and a 

driver is not identified. 

 

This has arisen . . . it has been a piece of legislation for a long 

time that, in fact, one can charge the owner of a vehicle.  That 

was struck down several years ago because one could end up in 

jail as a result of a traffic offence even though you may not 

have been driving the vehicle and committing the offence.  So 

this change removes the ability for an owner to go to jail as a 

result of an offence and provides that the owner of the vehicle 

can be charged. 

 

This accomplishes a couple of things for people who've had 

concerns.  One is it reduces the necessity for high-speed chases 

when one can identify the vehicle.  It also conveniences the 

enforcement of the law for school bus drivers who often cannot 

identify the drivers of vehicles offending the requirement to 

stop when a bus is loading or unloading. 

 

So we have had, as the members opposite may be aware . . . 

there was some concern expressed in the press that the car 

rental agencies were concerned.  We met with that agency, 

with the representative organization of the car rental agencies, 

and they are happy and satisfied with the provisions of the Bill. 

 

And the fourth item is in section 97 and it simply provides that 

portable scales can be used in enforcing the law, that they are 

legal.  And it was believed to be important that that be 

established. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, I'll deal with the last portion 

first here because I think the point has to be made here that 

portable scales have been found as not a legal, binding method 

of enforcing a law by judges. 

 

And apparently in my understanding, judges made that 

determination, that you couldn't prosecute someone on the 

basis of information you arrived at from a portable scale 

because they weren't dependable.  Why would those scales 

suddenly become dependable now that you make a law saying 

that they are legal to use in a court of law?  Why would the 

judges' determination there, Mr. Minister, suddenly be wrong?  

If they weren't reliable before, why will they now be reliable? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the case where in fact the 

results from a portable scale were not used, the reason was that 

there was no authority in the Act to use the results from a 

portable scale, even though within The Highways and 

Transportation Act there is provision for the use of portable 

scales.  So The Highway Traffic Act is now being amended to 

make provision for the use of portable scales.  It was only as a 

result of the fact that there was no provision for the use of 

portable scales in the Act that that court case was lost. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Is there any testing system that's going to 

prove that these portable scales are accurate? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we don't have the detail of 

the testing of the portable scales here, but there are procedures 

for determining their accuracy and those are presentable in 

court.  If a person who is charged with an offence challenges 

the reading on a portable scale, then the evidence with respect 

to the scale being used would have to be presented in court, and 

the decision would be made there relative to the currency of the 

confirmation of the scale reading. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I think that's small 

comfort to somebody that gets picked up, has a truck weighed 

on a portable scale that he would possibly know wasn't 

accurate because he may have had his truck weighed 

somewhere else.  If there is no process where he can demand 

on the spot that that truck be weighed on a different, legal 

scale, what possible chance would he ever have to win a case in 

court? 

 

He should have that opportunity to say:  I don't agree with your 

portable scale; I will voluntarily allow my vehicle to be 

weighed on a legally balanced scale in the closest town or at 

the closest weigh station where the scales are not portable. 

 

I take note, Mr. Minister, of the fact that most portable scales 

that I've seen have printed on them a simple statement -- not 

legal for trade.  Why would your portable scales be any better 

than anybody else's? 

 

And are you going to provide that appeal process for 

individuals who believe that they are being falsely accused by a 

portable scale that might have been dropped or somehow 

wrecked as a result of . . . if they happen to be digital read 

_outs, maybe they come into contact with a magnetic field in a 

vehicle, generator, or something like that might be producing 

electrical outputs or whatever happens, and may have wrecked 

the ability of these machines to work accurately.  So what 

provision is there for people to say: I don't believe this scale is 

right; I want to have another opinion? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the provision for testing 

with portable scales is based on the confirmed accuracy of 

scales.  If a person is charged and goes to court and challenges 

the accuracy of the scale, it is up to the Crown to demonstrate 

that the scale is accurate, not up to the person charged to 

demonstrate that it is not.  So that the person is protected in that 

regard.  The practice within the department, however, is to 

offer people the choice that you asked for.  While it's not stated 

in the Act, the practice in fact is that if a person is not happy 

with the scale reading from a portable scale, that they have the 

choice in practice of going to a stationary scale to have a 

reading confirmed. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the law wasn't there 

before allowing portable scales to be legal evidence and 

therefore if a charge was to be made, they automatically had to 

take the vehicle in and have it weighed on a legally-balanced 

scale.  Now you're making a law that 

provides that you don't have to take a vehicle to a legal scale.  

You can do it with this portable scale that everybody has 

recognized for years are not accurate. 

 

These highway scales are nothing new.  They've been out there 

for many, many years.  Back as far as I can remember, people 

have had portable scales underneath their vehicles to spot 

check for weights.  When a spot check has been done in the 

past, automatically if it was a quite a ways over, they took that 

vehicle then and weighed it in a town or at a weigh scale on a 

highway where the scales were legally balanced and properly 

checked on a timely basis. 

 

You are now changing the law.  You are now changing the 

requirement to protect people against your law, from being 

falsely used or mistakenly used perhaps even.  It might be 

nobody's fault whatsoever.  The thing might just get bumped or 

banged out of whack, and somebody could end up paying a 

huge fine without any recourse. 

 

And I'm saying to you, why not put an amendment in that 

people have the option to choose to have their vehicle, if they 

are significantly over the weight restriction, they have the 

option at the site to choose to go to a weigh scale that is 

properly balanced on a highway or go to a grain elevator or 

some place where scales are known to be 

government-inspected and government-checked. 

 

The Chair: -- Before the minister answers, I wonder if we 

could have the co-operation of other members of the House.  

It's difficult at times to hear the person putting the question 

when other members are carrying on their conversations. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the issue is 

complicated mildly by the fact that what the member opposite 

is asking for is already provided for in The Highways and 

Transportation Act where the person may be charged for 

exceeding legal weight limits on the highway.  In The Highway 

Traffic Act that we're here discussing, it is only the 

introduction of evidence relative to a person carrying more 

weight than that for which the vehicle is registered. 

 

So the provision here provides for the introduction of the 

certificate from a portable weigh scale into court for the 

purpose of that narrow application.  The person being stopped 

on a highway has the right to, under The Highways and 

Transportation Act, in fact access a stationary scale, as the 

member opposite suggests. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, supposing that some 

official with his portable scale stops a truck-load of wheat and 

weighs it, finds him to be overweight, and charges him with 

being under-registered on his licence, which is now The 

Highway Traffic Act that you are just amending, and puts the 

pinch on him and says, that's good enough for me today; I don't 

want to fine you for any more. 

 

So he doesn't invoke The Highways and Transportation Act, 

which is overloading of the vehicle for the highway, and 

doesn't take him in to get him weighed.  He's simply going to 

charge him with the one charge which is the fact that he's not 

properly licensed. 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

But the individual says to himself, I don't think this is right; I'll 

take this load to town and get it weighed in the elevator on a 

government-inspected scale.  And he finds that there was an 

error.  How is he going to save now paying this weight 

restriction on his licence fine?  What evidence is he going to 

use to convince the court that there's been an error made? 

 

If the official . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, I'll put it 

out to you in simple language.  One of your members seems to 

not be able to understand what we're doing.  He thinks we 

should follow a trail of wheat to the elevator.  And that might 

be appropriate for some folks in this Assembly to find their 

way that way.  Maybe they could feel along on the ground with 

their fingers and track it down that way. 

 

But the reality here is, Mr. Minister, that there's a good chance 

that the law could in fact be abused, not through intent but 

through neglect of the scales or accident of the scales being out 

of whack.  There is a great potential I see in this particular Bill 

allowing for things to happen that are not fair to the general 

public. 

 

And I would think that it would have been quite simple if you 

already have in The Highways and Transportation Act . . . for 

those kinds of fines that pertain to the destruction of the road 

itself from overweight, if it's in that Act that you have the 

ability to ask to go to another scale for a double-check, it 

similarly should be as easy to write into The Highway Traffic 

Act the same right. 

 

Why would you not provide an amendment to this Highway 

Traffic Act that would allow people the choice of saying, I 

don't agree with your portable scale; can we have it verified at 

a legal scale in town or at a highway station?  Why would that 

be such a great hardship for the department? 

 

The official would then go along.  He would be the same one 

that read the portable scale.  He would also watch the manager 

of the other scale perform the duties and verify one way or the 

other whether he was right or wrong. 

 

It would be a simple matter then to take that weigh, say from a 

grain elevator . . . again the elevator agent could sign a slip 

saying that he was the one that was the weigh master.  Or the 

person that runs the weigh scale on the highway who is in 

charge of that scale would simply sign the slip as the weigh 

master there, saying that this is the weight on such and such a 

day of such and such a vehicle with registration numbers and 

licence numbers.  There could be no confusion whatsoever.  

And it would absolutely be guaranteed that a person would 

have that opportunity to have these portable scales checked that 

most often won't be defective, but in all fairness, can be 

defective and often might be. 

 

And so I'm suggesting, Mr. Minister, that you explain to us 

why it would be such a great tragedy to include that in this Bill. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the departmental officials 

inform me that it's . . . that other than it not being seen to be 

required, would neither be a change in practice nor such an 

inconvenience.  The suggestion is 

that the present highways and traffic Act does provide for that 

option.  That the person being charged does not have to do 

anything more than challenge the certificate as introduced in 

court.  If the enforcing officer cannot demonstrate the accuracy 

to the satisfaction of the court, of the portable scale, the person 

would not be found guilty according to the charges.  And the . . 

. say the instructions, according to the department, that goes to 

the officers, is in fact if a person wants to access the scale, they 

would be given that right. 

 

If it would be acceptable to the members opposite, if accepting 

that that is the practice, I would ask the department to review 

that for the next legislative session to make sure that's clear and 

there is no points being missed there. 

 

But it's my understanding that the persons charged are not 

disadvantaged, because if in fact the officer cannot demonstrate 

the accuracy of the scale, according to the weights given, then 

the charges cannot be carried forward.  That in practice, people 

who are charged are in fact given the right to access the scale. 

 

And we would review what amendments would be necessary in 

a different part of the Act in order to put into The Highway 

Traffic Act the provisions which are presently in The 

Highways and Transportation Act.  That, as you request, it's 

simply not apparently a simple amendment, and in practice that 

is what's being done at the moment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I appreciate that 

approach.  And I think in all fairness that might be as far as you 

could go with correcting the problem.  So I'll just take another 

minute though to outline the problem a little bit more detailed 

for your officials so that they will in fact know that this is not 

something that . . . not seen to be required, might be required 

and should be required. 

 

My point being this, that under the highway transportation Act, 

in order to be fined you would have to be overloaded on the 

first square-inch width of tire.  I guess they have a metric term 

for that now, but I think we understand what we're talking 

about.  You in fact would have to be over your weight limit by 

that measurement in order to be found guilty of an offence 

under that Act.  Whereas you might be legally weighted for 

that Act and still be overweighted according to your 

registration on the vehicle, and you might be charged with that 

requirement, to have your licence show a higher weight and, 

correspondingly, a higher charge on your licence.  I guess that's 

how it works. 

 

But then you see the reality that if you're charged for your 

registration not being up to par, the highway transportation Act 

might not come into play.  Therefore the provisions in that Act 

that protect you and give you the right to a second-opinion 

scale would not apply in all cases to The Highway Traffic Act 

where you're simply having your registration challenged. 

 

And so it needs to be written into both Acts, as far as I can see, 

in order to cover all the bases for all individuals that might in 

fact feel that they need protection from the law itself.  And so 

there are times at which the two Acts don't 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

both work at the same time.  And that being the case, then both 

Acts have to protect individuals.  I hope I've made that clear 

enough so that your officials can understand what our concern 

is, is why people should have that right to a second check. 

 

It quite simply is a fact of life that portable scales do get 

bumped out, and I haven't seen one yet that is infallible.  And if 

there is such a scale, I'd really like to see it. 

 

And the statement that you make that you could take that scale 

and have it checked by challenging it in court, doesn't work too 

well for me either because I'm pretty sure you wouldn't have 

just one set of scales in the province.  I think you most likely 

would have several scales.  You might even have several 

hundreds of scales.  And unless they were numbered and the 

individual actually took down the numbers off the scales to be 

able to legally identify them and have somebody verify that he 

legally identified those particular scales as the one that did the 

weighing, then how would you ever find out which scales this 

person, through the court system, wanted to have checked or 

verified? 

 

So that runs into that problem.  So that all those kinds of 

problems I see as being alleviated by writing in there the 

provision in both Acts that you have the right to go to a second 

opinion right at the time of the infraction or the alleged 

infraction . . . 

 

If you'd like to comment a bit further on that aspect of it, then 

I'd like to carry on to another part of the Bill 

 

(1515) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, I appreciate the comments of the 

member opposite in that regard.  I think in the mean time, as 

we're reviewing this in the department, I think the interests of 

the public are safeguarded by the fact that the questions the 

member asks hopefully are questions that a judge hearing a 

case would expect the Crown to demonstrate or the officer to 

demonstrate before he accepted in fact that a weight was 

accurate. 

 

He would have to be convinced that a particular scale was in 

the . . . was being used by a particular officer and that it had 

gone through appropriate checking and had not been . . . and 

was in fact reliable at the time.  That's the expectation that I 

have, going through the official's description of the way that's 

prosecuted.  But we will carry that discussion forward in the 

department.  I appreciate it being raised. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Again, I'm glad 

that you're going to take a look at this problem because there 

are other considerations that could come out of this.  For 

example, you could end up having a judge put in a position of 

having to debate actually a Bill in law within his court the way 

you've stated it.  And I don't know that they have that 

jurisdiction or if they'd want to put themselves out on that kind 

of a limb, to be able to do that. 

 

So I think it would be much better if the Bill were written so 

that judges wouldn't be put into that kind of a sort of a boxed-in 

situation where they would be trying to determine whose scales 

did the weighing or who did the 

weighing or which numbered scales were used and all these 

variables. 

 

The other consideration of course that comes to mind is that 

these scales might be out of order one day and they might have 

periodic checks, and maybe they're readjusted and by time an 

individual is fined or receives a ticket out on the road and the 

time that he ends up in court to plead his case, those scales by 

normal, routine maintenance might have been readjusted or 

fixed.  And so then you lose the effect of having a guarantee. 

 

Okay, the other possibility to relieve some of this problem 

would be that, immediately for the moment I would suggest 

that you might instruct your officers who would be using this 

particular law to put the numbers of the scales on the scales and 

have those placed on any document, fine order, or whatever 

you would call it, that would be used to summons a person to 

court.  And that might alleviate some of the problem at the 

moment.  And that could be, I think, a directive without an 

amendment.  And that might be of some help to you. 

 

I want to back up through the Bill.  You said yourself a few 

minutes ago that there were concerns about the way that the 

charges will be laid against owners of vehicles in this Bill.  

And I think we expressed some concern about that and, as 

you've mentioned, the media has shown some interest in the 

possibility of things happening here that in the past have been 

questioned as to whether or not they're fair to individuals.  Who 

should have the responsibility for a vehicle?  And I expect that 

there have probably been debates in this House many times in 

years gone by about who should accept the responsibility for 

whose actions, or someone else's actions I guess, as we're going 

to say in this situation. 

 

The problem is, and I'm sure you're aware of this, Mr. Minister, 

that this Bill allows the police simply to take down a licence 

number and write a ticket for an offence to the owner.  If that in 

fact happens, it places an awful lot of responsibility on people 

that forces them to take actions that will be very unusual and 

very unnecessary in a lot of cases.  But it's going to be a lot of 

expense and a lot of trouble. 

 

For example, one of your children takes a vehicle out of your 

yard and you are pretty sure that that's where the vehicle went, 

but you couldn't absolutely guarantee it.  In order to protect 

yourself from prosecution or from any repercussions through 

this particular amendment to the law, you would immediately 

have to get on the phone and report that vehicle stolen. 

 

I suggest you might have 50,000 vehicles a day in 

Saskatchewan that are being used by high school children that 

the fathers are going to have to now phone in and report them 

stolen in order to protect themselves against prosecution if one 

of these school children happens to have a buddy that decides 

to take it for a spin around the block and rhubarbs it into a 

telephone pole or passes a school bus while it's in a loading 

zone.  Now there's something . . . an infraction that nobody 

should ever allow to happen, but we happen to know that it's 

one that occurs far too frequently. 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

So what I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is that this law places an 

unreasonable amount of pressure on the owner of a vehicle, and 

in past it has been seen as reasonable not to do that.  Vehicles 

have been around for a long, long time.  Discussions of this 

nature have been around for a long, long time. 

 

All of a sudden we've determined that the owner of the vehicle 

should be charged with whatever happened, simply to alleviate 

the officials who happen to be the police force, either RCMP 

(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) or city police force in the 

city, wherever they might happen to be, to relieve them of the 

responsibility of definitely identifying who committed an 

infraction.  In other words, for expediency of speed and ease of 

operation of their jobs, we are going to waive the rights of 

individuals in this country through this Bill. 

 

Now it may not be as horrendous as some situations where the 

rights under law are removed.  I don't expect that anybody will 

ever be sent to the gallows as a result of this particular Bill.  

But certainly the financial responsibility that could result from 

law suits could bankrupt many, many people in many, many 

circumstances. 

 

And I think I could point out a hundred examples of different 

accidents that could occur where individuals might be found 

responsible because they happen to have owned the vehicle that 

was involved in that particular crash and didn't report it stolen 

in time, and they would be in a lot of trouble. 

 

So explain to me, Mr. Minister, how these kinds of concerns 

can now be alleviated where they couldn't be in the past 50 

years of motor vehicle driving in Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Act as it's been 

amended is in exactly the same format as it has been for the last 

30-plus years.  The provision that's being now added . . . 

because the Act as it had stood for 30 years was struck down 

under the provision of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, that 

a person could go to jail for such an offence.  And so the Act 

has now simply been amended to clarify that you cannot go to 

jail. 

 

In every other respect the Act is in exactly the same format that 

it has been in the past 30 years, and in the similar format to that 

in other provinces in the country in order that reasonable 

enforcement can take place. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, when we first started this 

discussion, you started off by giving us a brief outline of what 

was in the Bill.  And when you did that you said, this is just a 

housekeeping Bill.  And I expected half the folks that were 

watching TV all around in the TV land around us probably 

went and shut their sets off and said, well if we're going to talk 

about housekeeping, why bother listening. 

 

But now we're into this debate for about 30 minutes or so, and 

we've already discovered that the last part of the Bill has 

definite potential to discriminate against some folks. 

 

And you yourself have said that you're going to look at 

that possibility and make some recommendations to change 

that at the next sitting, or whenever we come back to this 

Assembly.  So it's no longer housekeeping. 

 

We find as we go into this thing little by little and a bit more, 

that it becomes a bit more complicated and there may be a little 

bit more written into these words than meets the eye on the 

surface. 

 

In other words, it's no longer a question of housekeeping, it 

now becomes the construction of absolute laws that are 

required the public to become aware of so that they know how 

to live their lives in our society. 

 

These are not housekeeping matters when you have to change 

the way that you typically have used your vehicles, especially 

in Saskatchewan where we are so dependent on motor vehicles 

for our transportation, and almost anyone who goes anywhere 

has to have some kind of a motor-driven vehicle. 

 

You brought up the question of the constitutional question.  

Who is responsible for individuals' actions -- the individual, the 

property owner, or who?  And these are the kind of questions 

that are raised here. 

 

Now you say that you're changing the Act so that people don't 

have to go to jail.  And that's probably good.  I'm not so sure 

that in a hundred per cent of the cases that that would even 

apply either. But there are certainly a lot of other ramifications 

to this amendment that suggest to me that it wouldn't quite be 

the same as it was before. 

 

Now I don't have a copy of the old Bill, but it just doesn't augur 

true to the kind of suggestions that have been made to me by 

people that have I've discussed this Bill with, both on the 

telephone from concerned constituents throughout the province 

as well as our own folks within our own caucus and our 

research people. 

 

So I'm suggesting to you that there may be more to this than 

what your answer reflected.  And I want you to tell me, I guess 

to start with on this constitutional question, who do you think is 

responsible for the actions of individuals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Excuse me.  I didn't catch exactly the full 

last sentence, if you could repeat it.  I was discussing another 

part of the Bill here. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- The actions of individuals is the 

constitutional question.  Who is responsible for the actions of 

an individual? -- the owner of the vehicle in this case, because 

we're talking about motor vehicles?  Who's responsible for the 

action of the individual that commits the crime?  The owner of 

the vehicle?  In part of this we refer to the possibility of three 

parties being involved. That would be a second party that 

would perhaps have taken the vehicle originally and then sublet 

it to another third party. 

 

Who is really responsible in your opinion for what ultimately 

happens in the end?  It is a constitutional question. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- While the officials are looking for 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

legal quotes if they have them with them, I would like to issue 

an alert to the province to turn their television sets back on so I 

can clarify what seemed to be misunderstood a minute ago. 

 

I don't believe and hopefully did not say that this Act was 

housekeeping.  I was listing the four significant points and 

went by the fifth one, which was a housekeeping amendment 

which is section 81.8, and because it had been housekeeping I 

glanced over it.  And I said the third point is item section 93, 

and then I counted down the page. 

 

I said no, the third item is a housekeeping amendment, section 

81.8, a provision that corrects a cross-referencing error.  And 

then I went to the fourth item which is section 93, which we are 

now discussing.  I believe that's how I described it, but I 

wanted to make sure that that was clear, that I had not tried to 

suggest that the amendments to this Act were housekeeping. 

 

With respect to the concerns about the appropriateness, the 

members in the previous government introduced the same 

piece of legislation.  It died on the order paper.  The provisions 

of the legislation introduced by the members opposite in the 

previous session were identical, and so I presume that in fact 

there ought to be some comfort with it since it must have been 

carried through the caucus of the members opposite when they 

were in government. 

 

The other, I think, demonstration that the Act in fact has not 

provided any concerns, is that the . . . is for the 31 years that 

the Act has been in place, that there have not been any great 

miscarriages of justice under it, that in fact it does provide that 

the owner of a vehicle is responsible for the operation of that 

vehicle, and that if someone else is driving the vehicle, all the 

owner has to do is identify who in fact was driving it. But the 

owner remains responsible for the driving of their vehicle.  So 

it is provided in the Act that the driver and the owner are liable. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, how long has it been that the 

RCMP or police could charge an individual without getting 

him to sign the document that the police give them on the 

charge and provide that as evidence in a court, when now it 

doesn't have to be -- as I read this Bill -- it doesn't have to be 

signed because all they have to do is submit it and then send 

them the bill?  How long has it been since that has been in 

place? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I maybe need clarification 

on the process here.  Maybe the member opposite hasn't had a 

speeding ticket for a while.  I don't believe it's a requirement 

that the person receiving the ticket sign it now.  And I don't 

think . . . it's not my understanding that it has been recently. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Okay then what constituted the right of an 

individual, the owner of the vehicle, if someone else was 

driving it.  Could you do it before, just pick the licence number 

off, send him the bill later?  How long has that been in 

existence? 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, it has been for 30-plus 

years, the circumstance that if you have committed an offence, 

and you are observed by an enforcement officer committing an 

offence, that they would then serve you with a summons and 

request your appearance in court.  Or if there was a provision 

for voluntary payment, that would be an option that you would 

have at that time. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- That's right.  If they saw me driving a vehicle 

in a dangerous driving or a hit and run or whatever . . . If they 

saw me then they would send me the bill.  Now as I understand 

this, you're going to send the owner of the car the bill.  Is that 

new?  Then why have not the police forces been able to do that 

up to this point?  Or why haven't they practised doing that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- That is not new.  I think the owner of the 

vehicle would be served with the summons.  If the owner were 

to identify someone else as the driver, then that process would 

carry forward to make sure that the charge was appropriately 

laid.  And this is . . . Until 1987, when it was struck down 

under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms on the grounds that 

you could end up in jail, this was carried on, and will, after 

these amendments, again be carried on as it is carried on in 

other provinces. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well I don't believe that there should be a law 

that says that if I'm sitting in my rocking-chair in my home 

watching television, and someone is using my vehicle and has a 

hit and run, or a dangerous driving, that I should be charged.  

And I don't understand how you have gotten away with not 

having this brought before the charter before '87.  Taking the 

fact that you put them in jail is not going to remedy the 

problem as it relates to the charter.  And that was what the 

judge brought down, but that's not the only part of that that's 

going to cause a problem in relation to the charter.  You have 

to have that individual have the freedom to be heard in a court 

of law.  And he wasn't at the scene of the incident occurring. 

 

So you have to describe to me a little bit more fully what you 

anticipate and how this is going to work. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 

believes that this kind of legislation should not be in place, then 

he's had a change in heart in the last year because last year he 

introduced legislation making the same clarification in the law 

in the House.  Or his government did. 

 

The process that would be followed would be that the 

summons would be served on the owner of the vehicle, as it has 

been for the last 30-plus years.  And if the owner identified 

someone else as the driver, then the other driver would be 

pursued.  And this is a law that is found to expedite the 

appropriate enforcement of good driving and safety for people 

on the highways, and it's a provision that the members 

opposite, as recently as a year ago, introduced into the 

legislature. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Now, Mr. Chairman, I was recently visiting 

with a number of RCMP on this, and after this goes through, it 

will be the first time that they will be able to do that.  That's 

what they told me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I'm just 

telling you what they told me.  Okay?  And so I'm telling you 

that if they could have done it for the last 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

25 or 30 years, as you're indicating, why weren't they doing it? 

 

The concern that I have is now you're going to start issuing 

tickets on the basis of an individual not being at the scene of 

the incident, and he is going to get a summons, and he doesn't 

know anything about it.  And that's the concern that I have. 

 

And I could list you a number of cases where those kinds of 

things have happened.  And the individual, because it was 

recorded at the time, was not the owner of the vehicle where 

the incident occurred -- the accident or the misdemeanour of a 

traffic violation.  And so I want to know when this started, 

because the Mounties are telling me that it's going to start when 

you get this through. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, if the member opposite 

checks the legislation, our officials don't have the exact year of 

the introduction of that measure but it is in excess of 30 years 

that it has been in place.  It may be possible that the police 

officers with whom you spoke have graduated recently, since 

that provision was not used because the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms had come in the way of the enforcement because of 

the possibility that someone could go to jail. 

 

Clearly there must have been charges laid or the challenge 

would not have been begun that struck . . . that caused it to no 

longer be used since 1987.  But the facts are that, the officials 

tell me, that in excess of 30 years this provision has been in 

place in the manner in which it will again be able to be used. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I guess I'm going to raise it from this 

perspective, Mr. Minister.  Don't you see the problem occurring 

. . . Now let's take an example of someone driving my vehicle 

past a bus that has the flashing lights on and hits someone and 

then leaves the scene of the accident.  I'm the first one that is 

notified on the basis of that, that I have had criminal action 

intended on me.  They don't have to catch the . . . stop the 

vehicle.  They don't have to apprehend the individual that did 

it. 

 

When do I have my day in court to determine that I wasn't there 

doing it?  And that's what we're getting at in this section here.  

We don't understand why that has to be.  It needs to be the 

individual apprehended. 

 

If I have my son or my daughter or a friend who is staying in 

my home going by and steal something out of the store, they 

don't come to me to apprehend me for that violation.  They go 

to the individual who did it. 

 

In a driver's licence you have the legal right to drive a vehicle 

and I don't know where you should ever have the responsibility 

of your vehicle when someone else is driving it. 

 

And I can cite you case after case.  If you've got teenage and 

older kids that are there, you could have your vehicle driven by 

10 different people on a given evening.  And that is the concern 

that we have and we want you to understand that we have that 

concern. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the Act has not yet 

been changed in that regard.  The Act continues to say what the 

Act has said for in excess of 30 years.  So this is through the 10 

years of the member opposite's government.  He gets rather 

excited about it now, but in the time of his government the Act 

said what it says now.  The amendments that are introduced to 

say that you cannot go to jail for it is a new provision that 

clarifies the use of the Act in law enforcement. 

 

But let me read the Act as it's stated and has been stated for a 

long time: 

 

 The holder of a certificate of registration or registration 

permit of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is liable for a 

violation of this Act or the regulations, unless he proves to 

the satisfaction of the court that at the time of the offence the 

vehicle was not being operated by him, nor by any other 

person with his consent, express or implied. 

 

That is a very old provision.  And the feigned offence of the 

members opposite about something that's been in there for 30 

years is remarkable. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, the point is that we didn't 

get everything done in 10 years that we had intended to do.  

And if we would have been there another 10 years, we 

probably would have got some of this stuff straightened out.  

Having given that, now I'm here and I'm asking you to fix it 

and make it right. 

 

This is my question.  If the charter said you couldn't go to jail 

as a punishment, why would you have . . . because of charter 

application, why is a fine any different than going to a jail?  If 

you can't be sent to jail, then why can you be fined for the same 

crime? 

 

That's the question we have.  And that underlines all of the 

discussion that we've got here right now. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, not only did the members 

opposite accept the Act as it was for 10 years, and I'm sure that 

the Highways ministers before me knew perfectly well of the 

provisions in the Act because they were being enforced under 

them, but they brought in the very same provision as is now 

being introduced so that people could not go to jail for the 

application of this Act. 

 

The fact is that one must be able to protect the interests of 

people on the highways.  If the member opposite has no 

concern for the violation of the Act with respect to school bus 

children, if the member opposite has no recognition of the fact 

that a school bus driver is not in a position to pursue to find out 

if Joan Smith or John Doe is driving a vehicle, if the member 

opposite believes that the law for the protection of children 

being served by a school bus system is valid, then there must 

be a way of enforcing the law. 

 

(1545) 

 

The member opposite may shake his head, but you can't have it 

both ways.  You can't protect the interests of innocent children 

who are being picked up in a school bus along the highway and 

ignore the violation by the person who is driving the vehicle for 

whom the 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

responsibility comes back to the owner.  If I own a vehicle, it is 

my responsibility to see to it that it is safely operated. 

 

And if in fact you do not trust the person that you may . . . that 

may be driving your vehicle, then I would suggest that you 

ought not to leave a vehicle in a position where somebody you 

don't trust could take it over.  It's clear that the law must be 

enforced.  And it's clear that the members opposite believed the 

law must be enforced for the last 10 years. 

 

And it's certainly my intent to continue with this legislation, to 

in fact clarify the law that says that the school bus drivers have 

the capacity to identify vehicles that disobey the law, so in fact 

that those kinds of offences and others on the highway can be 

properly attended to. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Minister, if a person using my car is 

caught for dangerous driving, which is in excess of 85 miles an 

hour or something like that -- I don't know what the kilometres 

are -- he gets put in jail.  Now, he's using my vehicle.  He's 

driving in excess of 85 miles an hour.  He gets put in jail.  Is 

that legal under the charter, according to the way you set this 

Bill up? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, dangerous driving is a 

criminal offence and this Act does not apply in that case. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there any cases where an action taken by a 

vehicle, a driver of a vehicle, that he would be put in jail?  Is 

hit and run a criminal offence as well in that case?  Could you 

give me that observation? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the hit and run is another 

criminal offence.  The circumstance under The Highway 

Traffic Act, there is no direct provision for going to jail.  It is 

only as a result of non-payment of a fine levied under The 

Highway Traffic Act where jail could be a possible outcome.  

And in fact with this amendment, it says you could not go to 

jail under this amendment that's brought here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Is there a process whereby an individual could 

take an individual who had not assumed the proper 

responsibility in driving my vehicle, is there a way that I can 

take him to court for suit and damages without having me tell a 

police officer that he stole the vehicle? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The provision, as explained to me by our 

officials, is that you do not have to declare the vehicle stolen, 

although if it is you can.  You simply have to identify who was 

driving the vehicle, and the police will pursue the person who 

was driving the vehicle. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- If they don't find that individual, then I have 

the responsibility of paying the fine.  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the circumstance the 

member opposite describes is one that could arise if the 

enforcing officer was not convinced by the explanation by the 

owner and there was no way of pursuing the alleged driver.  

There is, within the realm of possibility, the circumstance the 

member describes.  If I may read again from the Act: 

 

 The holder of a certificate of registration or 

registration permit of a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is 

liable for a violation of this Act or the regulations, unless he 

proves to the satisfaction of the court that at the time of the 

offence the vehicle was not being operated by him, nor by 

any other person with his consent, express or implied. 

 

So that the practice of the officers is in fact to follow your 

advice with respect to who was driving it.  If it seemed as 

though that led nowhere, there is a possibility that the owner in 

fact would end up paying the fine. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I will go to another item that was raised 

earlier.  And that deals with the portable scale scenario and you 

said that you would hope that the judge would have discretion.  

Well if the Bill says that he shall use a portable scale, then he 

will have to use a portable scale.  He doesn't have discretion.  

He doesn't have discretion under that. 

 

And I would say that you could not have any discretion.  If it 

says, portable scale can be used, he doesn't have . . .  You have 

to put it in here to allow discretion, if you want him to have 

discretion. 

 

I want to point out one other thing.  Under (a) 'stationary scale,' 

you say it has to be: 

 

 . . . bearing a date not more than one year prior to or 

subsequent to the date of the offence charged in the 

information or complaint, has been issued and signed or 

purports to have been signed by an inspector within the 

meaning of the Weights and Measures . . . 

 

You don't do that with the portable scale.  Which raises the 

question, why don't you?  Because you probably can't get it 

legalized for one year.  It probably can't be done.  And that's 

what the member from Maple Creek was raising here before.  

And it raises a concern on that basis. 

 

If the judge has made a decision prior to this that says, I'm not 

going to include a portable scale, and then you put it into the 

Bill that he has to, he doesn't have discretion.  So you need to 

either put discretion in there or allow an opportunity for 

discretion at some point. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the provision in the Act 

simply allows that a certificate stating the results of the test can 

be introduced into the court.  The judge continues to be the 

person who must judge the quality of the evidence.  And if 

there is doubt, if it cannot be demonstrated that the weight is 

accurate, then there clearly could not be a guilty charge. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Can you define in which section of the Act 

that that is what it says, that he has discretion to make that 

decision.  It's not in this part.  But in the main Act, can you tell 

me where that is, and read it for me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I'm not a lawyer, but if I read section 

97(2): 

 

 In a prosecution for a violation of this Act, the regulations or 

a bylaw of a local government, the following certificates are 

admissible in evidence 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

as prima facie proof (my officials tell me that means at face 

value) of the facts stated in the certificate and of the authority 

of the person who issued and signed the certificate, without 

proof of his or her appointment or signature: 

 

 (a) a certificate: (and it goes on) 

 

  (i) stating the result of a test . . . 

 

It simply allows it to be introduced at face value as evidence 

into the charges.  The judge clearly has to judge the evidence 

brought before him/her. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Yes, you're right.  And what it does is it 

places stationary scales and portable scales on the same basis.  

And in here it doesn't even give you the benefit of having it 

checked.  So the judge sees stationary scales are put in there, 

and that's right because they're checked.  A portable comes in 

here, based on the signing of the certificate that the bylaw was 

contravened or the regulation was contravened, and the judge 

will have to take it at face value. 

 

If he has to take the scale . . . the stationary scale at face value, 

he will have to take the portable scale at face value.  And I 

want to know where you read discretion into there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The information that's introduced as 

evidence is not in itself the . . . does not in itself provide for a 

verdict.  The information that's introduced as evidence is 

information for the judge to make his or her judgement.  And 

clearly if there is doubt as to the accuracy of the information, a 

judge, I believe it's their duty to determine that, and will, as 

they have in the past. 

 

But as we had said earlier, I will ask the department to look 

into that in the immediate future and check what the nature of 

amendments would be that would be required to clarify that, if 

there in fact is legal cause to say that there should be an 

amendment introduced. 

 

In the mean time it's my understanding from the officials that 

officers are instructed to give people that option, and I'm not 

aware of circumstances where people feel they have been 

abused by that practice at the moment. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- The reason, Mr. Minister, that they're given 

discretion is because it isn't in the Bill now.  It's a practice that's 

followed, that's right.  So you have discretion on the part of the 

officer who's making the assessment, can he go and get a 

different weight.  In here he's already past that process.  He's 

gotten to the place where he's in court and he's saying, I want to 

have a check on my weights because it was only a portable 

scale; how can you get it?  How can you get that done?  You 

can't. 

 

And the judge is going to have to go on the basis of what 

you've got on your Bill.  And that's the problem.  The police 

officer, on the basis of regulations, has discretion.  But the 

judge, when he sees this, doesn't have discretion.  He has 

absolutely none.  And that's the part . . . if you put this in the 

Bill next year and we've gone through it, how are we going to 

get it out?  That's the question we have. 

(1600) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Again, I'm not a lawyer, but it's my 

understanding of court practice that judges receive information.  

Evidence is information for them to make their decisions.  If 

the information is flawed, as the member opposite would 

suggest, then if we have judges of the quality that I believe we 

have in the province, they would not convict someone on 

flawed information just because it is capable of being 

introduced.  The information itself does not convict; the 

judgement of the judge convicts.  And the information must be 

sound before a conviction can result. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Mr. Minister, it's a matter of logic.  If 

the person who is prosecuting presents this as evidence before 

the court, today you do not have a portable scale that can be 

used as evidence except if it's ensured to be accurate.  So why 

put it in there now to determine whether this is accurate? 

 

If you put it into the Bill, it's accurate.  It has no discretion.  

You put it in there; it's accurate.  And you're putting it in at the 

same consistency as the stationary scale.  That's what you've 

got in there.  And that, Mr. Minister, is what we're talking 

about as being not proper, and we would like to have it out of 

there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, the circumstance 

continues to be one that says that if the charge is laid on the 

basis of a portable scale measurement and the portable scale 

measurement is introduced as evidence and the person being 

charged believes that it's inaccurate, the Crown would have to 

demonstrate that it is.  And if the Crown can't demonstrate that 

it is, then the person accused would not be found guilty.  It 

seems logical. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well you're also the minister that took away 

the rights to farmers in court, so that's . . . we'll just leave it 

there.  I will also . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Cheap shot, cheap shot. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- No, it was an expensive shot. 

 

I want to also ask the minister about the seat-belts.  Seat-belt 

that is worn has to be worn by an individual across the lap and 

over if that's the way the seat-belt is made. 

 

Young children will put that across the chest behind them.  It 

says in your explanation that any person 18 to 22 kilograms 

who find it uncomfortable to wear a shoulder-strap . . . Now a 

little bit tongue in cheek but are you going to have a portable 

scale to find out whether they're the right size to have the strap 

placed behind them?  Are you inferring that an adult who has 

that shoulder-strap go across his face, should have it across his 

face, or should he have it behind him?  That's the question that 

I would have in this case. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the kinds of concerns that 

the member opposite raises will be addressed in regulations so 

that there is a definition of when it applies and when it does 

not. 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

I know from experience of someone in our family who has a 

colostomy, that they have been given exemptions from wearing 

belts.  And I think those kinds of concerns will be addressed.  If 

there are any specific concerns that the members opposite have, 

I would appreciate them forwarding a list of the kinds of things 

that should be addressed in regulations, that the department can 

consider. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I know that this . . . You were making an 

observation about the other part of this Bill that was before this 

Assembly earlier on.  I know that this part was not.  I know 

definitely that it was not.  And I was in strong objection to it at 

the time that it was put in, and I will be in strong objection to it 

now.  Because children, or certain makes and models of 

vehicles, have different heights.  And you can't adjust the strap 

that comes from the top of the door or the post.  You can't 

adjust it to be at the proper location going across your chest. 

 

And that's the kind of thing that could more injure an individual 

than help him if it was across his throat, across his face, or 

anywhere there.  And I think that you have to be very serious 

about what you're going to do with this kind of a seat-belt 

regulation because behind you is way better than none at all in 

the case of an accident. 

 

I'm not talking about getting caught and getting a $40 fine or a 

$50 fine; I'm talking about in a case of an accident.  That 

individual who has it across his face is going to be seriously 

injured, and across his throat.  It has to be down low enough so 

it maintains the volume of his body in the impact. 

 

And I just raise this with you on this basis.  I think that you're 

going to make it very, very difficult for a police officer to make 

sure that he knows where that seat-belt is supposed to be.  Will 

he check every time?  On my car I can move that shoulder strap 

up and down on the post, but you can't do that on the majority 

of cars.  And even then, for a short person, it doesn't come 

nearly to the place where it's supposed to.  It goes across your 

face or your throat and not across your chest, and that's why 

people put their arm over it. 

 

What you're going to have, Mr. Minister, is people getting an 

exemption so that they won't use the seat-belt at all if that 

becomes uncomfortable.  And then you're going to have a 

greater problem.  And that's what I think is where we're getting 

to if we make the thing too restrictive. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I believe I said in the 

earlier answer, the regulations will address the circumstances 

the member opposite raises.  If there are any special 

circumstances that the member opposite wants raised in the 

regulations, that will be provided for.  It's recognized that there 

are people for whom the application of the shoulder strap under 

normal circumstances, if they are short people, could cause 

difficulties, and that will be addressed in regulations. 

 

But I would appreciate receiving from the members opposite 

any other circumstances where a special regulation can define 

the wearing of seat-belts. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

we appreciate your offer to consider our concerns and we will 

certainly begin that process as soon as we get finished here 

today. 

 

I do have a question though that raises from my colleague's 

discussion with you.  In this whole area of constitutional rights, 

I worry about the ability to make any law work any more.  It 

gets extremely difficult I'm sure, from your point of view as 

well as from ours. 

 

When a person decides that he wants to be a driver in our 

province, he must go to a licence bureau and take a test, and 

then he drives and he is assessed by an expert. 

 

Fortunately through our school system, most young people 

have the opportunity to be able to train through a program 

before that happens, and they become reasonably good at the 

art of driving before they're given a licence. 

 

But no licence is ever given, is my understanding, having 

talked to some of the people and having taken tests myself -- 

no licence is ever granted to an individual who isn't seen to be 

good enough to have that responsibility of a driver.  An expert 

hired by the government on behalf of the government grants 

that licence to that individual, would be my determination, that 

the government then has said that individual is capable of 

driving.  Therefore we will allow him to buy a licence. 

 

If they didn't say he was able to drive, they wouldn't give him 

the licence.  So the onus of responsibility for that driver 

conducting himself in a responsible manner must therefore lie 

with the government to some extent. 

 

Now we have the question of the motor vehicle that he drives.  

If he drives his own motor vehicle which he's able to finance or 

buy and he wrecks it or drives over somebody, he is 

responsible for his actions.  If he is breaking the law when he 

does this infraction or hurts somebody and causes himself to be 

sued or causes some damage or expense, then who's 

responsible for the actions of that driver?  Obviously no one 

ever takes the government to court and says, you gave this 

person a licence, therefore you're responsible for his actions.  

Nobody holds the car dealer responsible because he sold this 

individual a car. 

 

And yet I might have a vehicle that I may give to one of my 

children who might have a licence that the government 

condones, who will take that vehicle, might in fact park it, 

inadvertently leaving the keys in the switch.  And one of his 

buddies might come along, take that vehicle, go on a beer 

party, and wreck it by driving it into a school bus.  He's done 

all kinds of bad things. 

 

First of all, my son or daughter who might have gotten that 

vehicle would have had a licence granted by the government.  

The government has responsibility that they're responsible to 

have that licence.  They may not have even left the keys in the 

vehicle.  This individual might in fact have stolen it and 

hot-wired it.  It doesn't matter how the process goes there. 

 

But what I'm trying to get at is the process of responsibility 

here.  I'm going to be held responsible for this wreck that 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

happens. 

 

Or suppose the person, you know, side-swipes the bus and 

takes off.  I guess the scenario would be better if he took off 

like lightning out of there and got away, and nobody could 

quite identify who the driver was.  Then I as the owner of that 

vehicle am responsible.  And I -- going back to my colleague's 

discussion earlier -- can't see why I as an owner of that vehicle 

should be held responsible for the actions of all of these other 

individuals in the world.  Just because the police need to have it 

expedient to be able to pin it on somebody isn't good enough 

for me. 

 

And I think that the process, even though it's been in place for 

30 years, might be wrong enough, as I sit here and look at it 

and think about it, to warrant some changes.  And you can 

blame the guys in the past for not making the changes in time, 

and I could blame you today for not doing it now.  But in 

reality, what we could do is think about this and change it for 

the future.  And that probably would serve the interests of 

everyone to a better extent. 

 

Because I just can't see this business of my being responsible 

for another driver's actions when you say that I should've 

assessed how this individual would perform as a driver.  I'm 

not going to try to quote you exactly, but I think you suggested 

that I should make a determination, as the owner of the vehicle, 

of the ability of a driver to perform that task of driving 

carefully and reasonably. 

 

(1615) 

 

And immediately I thought, didn't the person that gave this 

individual his driving licence have that responsibility?  Was 

that the person that should have decided that this individual 

wasn't capable of driving?  Why?  How would I qualify to be 

that person to make that determination?  And why would I be 

held responsible as an individual who happens to have enough 

money to be able to buy a vehicle?  Why would I be put on the 

spot as being legally responsible for the actions of somebody 

else that has gotten a licence from a government dealer?  And, 

you know, I think I should let you respond. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I don't know if the member opposite is 

suggesting that we live in a society without responsibility or 

that we should.  Clearly the act of owning a vehicle in this 

society is an act that carries with it responsibility. 

 

People who own vehicles own an instrument that can be very 

dangerously used by others.  One ought not to carelessly leave 

vehicles like that in the hands of people in whom one does not 

have confidence. 

 

The law in Saskatchewan -- and I'm sure in every other place 

where vehicles are driven -- suggests that if you own a vehicle, 

you're responsible for its usage.  And if you own a vehicle, you 

ought to be very careful about who uses it while you're the 

owner. 

 

There's another section, section 86 of the Act, that provides 

provision for other circumstances.  It says: 

 

 When any loss, damage, or injury is caused to a 

person by a motor vehicle, the person driving it at the time is 

liable for the loss, damage, or injury if it was caused by his 

negligence or improper conduct, and the owner of the motor 

vehicle is also liable to the same extent as the driver, unless 

at that time the motor vehicle had been stolen from the owner 

or otherwise wrongfully taken out of his possession or out of 

the possession of a person entrusted by him with its care. 

 

The fact is that when you own property that can be used 

dangerously, you're responsible for who uses it.  That I hope is 

a value we all accept in a society in which these kinds of things 

such as vehicles are commonly owned. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well I can't quite agree with that, Mr. 

Minister.  This process of responsibility has gotten me really 

troubled.  Suppose you were to borrow your rifle to another 

hunter who is, say, 30 years of age, has taken his tests that 

qualify him in the province of Saskatchewan.  Now before you 

can buy a licence, you have to take a test apparently, from 

some wildlife people that qualify, and he's got this test.  He 

goes and he buys a licence to hunt a deer.  And he comes to 

you and he says, can I borrow your rifle to go hunting? Are you 

responsible if he shoots the tractor tire out on the neighbour's 

tractor? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I am not a lawyer, and I 

suspect that's a good question to ask the Minister of Justice on 

another occasion, but it doesn't have a lot of applicability to 

this Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- But, Mr. Minister, it has everything to do 

with it because what it does is to try to give you a refreshed 

look at the reality of a motor vehicle becoming a weapon of 

sorts.  And that's what you're basically saying.  If you take this 

vehicle out and kill somebody with it, it has become a weapon 

that you are responsible for even though somebody else is 

driving it. 

 

And when I use the comparison of a rifle, let's take that one 

step further. Supposing I sold that rifle to that individual 

knowing that he was a careless individual who might have had 

a record of shooting tires out before.  Am I now responsible for 

his actions even though he has the money to pay for it and has 

bought it?  Has he bought a tool or has he bought a weapon, 

and am I responsible for his actions for ever and a day? 

 

Now the same applies to a car.  Supposing you're going to say 

I'm responsible if I own the car.  Am I now responsible if I sell 

my car to my son and he goes out and does damage with it.  He 

probably wouldn't have the money to pay for it, so I probably 

would say, I'm selling it to you a dollar down and a dollar a day 

for the rest of your life.  Am I now responsible for the rest of 

his life and the rest of my life for that vehicle and everything 

that happens to it?  The same scenario must follow through, 

must it not? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well, Mr. Chairman, this is a very 

interesting and not going very far very fast conversation.  But 

the fact is that the registered owner of the vehicle has 

responsibility for the vehicle. 

 

May I read again: 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

When any loss, damage, or injury is caused to a person by a 

motor vehicle, the person driving it at the time is liable for 

the loss, damage or injury if it was caused by his negligence 

or improper conduct, and the owner of the motor vehicle is 

also liable to the same extent as the driver, unless at that time 

the motor vehicle has been stolen from the owner or 

otherwise wrongfully taken out of his possession or out of 

the possession of a person entrusted by him with its care. 

 

The registered owner of the vehicle has responsibility for the 

vehicle.  That's a common value.  And while the member 

opposite says he has a little difficulty with the notion of 

responsibility, most of society does not.  Most of society 

believes responsibility is something that we as adults take, and 

these are part of the descriptors of when we must take that 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not so sure about the 

rest of society and how they think.  So let's dwell into this just a 

little bit further. 

 

You have the ability to stand in your place today and hold up a 

pamphlet or a brochure full of Acts and laws, and you read part 

of a law to me. 

 

The fact that you have in your hand a written law that you can 

read doesn't necessarily make me believe that I agree with that 

law being right.  The fact that it happens to have been 30 years 

old doesn't necessarily make me agree with the fact that it is 

right.  And the fact that you take the premise of that law to 

expand a further law to restrict other people in society certainly 

is not justification in my mind either. 

 

Now maybe the problem goes to the fact that the original law is 

wrong, even though it's been there for 30 years.  And maybe 

that's what the charter of rights has been saying when judges 

have ruled that under the charter of rights you cannot hold 

responsible people for actions of other individuals.  Who is 

responsible for the actions of an individual?  Are you 

responsible for him?  Is the government responsible for him?  

Or is he responsible for his own actions? 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that people in our society 

must be responsible for their own actions.  They must not be 

allowed to pass off responsibility to someone else, who in this 

case happens to have been the individual that bought a motor 

vehicle. 

 

I'll carry that scenario one step further.  And I think my 

colleague tried to make this point but didn't possibly get 

through to the way that we were trying to arrive at. 

 

The charter of rights, you have claimed, protects an individual 

from being sent to jail.  If that is true, then what you are saying 

is that the penalty of going to jail, the penalty of going to jail is 

too stiff a penalty for the crime involved, the so-called crime of 

responsibility. 

 

If going to jail is too high a penalty to be paid, and the Supreme 

Court of Canada would uphold that, as I'm hearing you suggest, 

because of the charter of rights, would it not also follow true 

that a person who would find 

himself fined or sued for large sums of money, might in fact 

find that to be too heavy a penalty to pay, and that he might 

rather go to jail than to have to pay all that money.  Would he 

then have a legitimate case to say that he is being wrong done 

by by having to pay the penalty of dollars rather than the 

penalty of jail?  If jail is too stiff, could not fines or lawsuits 

similarly be too great a price to be paid? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well that's a matter for the courts to 

decide.  It is not the Charter of Rights and Freedoms that said 

someone should not go to jail.  They simply said that because 

someone may go to jail, this Act could not be applied.  So the 

Act now provides that you may not go to jail as a result of the 

application of this Act. 

 

If someone who was fined and believed that they were unjustly 

fined as a result of the application of this Act, wanted to take it 

to court and say that that's an unfair provision, then they can.  

The fact is that in providing a balance for justice in our system, 

certain laws are enforced.  And I think most of us would agree 

that when we own a vehicle, we are responsible for its use.  

And if we cannot be responsible, then we ought not to own a 

vehicle.  And that, I think, is a value as common as motherhood 

and apple pie. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, we can use clichs of all 

kind.  Having a law that only part way applies, you can't send a 

person to jail but you can fine him and cause him to go 

bankrupt, in my scenario might be like trying to claim you're 

only a little bit pregnant. 

 

You see, you're either being fined or penalized, or you're not.  

You're either pregnant, or you're not.  It doesn't matter to me 

whether you have the penalty of going to jail or the penalty of 

being sued for all of your worldly goods.  To me, the penalty, if 

the penalty is too stiff for one kind of penalty, the other penalty 

might be too stiff for another individual with a different set of 

values. 

 

And so what we are saying to you is that when the Supreme 

Court or the court system, whichever court you're talking 

about, made this decision about people not being sent to jail 

because that would be too stiff a penalty, what they were trying 

to say to you, sir, as now a lawmaker, which you are -- and 

that's what you are today; you are a lawmaker, not a 

law-breaker, a lawmaker, although some people might say this 

Bill would put you in the other category -- the reality, Mr. 

Minister, is that you cannot force society in all fairness to take 

every element of every Bill to the court system for a decision. 

 

When the court deals with a situation on one particular issue, 

they expect you, and I think society expects you, and the 

people that wrote the charter of rights expect you to use those 

decisions with some discretion as a precedence to establish a 

direction of policy and a direction of law making. 

 

If we don't do that, Mr. Minister, in all fairness, we will have 

our society tied up in the court system for ever and a day, and 

the only people that are going to benefit by this will be the 

lawyers and the judges who will for ever have more work than 

they can ever possibly do. 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

So what they've said to you, sir, because you seem not to have 

grasped what I'm saying, they've said to you that here we've 

established a precedence that maybe the actual fabric of the old 

law might be wrong.  The onus of responsibility may not be 

considered motherhood and apple pie any more.  It might be 

considered that the individual that commits a crime or uses a 

vehicle wrongly is responsible for his own action. 

 

And the guy that sells me a car is not responsible for how I 

drive it any more than I should be responsible for how a third 

party uses my vehicle if he happens to get it into his hands.  So 

does that make any sense to you, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Well I guess the question I would ask, 

does it make any sense to the member opposite?  The question 

that the member I think asks is: is this provision that's been 

provided in this Act, has it been tested?  And yes, it has.  It's 

been applied and tested in Alberta, and it has withstood the 

legal test. 

 

So the provision that's being brought forward here has 

withstood a court challenge in Alberta, and we believe it to be 

appropriate within the law. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I want to go on to a 

few other points here because I know that one of my colleagues 

has some other questions.  But I want to cover some other 

points while I've got your attention. 

 

This 81.8, you pointed out, was a correction of an error.  For 

those people that are watching, the question come to mind, 

they're going to maybe wonder what was that error.  What did 

you correct? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I can have the specific 

cross-referencing error identified in a moment.  It refers in one 

section incorrectly to another subsection.  Where it was 

referring to subsection (2), it is now more accurately referring 

to subsection (3) in that section. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- So what you're saying is that people that write 

laws make mistakes, and you're correcting an error, 

typographical or whatever, and that there may in fact be a need 

to amend this Bill further when we get finished.  And I'm glad 

that that scenario might be positively viewed. 

 

I want to go back just to this weight thing because another 

question crossed my mind here.  An individual who now owns 

a car and a trailer . . . This will not be cattle trailer.  We're 

talking about the type of a trailer that you would use to live in. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Holiday trailer. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- A holiday trailer -- thank you, from my 

colleague here -- a holiday trailer behind your car.  If that unit 

is in excess of the 5,000 kilograms, are they now required to 

buy a truck licence or some other type of a vehicle licence to be 

legal under this Act? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, as I understand the 

circumstances, if you were contemplating, with your 

private vehicle, pulling a very substantial load -- the 

circumstance is difficult but not impossible to imagine - 

_ you could theoretically register a private vehicle for 54,000 

kilograms if you wanted to build a lead-filled trailer.  And if 

that was your intent, then you should register your car -- your 

little Rabbit or whatever -- for that 54,000 kilograms so that in 

fact you are not in breach of the registered weight. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I've got an Oldsmobile 

and it's really powerful.  How much money am I going to have 

to spend on my licence now if I pull over the 5,000 kilometres 

of weight . . . or kilograms?  I didn't get the right metric term.  

If I get over 5,000 kilograms with my car and my trailer, 

whether I can pull it or not, how much extra money am I going 

to have to pay for licencing to be legal? 

 

The Chair: -- Order, order.  I'm having great difficulty hearing 

the member. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Did the minister not hear?  I'll just rephrase 

that.  If I have an Oldsmobile with enough power to pull my 

house trailer, and it happens to weigh over 5,000 kilograms -- 

not kilometres, kilograms -- how much will it cost me to 

legally license that over and above a private vehicle licence? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this only provides that 

clarification that when your vehicle exceeds 5,000 kilograms, 

that is the towing and the towed unit together, that you should 

register your towing vehicle for the total weight you expect 

your combined unit to be.  We do not have the fees with us, but 

we are not changing the fee structure.  It just defines that if you 

are going to exceed 5,000 kilograms for your . . . which is a 

substantial size of a combined load -- if you're going to exceed 

that, you should then register your vehicle for that anticipated 

combined load.  And you should make sure that you're not 

breaking any other laws in the process. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Minister, what other laws would you 

anticipate I might be breaking? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The weights, the brakes that are required, 

the dimensions of the vehicle in order to get that weight into 

the space you've described -- there are a number of areas one 

should be concerned about.  But we don't have the fees for 

licensing here at the moment. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Maybe as I have you answer my next 

question you'd also throw in for me who I'd find that 

information out from, because there are some people, believe it 

or not, who have some rather big-powered, older cars.  And 

they do in fact in this province hook on to stock trailers and 

load them up with their children's furniture and move them 

from one university to another and that sort of thing.  And I'm 

not just sure if they get over this 5,000 kilograms or not, but I 

suspect that they must be very close to it after I've carried it out 

for about a day and packed it all in there, and it feels like at 

least 5,000 kilograms on my back. 

 

So knowing that these people do this sort of thing, it would be 

of great interest to us to find out what it's going to cost us to 

keep those units legal, and in fact, whether or 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

not they are considered as part of this package under the 

restrictions.  And I'm taking it from your comments that they 

are. 

 

Is there anything in this that would indicate the limit on the 

length of such a unit on the highway? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- There are a number of provisions that the 

member opposite should check if you in fact want that kind of 

load behind your car, including the tonne capacity of the trailer, 

including as well the hitch on the car that may break loose and 

the mechanisms for attaching it. 

 

You can contact SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 

for all the requirements that are there, that if you anticipate that 

kind of a load. 

 

And when you have finished designing this vehicle for taking 

your children's furniture to university, I'd like to see it, please. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just drop around my farm any time, Mr. 

Minister, it's there. 

 

I'm afraid that -- on a serious note though, Mr. Minister, all 

kidding aside about this whole thing -- there is some suggestion 

to me in this Bill that people are no longer innocent until 

they're proven guilty.  Now they are guilty until they can prove 

themselves innocent. 

 

And I'm wondering if that really is the intention that we want to 

take our province in that direction.  Because if we're going to 

do it in a small traffic Bill, it almost seems inevitable that we 

will be leading that path in probably a total direction of the 

next three or four years.  And if you think that we seem a little 

reluctant to accept some of the things at face value that you've 

given us, you must understand that we are in a position now of 

being somewhat fearful of what this administration might do to 

folks. 

 

One of my colleagues made the comment, we are fearful now 

of where the slice of the socialist sickle will strike next.  And 

that is an old expression that's been used many times in this 

world.  It happens to now fall true in our province.  And we 

are, I guess, pretty gun-shy about accepting anything that 

becomes a law from this administration, in view of all of the 

massive changes that we've seen that have genuinely hurt so 

many people in so many ways. 

 

I do want to specifically deal with this Bill on one other aspect.  

I think my colleague talked to you for a few minutes about the 

seat-belt part of this legislation.  Just to clarify for myself, 

could you tell me, does this Bill apply that you now have to 

wear a shoulder-belt as well as a lap-belt in all situations?  Or 

are there some exemptions to that situation?  And does this 

apply both to front seat and rear seat? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I am interested by the 

concern the members opposite have about legislation that they 

themselves have designed and that they themselves have 

proposed amendments to, when we're introducing the same 

amendments. 

With respect to the seat-belt provisions, if the shoulder strap 

and the lap belt are joined, they must be properly worn.  There 

continue to be the exemptions that were always in place: 

medical exemptions, exemptions for delivery persons, and taxi 

drivers. 

 

And as we answered for your colleague earlier, that in 

regulation there will be some provisions for people for whom 

the normal wearing of a shoulder strap would be dangerous, in 

regulations to exempt them.  And if the members opposite have 

any particular situations they would like to have addressed in 

those provisions in the regulations, I'd appreciate having those 

ideas forwarded to my department. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, Mr. Minister, we certainly will bring 

those matters to your attention. 

 

I do want to comment to your first comment, and that of course 

is that we somehow should feel some responsibility to drafting 

these Bills because we did something about it before.  I assure 

you I had nothing to do ever before with any highway traffic 

Bill or any amendments thereto at any time ever that I'm 

consciously aware of, because I've never been in the 

government before this past election.  And so your remarks 

have to be restricted to other people. 

 

And I hope that you and the rest of the public will take note of 

that fact, that just because the laws were there before and a 

particular political party that I'm affiliated with put them in 

there, doesn't necessarily that I was always agree that those 

laws and regulations were the best ones for society around us. 

 

As a municipal person, we often challenged the regulations that 

we were forced to live under within our society, and it didn't 

matter to us what the political stripe of the government of the 

day happened to be.  We either supported them or opposed 

them, according to how we valued them as they affected our 

lives. 

 

And so not having had any input into them in the past, I accept 

no responsibility for the rightness or wrongness of them.  And 

those things that I feel are wrong, I'm going to bring to your 

attention; and those things that are right, I hope I have the 

courage to admit it and allow you to carry on. 

 

I haven't got any more questions just at the moment, but my 

colleague does.  So I will turn the matter over to him, unless 

you want to respond. 

 

(1645) 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, 

I've been listening to some of your comments about this Bill, 

and I guess it's probably . . . you had reasons to bring it in.  But 

myself, I don't know about this.  It just looks to me like another 

Bill that the government bring in where you're interfering in the 

private lives of people. 

 

I can't understand where all the requests came from to bring a 

Bill like this in.  I don't know where they came 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

from because I've never heard it.  I've been a politician for 15 

years; I've had no one ever say to me that we want something 

like this. 

 

The kind of a question I'd like to ask you, and excuse me, Mr. 

Minister, if I do ask something that somebody else has already 

asked before because I . . . and correct me.  If it's been 

answered before, I will look in the Hansard. 

 

I'd just like to know what happens that if someone steals a 

vehicle from me or it's just missing from my yard without my 

permission, and there's an accident, who gets charged if they 

find the individual -- he'll get charged or will I get charged? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the person stealing the 

vehicle will be charged. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- All right.  What if there's damage to that 

vehicle and the individual that took my vehicle absolutely 

hasn't got any money whatsoever, and I got a damaged vehicle?  

Will SGI repair my vehicle under my insurance? 

 

And if he had smashed into somebody else and they catch the 

person and there's damage to somebody else, damage to 

property; say they run into a house or somebody else's vehicle 

-- it doesn't have to be a vehicle; it can be something that's not 

insured -- who's responsible?  They caught him, they have him, 

but he has no money.  Could they still come back on me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that's a question 

of the applicability of the insurance, and you may on another 

day wish to ask the minister in charge of SGI. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well don't you think, Mr. Minister, that's 

something that . . . that's the kind of questions that I'm hearing 

since this Bill's been introduced; that's the kind of questions 

that people are asking.  You must have been asked that, Mr. 

Minister, of who pays.  You're saying, ask the minister of SGI.  

Well what if there's . . . the question I asked . . . 

 

Let's put it this way.  Someone comes into my Quonset or my 

garage.  I've done everything that I could do.  My keys are in 

the house.  And the middle of night somebody breaks into my 

garage, and they hot-wire that vehicle and away they go.  And 

they don't smash up a car.  They wrecked that vehicle, but 

maybe they damaged something else.  Maybe they run into 

somebody's house or a barn or something serious.  Maybe 

they've even run over somebody.  They injure some other 

individual. 

 

Who gets charged if they find that person and he has absolutely 

no way of paying the damages?  Can they come back on me, is 

what I'm saying, Mr. Minister.  Can they come back on me if 

SGI has nothing to do with it?  Just say there's damage to 

personal property and they've got him, but he has absolutely 

nothing.  Can they come back on me? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I will just read one more 

time, section 86, where it says: 

. . . and the owner of the motor vehicle is also liable to the 

same extent as the driver, unless at that time the motor 

vehicle has been stolen from the owner or otherwise 

wrongfully taken out of his possession or out of the 

possession of a person entrusted by him with its care. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- So then, Mr. Minister, if I didn't give . . . 

somebody steals my vehicle -- like I said, hot wires it and takes 

it away -- I'm not responsible whatsoever.  There's no 

responsibility can get back onto me.  Whatever this individual 

does, whether they catch him or don't catch him, they cannot 

come back onto me under any circumstances? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I do not understand the full extent of the 

law in all matters, but they cannot come back to you under this 

Act. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Well ask your officials if they can come 

back under any Act.  They must look into all these avenues 

because you're the department that's opened this up, that's 

going to make the owner of the vehicle responsible.  Like I 

heard you say a while ago to one of my colleagues, that if a 

person is going to own a vehicle, they'd better be responsible.  

If a person's going to own a vehicle, you better be responsible. 

 

Well if somebody takes my vehicle without permission . . . 

And you got into a pretty dicey thing here.  Here's somebody 

that's working for you, your hired man, or it could even be your 

son that doesn't live with you or it could be family members or 

it could be a neighbour.  And you know who it is.  But they 

haven't got my permission, and they take it away and smash it 

up and smash into another vehicle.  And I say they never had 

permission. 

 

Well how do you draw that fine line, whether they had 

permission or didn't?  Because you're going to open up a ball of 

worms here because what's going to happen if . . . Everybody is 

going to say -- not everybody, the honest people will say, yes I 

did give permission -- but a lot of people will say, I didn't give 

my son or even my wife permission.  What are you going to do 

in cases like that? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we have not opened up any 

can of worms in this regard.  We have not altered the 

provisions of the Act.  If the members opposite are suggesting 

that we should introduce amendments to the Act at this point, 

those proposals could be made to us for a future year. 

 

We have not amended the provisions of an Act that has stood 

for in excess of 30 years.  All we have done is to say that under 

the provisions of this Act, you cannot go to jail, which means 

that it will now likely not be struck down under the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms.  So we have not changed the Act.  We 

have not changed the provisions of the Act.  We have not 

opened up any can of worms. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- I don't know, Mr. Minister.  If you can't 

answer me that question . . . I asked you this question.  You 

just got up and talked about the bag of worms. 

 

I'm talking about if, if someone takes my vehicle and regardless 

who -- but they may be somebody I know, 



August 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

maybe are a family member or a neighbour, whatever -- and 

they smash that vehicle up and smash up somebody else's 

vehicle and do a lot of damage, and there's a big suit going on 

here, who's responsible?  The person, my neighbour, whoever 

took that vehicle?  If I just come out and say, I didn't give 

permission, whether it be my . . . don't matter who it is.  Am I 

home free? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the member opposite needs 

to be aware that under the provisions of this Act that the driver 

. . . the owner of the vehicle can be held liable.  The owner of 

the vehicle can identify another person who was driving, 

depending on what kind of case is involved, and the legal 

enforcement will pursue the driver if identified. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that under this 

Act, if I understand you correctly, you are putting the onus on 

the owner of the vehicle to go to a court of law, should they 

receive a summons if a vehicle they own that happens to show 

up is involved in some kind of traffic violation, and prove 

before a court of law that they were not indeed the driver of the 

vehicle.  Is that true? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- We are not in fact changing the Act in that 

regard or introducing new measures.  This is the provision that 

has been in the Act in excess of 30 years, that the responsibility 

for the use of the vehicle . . . or the responsibility is the 

owner's.  All we've done is say that you cannot go to jail as a 

result of a charge laid in that fashion.  So the provisions that 

have been under the Act for a long time are roughly accurately 

interpreted by you. 

 

The practice, as I understand it, by the enforcement officials is 

that if a summons was delivered to you and you said no, I was 

not driving the vehicle, my daughter was driving the vehicle; or 

my daughter was driving the vehicle and she lent it to her 

boy-friend and the boy-friend says no, my friend drove it, that 

the police would pursue the person who was driving the 

vehicle.  That would be their intent. 

 

If all else failed, the responsibility would come back to the 

owner. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- So what you've just said . . . And you're saying 

that this Act has actually been in, whether it's been on the back 

burner for a number of years or . . .  it's been part of the Act.  

And under the Act, as it was over the past number of years, if a 

person received a summons, that they were possibly liable to 

some term in jail if indeed, say, the court didn't believe or they 

couldn't prove that they weren't driving the vehicle. 

 

You're putting the onus on the person to go to court, prove that 

they weren't driving the vehicle.  Then who puts the . . . How 

do you put the onus on the responsible person?  You have to, as 

an owner . . . I as an owner would then have to prove I wasn't 

the person driving the vehicle. 

 

And then does the court then send out a summons to the person 

responsible?  Or the individual who owns the vehicle has to try 

and prove who was driving the vehicle, specifically when you 

relate to, say, someone who has lifted the vehicle or taken the 

vehicle without your 

knowledge or without anybody's knowledge? 

 

The reason I raise that is not only the fact that you have this 

vehicle taken, and maybe your vehicle's wrecked and 

somebody else . . . maybe someone's life has been put in 

jeopardy because of an accident, but it's not just the insurance 

that you may be facing, Mr. Minister, it's also the fact that 

you're going to have a record against your licence or against 

your person that is going to translate into substantial costs to 

renew your licence.  And there are two major factors that we 

face here, Mr. Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the practice is that the 

summons would be delivered to your door, to you, and you 

would identify another person who was driving the vehicle if in 

fact it was not you.  The enforcement officer then, by practice, 

pursues the other person who was driving the vehicle.  That's 

the manner in which this has been done for 30 years. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- You're saying it's delivered personally, not just 

thrown in the mail? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The expectation would be that the 

summons may in fact not be even delivered the first time; that 

the policeman would come to your door as part of an 

investigation to determine whether in fact it was you.  But if a 

summons were being delivered, it would be hand delivered. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not going to belabour the 

point on it but I think just recent events are a strong indication 

of the fact of how serious this piece of legislation can be.  We 

just need to look a couple of days ago where a gentleman went 

to help some individuals and ended up losing his life, and his 

vehicle destroyed.  There again, in some cases . . . in this case 

we're probably dealing with individuals who probably shouldn't 

have been on the street at the time. 

 

But certainly it seems to me, Mr. Minister, as we've seen 

through a number of pieces of legislation, that we have areas 

where government . . . And I'm not exactly putting all the fault 

at your feet.  I was very aware of the weight that can be put 

upon government officials, upon ministers, by even ministers 

of the department -- or not to say ministers -- but individuals 

and departments, because I worked on regulations and I 

worked on legislative review.  And certainly a lot of times 

you're sitting there and you're trying to hammer out with 

department officials, are we going beyond what we should be 

doing?  Are we properly protecting people? 

 

I think, Mr. Minister, we certainly have to sit down and weigh 

the fact that we're not interfering with people's rights -- and I 

think that's the area in question -- while at the same time 

protecting individuals from harassment by . . . and when it 

comes to police services too.  We know the fact that after all, a 

policeman has a notice to put forward a traffic violation.  He's 

got the registration, he's got the vehicle, and he doesn't know 

whether you were driving it or not.  And the person receiving 

that, who knows what can happen as people react to some of 

these notices handed to them, Mr. Minister.  So that's the point 

we're trying to raise here today. 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard August 19, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- I thank the members opposite for their 

contribution. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Just before we 

run away here so quickly for our evening meal, I would like to 

take an opportunity to thank the officials for coming in and 

helping the minister with his answers today.  I know they 

weren't all easy, and I know that some of them may have been 

confused.  But I want to assure them that our intention to make 

this a better province to live in is all that we were aiming for.  

And we truly do thank the minister and his officials.  Thank 

you. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you.  I again thank you for your 

contribution to the discussion and also thank our officials for 

their help in the discussions. 

 

The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 

 

 


