




















































Hansard: August 28, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3245 

 August 28, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

read the following petition: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned citizens of the province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that back pain and other highly prevalent 

neuro-musculo-skeletal disorders are extremely costly to the 

Canadian economy; 

 

 that scientific evidence clearly illustrates that chiropractic 

treatment is the most cost effective and efficient therapy for 

such disorders; 

 

 that in the face of an ever increasing pressure to adopt 

expensive new forms of high technology treatment, 

chiropractic care has proven to be a low technology, low cost, 

conservative, and safe form of treatment, consistent with the 

true wellness model of health care; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

comprehensiveness, accessibility, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to chiropractic patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed restrictions on this 

therapy will clearly cost more both in dollars and in patient 

disability. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment, and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

This whole stack of petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from right 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have as well a 

great number of petitioners with regards to the same issue that 

my colleague just read the prayer from.  So I will take great 

pleasure in presenting what appears to be between 7 and 800 

names and table them here today. 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I too have 

a number of pages of petitions that I'd like to present to the 

Assembly, coming from . . . signed by individuals from all 

across the province -- from Regina and Saskatoon and Unity 

and Reward and Biggar, Kenosee Lake, and Carnduff, Mr. 

Speaker, and Estevan, Conquest -- certainly a number of 

locations across this province where people are voicing their 

concerns and asking the government to give heed to their 

request regarding chiropractic treatment. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have a number 

of pages of petitions relating to the same subject, Mr. Speaker, 

in the numbering of probably 15.  And, Mr. Speaker, they reach 

all across the province, up to Lloydminster, St. Walburg, down 

as far as Swift Current, over to Unity, Biggar, over to Kyle.  As 

a matter of fact, I guess it would be quite relevant to say they 

cover the whole province, Mr. Speaker -- something over 200.  

I would be pleased to table those petitions. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

here from chiropractors concerned about the changes in the fee 

schedule.  I want to present them.  They come today from 

Regina, Lebret, Middle Lake, Saskatoon, Warman, Swift 

Current, Gull Lake, Cabri, Morse, Beechy, Perdue, Dinsmore, 

and Pilot Butte. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have some petitions 

as well with respect to chiropractic care in the province.  These 

petitioners come from all over southern Saskatchewan, 

Weyburn area particularly and Saskatoon, Regina, and 

Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I have several 

hundred signatures on petitions with respect to chiropractic 

care.  And I could just summarize with the last part of the last 

sentence.  And it really just says that we: 

 

 . . . humbly pray that your Honourable Assembly may be 

pleased to cause the government to reverse its decision to 

eliminate full coverage and universal access to chiropractic 

treatment and that your Honourable Assembly withhold 

consent from any government proposal to discriminate 

against chiropractic patients by charging them fees not 

assessed for any other medical treatment. 

 

These people that have signed are from Qu'Appelle and Fort 

Qu'Appelle, Abernethy, Wolseley, Balcarres, Battlefords, 

Landis, various places in Saskatoon, more from Fort 

Qu'Appelle.  I've got a large number from Regina and 

Saskatoon, but places like Lipton, Indian Head, Cupar, those 

from Lemberg,  more from Fort Qu'Appelle, Kindersley, Eston, 

Leader, Regina, several people from Swift Current, Eatonia, 

people from Radville, Weyburn, Creelman, Yellow Grass, 

Stoughton, Weyburn, Yorkton, Estevan, Manor, a large number 

from Weyburn again, Mr. Speaker, and from Lampman, a large 

number from Regina. 

 

And then places up in the north-central prairie like Meadow 

Lake, Melfort, Pleasantdale, Carrot River, Gronlid, 

Saskatchewan; to name a few.  Quite a few from Bjorkdale, 

Porcupine Plain, Nipawin, Tisdale, Carrot 



3246 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

River, Macoun and quite a few in that area.  Again a large 

number from Regina and Saskatoon and several from White 

City, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I now table these petitioners. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have petitions 

today concerning chiropractic care in our province.  I'll only 

read the prayer to the Assembly: 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment and that your 

Honourable Assembly withhold consent from any 

government proposal to discriminate against chiropractic 

patients by charging them fees not assessed for any other 

medical treatment. 

 

Today, Mr. Speaker, I have 32 pages of petitions.  It's over 400 

names from across the province of Saskatchewan.  If one looks 

at all of these locations, it indeed would be a road map of our 

province and obviously a fair representation of the will of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I too have 

petitions to table today pertaining to chiropractor patients.  And 

I won't read any of the prayer or anything because my 

colleagues have read that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

These are from . . . I'll just give a few, just a few: Lloydminster 

and Maidstone is that page, and Yorkton, Watrous area, 

Coderre.  And we have from Esterhazy, Mr. Speaker, Yorkton. 

This page is pretty well all Yorkton, and then we have some 

from Yorkton, Bredenbury, Canora area.  This page is pretty 

well all, Mr. Speaker, Tisdale and Lake Lenore, Tisdale. And 

this whole page here is all Tisdale, looks like, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another page is all Melfort, Tisdale, Porcupine Plain.  They 

vary from all over.  Tisdale. And this whole page, Mr. Speaker, 

is all Saskatoon.  It looks pretty well all Saskatoon.  And the 

next page is . . . some from my own constituency, Colonsay 

and Saskatoon, Dundurn area.  Those are all my constituency, 

Mr. Speaker.  And then the rest.  There's four pages here that I 

picked out here.  And they're all Regina.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, that pretty well finishes every home in Churchill 

Downs.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  To add to the 

15,000 petitioners on the chiropractic issue, I have several 

hundreds of names to add on a new petition, Mr. Speaker, 

which reads: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly in Legislature 

Assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Province of 

Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That provincial funding of Level 1 and 2 Special Care 

Facilities is important and necessary to maintain the health 

and well-being of Saskatchewan residents currently residing 

in or on 

 a waiting list for such facilities and elimination of this 

funding is immoral and contrary to the government's policies 

and promises by which it was elected into office. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

Government to immediately reverse it's decision to cease 

funding which will place an unbearable financial and 

emotional burden upon the already over-taxed people of our 

province. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And while I'm on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have one further 

petition to lay on the table: 

 

 To the Honourable Assembly of Saskatchewan in Legislature 

assembled: 

 

 The Petition of the undersigned concerned citizens of the 

Province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 That in the 1991 general election the voters of the province 

voted 62.62 % to prevent the Government of Saskatchewan 

from paying for abortion procedures; 

 

 and that this margin far exceeds the support of any political 

party represented in the Legislature; 

 

 and that the government is placing greater and greater costs 

on Saskatchewan people for an already financially stressed 

health care system; 

 

 and that it would be to the benefit of our democracy for 

governments to listen to the duly expressed will of the voters 

as well as to the benefit of our health care system to more 

judiciously husband our health care dollars. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to stop the funding of 

abortions in Saskatchewan. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I submit another 6,000 names to that effect. 

 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 

Deputy Clerk: -- According to order, the following petitions 

have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 11(7), they are hereby 

read and received: 

 

 Of citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly praying 

that your Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to eliminate full coverage 

and universal access to chiropractic treatment. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3247 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 

two visitors from sunny River Heights in Saskatoon, my 

constituency.  In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, I'd like you to 

join me in welcoming Shelly Banda and Tom Walker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, also in the west gallery, 

are three representatives from the ACFC (l'Association 

culturelle franco-canadienne), the francophone parents' 

association.  Their president Gerard LeBlanc; Roger Gauthier, 

and Richard Nadeau.  If the Assembly would join me in 

welcoming them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- And, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is a 

member of that organization, well known in the province as 

well, Florent Bilodeau. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Cline: -- I just wanted to join with the Minister of 

Education in welcoming Tom Walker and Shelly Banda who 

were former constituents of mine, but they moved out of my 

riding immediately upon my being elected.  I don't know if 

those events were related or not, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Merci, M. le Président.  Je veux vous présenter à 

toi et les autres collègues, les autres députés dans la législature, 

les gérants, les directeurs de la PPF (l'Association provinciale 

des parents fransaskois), M. LeBlanc, M. Gauthier, M. Nadeau.  

Aussi également je voudrais demander à les députés d'accueillir 

M. Florent Bilodeau, le directeur de l'ACFC ici à Régina.  Je 

vous demandrais à tous à les accueillir chaleureusement.  

Merci. 

 

(Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to introduce to 

you and to all members of the Assembly, the managers and the 

director of the PPF, Mr. LeBlanc, Mr. Gauthier, and Mr. 

Nadeau.  I would also ask the members to welcome Mr. Florent 

Bilodeau, the director of ACFC, here to Regina.  I ask 

everyone to give them a warm welcome. Thank you.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Crop Insurance Corporation Firings 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question today 

is to the minister responsible for Crop Insurance Corporation.  

The other night, Mr. Minister, in Estimates I asked you why 

you fired three individuals from the Crop Insurance 

Corporation -- Mr. Jim Walters, Geoff Bartlam, and Ron Osika.  

They were all hired prior to 1982.  And your answer was, 

re-organization at the Melville office and the Melville office 

only, you said, where the 

re-organization was at. 

 

Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: could you please tell 

us why Mrs. Brenda Hanley was fired as the manager of the 

Rosetown Crop Insurance office? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as the member 

opposite should well know that it's not the minister's 

responsibility to be involved in personnel at the lower levels of 

the Crop Insurance Corporation.  And whatever decision was 

made there, was made by management.  And I am not aware of 

or at liberty to speak about individuals in the House. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, that is absolutely not factual 

because nobody from the Rosetown office fired this person.  I 

talked to her individually, and she came in . . . she told me that 

someone from the Melville office came in and said, at 8 o'clock 

in the morning, you are fired. 

 

The next question I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you tell 

us whether she was fired with cause or without cause?  You 

probably know that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Chairman, as I said, those are 

management decisions.  In this particular case I do not know 

whether or not she was fired with or without cause.  I can find 

that information for you if you would like. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the minister knows right well 

when they fire a manager -- there's only a few of them in the 

province -- he knows right well whether they're fired by just or 

unjust cause.  He knows quite well. 

 

Well I can tell him, Mr. Speaker, and I will tell you, that she 

was told she was fired without cause.  Because we have in fact 

learned that she was fired because several years ago she 

refused to approve an unethical crop insurance contract for the 

wife of your friend, the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is despicable, absolutely despicable.  A 

women who has been working diligently for Crop Insurance 

Corporation for more than a decade, hired under the former 

NDP administration -- she was hired under the NDP 

administration -- fired because she would not allow 

double-dipping into the crop insurance by the now Minister of 

Agriculture. 

 

My question, Mr. Minister:  are you aware that both the 

Minister of Agriculture and his wife are now holding crop 

insurance contracts for the same farming operation and that a 

refusal to go along with that scheme was the reason for the 

firing of Mrs. Hanley? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think we've reached 

a new low in question period here.  I think, Mr. Speaker, that 

again the members use the protection of the 



3248 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

House to make slanderous remarks which they probably would 

not make outside of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do not know of reasons for the management 

decisions that were made, but I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that 

that was not the reasons.  The members opposite continue to 

point to political patronage of members that were . . . of civil 

servants who were hired by NDP (New Democratic Party) 

governments in the previous administration.  Now does that 

make sense that they're being . . . if they were political 

appointments we would be firing ones that were hired by the 

previous government. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, that in the normal running of a Crown 

corporation or a government department there are people who 

must move on and do different things.  That's the way of the 

world, Mr. Speaker.  And to say that we should never have 

people dismissed, that, I believe, is ridiculous.  And to make 

those sort of allegations is really slanderous, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, that's 

all they can think about is political patronage, and I never 

mentioned political patronage in my question.  But they got it 

on their minds at all times, so that's why the answers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture's always stated the 

biggest reason for the change in the 1991 GRIP was moral 

hazards.  Do you agree that the two persons living on the same 

house -- man and a wife -- using the same yard to farm from, 

both have crop insurance contracts.  Do you agreed that this is 

the moral hazard that the minister is talking about? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, again the Minister of 

Agriculture has never said that.  The thing . . . What I want to 

point out, Mr. Speaker, is that we have rules and regulations 

whereby we allow or disallow contracts under Crop Insurance.  

The Minister of Agriculture is subject to the same rules and the 

same regulations as any other farmer in this province, Mr. 

Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, and I would like to point out, Mr. 

Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think there's just too much 

yelling on both sides of the House, and let's get it to order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- And I would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I would like to point out as the 

member opposite has already made the point, the previous 

administration was the one who approved this contract for the 

Minister of Agriculture.  If that, Mr. Speaker, if there was 

wrongdoing it was done by your administration not ours. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Appointments to Government Boards 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the Minister of Health. 

 

Madam Minister, in deliberation of one of your Bills the other 

day, upon questioning by the member from Rosthern about the 

make-up of various health boards around the province of 

Saskatchewan, you made the statement that these boards should 

be above politics and that there should be no political influence 

in boards. 

 

Do you still agree with that statement. Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The boards throughout the province are 

selected on the basis of competence and what the individual 

can contribute to the process. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to 

the same minister. 

 

Madam Minister, upon receiving complaints from people in the 

city of Prince Albert, a little further checking has revealed that 

a number of the individuals on the new health board appointed 

in that city are long-term contributors to the NDP party. 

 

In fact, Madam Minister, in fact, Madam Minister, as we have 

pointed out with so many other boards, there is a price tag 

attached, a price tag attached, it seems, for serving in this 

province. 

 

Madam Minister, in the face of your own statements how can 

you condone the fact that it looks like about 350 bucks is the 

going price for health boards in the province of Saskatchewan?  

Can you answer that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, Mr. Speaker, the criteria that 

we use in selecting members of boards is first of all, we go to 

the stakeholders who are involved and we run a number of 

names by them and they make nominations and the 

stakeholders agree to every single member on that board. 

 

So the stakeholders involved in the process in Prince Albert 

agreed to the names of the board that came forward.  The 

member opposite is obviously criticizing those stakeholders.  

The Department of Health does not look at whether anybody 

made a contribution to the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party 

or the NDP Party.  And I'm not surprised if people contribute to 

the NDP Party since by far the vast majority of people voted 

for us. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is the statements of the member 

opposite are about as accurate on many occasions as the one 

made by the member from Rosthern yesterday about Dr. 

Hindmarsh which were absolutely despicable under the 

circumstances and which was very upsetting to Dr. Hindmarsh, 

and you owe him an apology.  Now the . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3249 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Question to the 

same minister.  Madam Minister, every community in this 

province is living in fear of what has been pointed out with 

Prince Albert, that rather than the community being able to 

make decisions based on the good of the community, you seek 

at every opportunity to put your partisans in place to make sure 

that Madam Minister's and the Minister of Finance's will is 

imposed upon that community. 

 

Madam Minister, the donations of one of these persons 

stretches back to 1982, and if you remember 1982, everybody 

in the province was a PC.  So I would suggest a New 

Democratic Party contribution in '82 and continuing all the way 

through signifies some degree of partiality. 

 

Madam Minister, in the light of this information and the held 

fear of so many communities that this is what you're up to, 

would you now give this Assembly the assurance that these 

boards in the future will not have this criteria attached to them? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There never was that criteria attached to 

them.  We will continue to go to the stakeholders, and we will 

get nominations, and we will appoint a board of qualified and 

competent people from the nominations provided to us.  That's 

what we will do.  That's what we did in the past.  That's what 

we'll do in the future. 

 

And I want to say something about the health reform that's 

taking place.  And I'm going to in this instance call the member 

to Rosthern to listen to this, what Dr. Hindmarsh is saying 

about the health reform.  He says: the one premise I hold to is 

this; it is a day and age to urge co-operation to facilitate the 

changes that are necessary.  That's what he says. 

 

The last thing we need right now is to set up an atmosphere 

where there is no co-operation.  But instead the member from 

Rosthern drags a name through this Legislative Assembly and 

attributes things to him that aren't accurate. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Economic Plans 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is to the 

Deputy Premier.  Mr. Deputy Premier, we are likely going to 

wrap us this session today and we're all going to be able to 

assess your government's performance in the first few months 

of the first year of operation.  And people across the province 

in petitions by the thousands and tens of thousands and people 

who have been misled are saying that your first year is an 

absolute failure. 

 

Pensioners, the youth, 60,000 farmers, labourers, business 

people, diabetics, and others have been abandoned by your 

administration.  What we've seen in this Legislative Assembly 

has no connection at all to your Speech from the Throne. 

Mr. Deputy Premier, on behalf of your administration, looking 

at all of the things that you have failed to do and your tax 

increases and your cuts, can you now admit, Mr. Deputy 

Premier, that you had no plan at all when you were elected 

except just to get elected? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am 

pleased to respond to the Leader of the Opposition to this 

question, and I want to say this to him. 

 

In 1983, the Leader of the Opposition said in New York this 

province had so much going for it that he could afford to 

mismanage it.  And he did. 

 

He dragged this province into a debt situation that is greater 

than any province in Canada and made it difficult for the future 

generations of this province to provide themselves the thing 

that they should have a right to have. 

 

Since November 1, 1991, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

turned that around. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And that's why the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying, Mr. Speaker, that they are relieved 

that they finally have a government in office that is honest and 

open and accountable and providing good management of their 

taxpayers' dollars. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we heard that at the opening day 

and we hear it at the end, and in between, Mr. Speaker, we 

have the real facts and the truth.  The truth is, is that the hon. 

member admits clearly that he is taxing and he is cutting and 

his deficit is increasing and his credit rating is going down.  He 

is practising patronage; rural people are being abandoned; 

health care people are being abandoned; and he says, well we're 

finally in power and we're living up to the plan. 
 

Mr. Minister, what the people are asking is if your credit 

rating's falling and if you're increasing taxes and if you're 

cutting services and you're abandoning rural people and you're 

charging those that are sick, won't you now admit that you 

didn't have a plan at all for the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I happen to have here 

an editorial from a recent edition of the Swift Current Sun.  Is 

it Swift Current Sun? 
 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes. 
 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Which very clearly portrays the 

performance of the opposition in this legislature since this 

session began in April when an editorial says:  most of what we 

hear from the opposition lately is closer to ravings than 

rhetoric. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



3250 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And, Mr. Speaker, I might say that 

the people of Saskatchewan recognize that to be the case.  And 

they know that what this government is doing, and it started it 

with this session and this first budget of this administration, 

that we are returning the future of this province back to our 

children and their children and guaranteeing the future by 

turning away from the kind of mismanagement and waste that 

took place here in the nine and a half years between 1982 and 

1991. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, it's good to know -- and I'm sure 

the media will be really happy to know -- that the Deputy 

Premier has read John Penner's report to the legislature . . . 

from the legislature to the people of Swift Current. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Because that's what you've done.  Because 

nobody else is saying that.  Nobody else is saying that.  In fact 

the media report card has failure, failure, failure, failure . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, we have failed pasta plants; failed 

airplane projects; failed Piper; failed AECL (Atomic Energy of 

Canada Ltd.) agreements -- you've broken those agreements; 

problems with respect to breaking agreements with other 

provinces, with the national government.  You have no 

economic analysis that shows that you have any direction at all.  

Your credit rating is going down.  You promised 700 

companies are going to be in here doing work, and in fact you 

have young people leaving.  You have senior citizens 

absolutely, totally disenchanted with the fact that you're 

charging them and cutting them off.  And your credit rating's 

falling and your deficit's going up.  And in fact it's a higher 

deficit than when you took office.  And last night you admitted, 

well it's really just the accounting principles that were different.  

You just stacked it up. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Premier, why don't you tell us your plan, 

your economic plan for jobs, for economic activity, how you're 

going to help rural people in a crisis, health care people in a 

crisis.  Rather than blaming the federal government or rather 

than blaming someone else two years ago, what are going to do 

today? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The 

Leader of the Opposition sounds like this may be his last day in 

this Legislative Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- And I think, Mr. Speaker . . . I 

think, Mr. Speaker, we're prepared to accept that at face value 

and give him that -- and give him that. 

 

But what I want to say in response to his questions directly, 

that the member from Estevan's failure was 

 taking a prosperous province in 1982, with a provincial budget 

surplus of $139 million, and squandering and wasting and 

turning a have province to a province that is a province that is 

no longer a have province and is dependent on the federal 

government for equalization payments, which we cannot 

always rely on.  That is the failure of the member opposite. 

 

The success of the present government, Mr. Speaker, is that we 

almost completely are either in the process of or have 

implemented the program of the New Democratic Party, which 

we distributed to the people of Saskatchewan during the 

election campaign, the first of which was to bring common 

sense financial management to this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker.  I have here, Mr. Speaker, the 

missing brochure that the NDP administration failed to 

campaign on but now have implemented in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- the missing brochure that the media know 

about, the public really knows about, and tens of thousands of 

petitioners absolutely know about. 

 

And it says, when you promise no taxes, what you really want 

to do is increase sales tax, increase the personal tax, increase 

the phone rates, increase power rates, increase natural gas rates, 

increase SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) vehicle 

insurance, increase the E&H (education and health), increase 

the fuel tax and the tobacco tax and cut services to people and 

charge for health care, increase the prescription drug plan. 

 

And the brochure, the missing brochure is rather deep when 

you look at what you've done in the last few months.  Tell us, 

Mr. Deputy Premier, what is your real plan, given the fact that 

your credit rating has gone down, you've gone down in 

popularity, your taxes are up, and you have a crisis in rural 

Saskatchewan and no idea what to do to help them?  What are 

you going to do now? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, my answer is going to 

be straightforward and direct to the member from Estevan. 

 

I want the member from Estevan to know that the direction of 

this government is to take hold of the financial disaster created 

by the member from Estevan when he was the premier and 

bring financial stability and good management to the province 

of Saskatchewan so that we can guarantee for future 

generations -- our children and their children -- a prosperous 

future in which all of the programs and services that they have 

a right to expect will be assured them, rather than jeopardize as 

the member from Estevan did during the time when he was the 

premier by his mismanagement of the finances of this province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, the missing brochure goes on to 

talk about all the campaign promises that you really planned to 

implement, that you were afraid to tell people 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3251 

 -- like closing rural hospitals, not funding level 1 and 2 nursing 

homes, making sure that rural people had to pay more and 

more, encouraging rural people to defend their health care 

system at the local level by raising mill rates.  In fact you know 

you've got community fighting against community, rural 

people fighting against urban people. 

 

Mr. Deputy Premier, in the real brochure, the missing brochure, 

you have all kinds of things that you have implemented in this 

Legislative Assembly in this session that you didn't campaign 

on.  Why don't you tell them, Mr. Deputy Premier, what your 

real plan was, which was totally patronage, increase taxes, cut 

the services, do anything at all to get in power, and once you're 

in power, do anything to stay in power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I want to 

quote from a brochure called "Let's do it . . . The Saskatchewan 

Way," which was the election program of the New Democratic 

Party.  And I want to tell the member from Estevan that we 

said at that time that we would do the following: 

 

 First Things First -- Common Sense Financial Management. 

 

 New Directions, New Priorities. 

 

 Jobs, Fair Taxes, and Wealth Creation. 

 

Doing away with the regressive provincial GST (goods and 

services tax) which he had implemented. 

 

We would provide "A Better Quality of Life."  And in order to 

do that, we have to clean up the financial mess which he 

created. 

 

We would fight for agriculture and rural communities.  And 

this government has done that, even though the members 

opposite would not join, time after time, in supporting 

resolutions urging the federal government to provide third line 

of defence. 

 

And that this government would provide "Open, Honest and 

Accountable Government." 

 

On every single one of those commitments which were made to 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

delivered. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker and members of the public and 

members of the Legislative Assembly and members of the 

media, this NDP platform, this contract to the people is just as 

valid as the 60,000 GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 

contracts that you broke.  And that's a matter of fact. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- You broke the contract with the public, you 

brought in legislative changes and rule changes undemocratic, 

unparliamentary, and you broke the 

contract just like you broke these promises because you had no 

intention of keeping them. 

 

And you said you're just going to base it on common sense.  It's 

common sense to rip up rural roads, common sense to break 

contracts, common sense to increase taxes when you promised 

to reduce them, common sense to cut services and charge for 

health care, Mr. Deputy Premier. 

 

Why don't you admit that you had no intention at all of living 

up to any of the promises you made except just do what's 

necessary to get elected, and once you're in here, practise 

patronage and do the opposite -- anything at all, just to stay in 

power? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the 

member from Estevan, I want to remind him about a statement 

that his former deputy premier, Mr. Berntson made in the 

Public Accounts Committee with respect to their attitude 

towards this province and governing in this province when he 

was asked the question. 

 

He said, we're going to do what we can, though, to make it very 

difficult for you people to take it over again when you get back 

into power.  And they did apply that principle, Mr. Speaker, 

with a scorched earth policy prior to the election, knowing that 

they were going to be defeated. 

 

Well I want to say to the member from Estevan, in spite of that, 

in spite of the damage that they did to the future of this 

province with their mismanagement, we have taken up the 

challenge.  And this government, with the help and support of 

the people of Saskatchewan, is . . . and will turn it around to 

make sure that that future is a bright one because the people of 

this province have confidence that this government is heading 

in the right direction and turning us away from the kind of 

direction that the member from Estevan and the member from 

Thunder Creek and Rosthern were leading us . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

New Training Program for Nurses 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise today to 

inform this Assembly of a new training program for nurses to 

be offered through the Wascana Campus of the Saskatchewan 

Institute of Applied Science and Technology. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The new course which we expect to 

begin accepting students in the spring of 1993 will provide 

advanced clinical training for nurses.  The course will prepare 

nurses for work in northern Saskatchewan and will also prepare 

nurses for an expanded role in the province's health system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in order to improve the effectiveness and the 



3252 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

efficiency of our health system we must make better use of all 

our available health resources, both technological and human. 

 

One of the ways we can achieve this objective is to create 

expanded roles for our health professionals including nurses.  

Mr. Speaker, as we reform our health system nurses will take 

on greater responsibility for providing health services in many 

communities.  In this role they will be working in new 

partnerships with medical and other professionals. 

 

I'm pleased to report that both the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association 

have expressed their support of an expanded role for 

appropriately trained nurses. 

 

The new clinical skills training program is the result of 

discussions between a number of important health groups 

including the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association, the Saskatchewan 

Registered Nurses Association, and the Saskatchewan Union of 

Nurses. 

 

Our government recognizes that retraining and skills upgrading 

are critical if we want to empower nurses to take on 

challenging new roles.  This new training program represents 

an important step towards a reformed Saskatchewan health 

system, a system that will see nurses and other health 

professionals with enriched roles, working together towards 

wellness for the people of this province. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Obviously anything that can be done to assist and facilitate 

working toward wellness is something that they will have the 

support of in general terms from the opposition.  However, in 

the mean time we must recognize that there is a sickness 

problem out there.  So let's not get carried away with wellness 

at the expense of leaving the sick element not properly taken 

care of. 

 

Madam Minister, when it comes to nurses and expanded role 

for nurses, I would support that.  I think quite frankly, Madam 

Minister, that the nurses have, for a long period of time, been 

underutilized and their skills and the perfection that they bring 

to the service of the sick could be expanded. 

 

Madam Minister, I think if you're going to be taking a look at 

the expanded role of nurses, then perhaps we should take it a 

step further and take a look at the role of nurses when it comes 

into the entry level within the sickness program.  I think there's 

a lot to be said for nurses' expanded role in that system as well. 

 

(1445) 

 

So let's not just stop at this particular aspect or component of it, 

Madam Minister, but take a look at the real, expanded role that 

nurses would be able to play.  And certainly you will get our 

support in a situation like that. 

Madam Minister, the one concern that I would express at the 

same time is let's make sure that when we talk about extra 

training for nurses and an expanded role for nurses that indeed 

there are going to be jobs for nurses.  That is a concern that 

nurses are expressing to me in your helter-skelter rush for a 

more fiscal responsible situation that you are not in the mean 

time actually going to cost nurses jobs.  That, Madam Minister, 

is something that will not be acceptable to the nurses, to the 

people, and thereby not to the opposition. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- Before we begin the Committee of the Whole, 

I'll ask the minister to introduce the officials who are with her 

this afternoon. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, to my right is Mr. Duane 

Adams, the deputy minister; to my left, Mr. Lawrence Krahn; 

and immediately behind me, Mr. Brian Middlemiss; and to my 

left, behind me, Rick Hischebett, Justice. 

 

Clause 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Yes, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 

Madam Minister.  It's been a while since we discussed this 

particular topic on the MCIC (Medical Care Insurance 

Commission) Bill which is the Act to change the medical care 

insurance Act.  And primarily for the numbers of hours that we 

were involved in discussion on this Bill, we primarily pursued 

the concerns of the optometrists in the de-insuring of their 

services that you were contemplating as a minister and as a 

Department of Health and the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now many of the discussions that we had at that time translate 

rather directly over to the concerns that are being expressed by 

chiropractors, but more importantly, so many of their patients. 

 

Perhaps to summarize the discussion that we have had, in so far 

as optometric services are concerned, I should perhaps read the 

petition that so many thousands of people have signed and 

asked us to present to this Assembly, which of course we have 

done. 

 

The petition that was signed in almost all cases was this one: 

 

 To the Honourable Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

Legislature Assembled: 

 

 The petition of the undersigned concerned 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3253 

citizens of the province of Saskatchewan humbly showeth: 

 

 that impaired vision is a highly prevalent disorder costing 

millions of dollars and causing distress to thousands of 

Saskatchewan people; 

 

 that early detection of eye disease and related medical 

conditions by optometrists is a highly cost-effective, painless, 

and effective part of our health care system; 

 

 that quality optometric care is vital to the working poor and 

that there is a direct correlation between work-place safety 

and good vision; 

 

 that the government publicly asserts it remains committed to 

the basic principles of medicare, namely universality, 

accessibility, comprehensiveness, portability, and public 

administration; 

 

 that the government is acting to destroy these principles as 

they apply to optometric patients; 

 

 and that the government's proposed de-insurance of 

optometric care will clearly cost more both in terms of dollars 

and patient harm. 

 

 Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

Honourable Assembly may be pleased to cause the 

government to reverse its decision to de-insure optometry, 

and that your Honourable Assembly withhold consent from 

any government proposal to discriminate against optometric 

patients by refusing them coverage under medicare equal to 

other patients. 

 

 And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Madam Minister, will you honour this petition? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Government of Saskatchewan 

supports the fundamental principles of health care, and that is 

that access to health care services is universal and health care is 

publicly funded. 

 

Now that has never meant in this province that every single 

health care service is funded.  Dental services aren't funded, for 

example.  Optometric services weren't always funded.  It 

doesn't mean that every possible health care service is funded. 

 

The government has set up a safety net to make sure that 

people who can't afford a service have access to it.  Going to a 

doctor, to see a physician for a medical problem, getting 

admitted into the hospital is fully funded by the government.  

With respect to chiropractors, for example, there are many 

jurisdictions that don't fund chiropractic services at all. 

 

In Saskatchewan we have a strong health care system.  We've 

set up a safety net to deal with people who can't afford some of 

the non-physician type services like the optometric routine 

exams.  We've set up a safety net in 

other areas as well, and the Government of Saskatchewan is 

committed to universally accessible, publicly funded health 

care, and we are also committed to reducing inequities in the 

system which I spoke about this morning -- the increased 

funding for mental health, the increased funding for northern 

health, for example. 

 

And this government has put forward to the people of 

Saskatchewan a health reform paper that opens the whole area 

of health care up for discussion by the public.  And we will be 

meeting with the public and having discussions of that nature. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, what I would like to know 

is, prior to you making the decision to de-insure optometric 

services for the citizens of this province, what did you do to 

make sure that everyone was aware of your intentions? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The decision to de-insure optometric 

services, routine eye exams, was a budgetary item and 

therefore was not . . . it did not go to the public for public 

discussion prior to the budget coming down.  It was a 

budgetary item and the budgetary process was followed. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Top secret, right, Madam Minister?  Top 

secret.  This is the open, honest, forthright government that's 

going to involve citizens every step of the way.  But you 

decided upon instructions from the Premier and your Minister 

of Finance that no one, no one should have any inkling of what 

you proposed to do to them.  So this was top secret.  You didn't 

do any consultation.  There was no attempt on your part to find 

out, not only from the recipients of the service, but no attempt 

to find out from the providers of that health service, what the 

impact of your decision would be. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When the member opposite fired some 

400 dental therapists, there was no consultation with the dental 

therapists; they were just shoved off into a room, herded into a 

room.  That's how the government opposite fired 400 dental 

therapists.  And when they fired some 400 nurses, the April 

leading up to the election, they didn't go and consult with those 

nurses; they just did it.  And I'm assuming they did it as a result 

of the budgetary process. 

 

And now all of a sudden we have this new-found allegiance to 

consultation on the budgetary process and budgetary items.  

And they had a whole list of things that they were going to do 

in their January 1 budget.  They were going to put co-pays with 

respect to optometric services and co-pays with respect to 

chiropractic services.  And did they consult with the 

optometrists and the chiropractors on that?  Would you answer 

that question for me? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- So from your answer, Madam Minister, I am 

to understand that you are using the wrongs that we did in the 

past to justify the wrong that you are doing now.  Am I 

understanding the logic of your argument?  We apparently did 

two things wrong, and so therefore that legitimizes what you 

have done.  I thought it was all understood by everyone in this 

province that the Conservatives lost in the fall of 1991.  Is that 

not correct? 



3254 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

So you can attribute some of our wrongs as contributing to our 

loss.  Now you're trying to say that, well you did it.  So 

therefore we can do it. 

 

Madam Minister, they elected you because they thought that 

you would do better. 

 

(1500) 

 

An Hon. Member: -- We will. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And the member opposite says, we will.  Well 

I would say to the member opposite that I don't think the 

people of Saskatchewan have time at the rate that you are 

decimating this whole economic structure and physical 

structure and social fabric of our province at the rate that you're 

going. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I want you to know that as far as 

consultation is concerned, I'm just going to read a little bit to 

you.  This is from the Star-Phoenix, May 5, 1992.  And the 

headline says, "Optometrists decry lack of consultation 

process."  Now, Madam Minister, that's not me; that's the 

optometrists.  And a few paragraphs: 

 

 The government wants to cut health care dollars first and talk 

later, giving the . . . (L-word) to its consultation credo, 

Saskatchewan optometrists say. 

 

Then they continue to say that: 

 

 While they were consulted (Madam Minister) on a regular 

basis by the Conservatives, the optometrists have been unable 

to get a meeting with the NDP until the budget leak . . . 

 

So, Madam Minister, not only did the citizens of this province 

not know what was going to be happening, the optometrists did 

not know what was going to be happening. 

 

And I suggest to you, Madam Minister, in all sincerity, you 

didn't know what was going to be happening.  I don't think that 

you realized that in your wild pursuit to follow the orders of the 

Minister of Finance and the orders from the Premier to save 

money, I don't think that you honestly realized the impact that 

your decision was going to have on the people. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I think a fair question for me to ask of 

you would be:  at what level of discontent that the people are 

exhibiting will you listen to them?  Now I know there were 

4,000 families represented in the petitions that were handed in 

to this legislature in protest over your optometric service 

deletion.  That figure's not high enough for you, Madam? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I want to comment on the member's 

comments about: they did some wrongs and we are just 

continuing to do the same sort of wrongs they were doing, and 

didn't they lose the election, and therefore we should learn from 

their wrongs. 

 

What I'm commenting here is the hypocrisy of the members 

opposite when they stand up here and say, oh 

 dear, you shouldn't have done anything to optometric services; 

you shouldn't have done anything to drug plan; you shouldn't 

have done anything to chiropractic services.  And yet they had 

a secret plan to cut physios with a co-pay of 30 per cent; 

chiropractors, 30 per cent co-pay; optos, 30 per cent; drug plan 

increases to 30 per cent; de-insure List 3 Labs; and it goes on.  

Wholesale program changes.  They had a whole raft of things 

that they were going to do after the election if they were 

re-elected. 

 

And now they stand up here and they criticize our government 

for trying to deal with their deficit.  That's the hypocrisy that 

I'm speaking to when I made those comments earlier. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that we are monitoring the situation 

with respect to optometrists and chiropractors.  I am advised 

that the Department of Health is having ongoing discussions 

with the professional associations.  Our caucus and cabinet will 

have ongoing discussions.  We will be monitoring the situation. 

 

We've established a safety net so that people who can't afford 

to pay are looked after.  People who can't afford to pay will be 

looked after.  And the fact of the matter is, is this government 

can't spend money it doesn't have, but we will look after those 

who can't afford to pay. 

 

And I also want to point out that I've been advised by my 

officials that apparently there are a number of signatures that 

have repeated themselves in some of those petitions.  And in 

fact in one case, it was 11 times. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I don't know what you're saying about the 

people of the province, Madam Minister, or the chiropractors 

or the optometrists.  To whom are you casting aspersions by 

making that comment?  I don't think we ever made a comment 

like that during your tenure here and the petitions that you 

handed in, with Saddam Hussein and all those kinds of names 

that appeared on your petitions, Madam Minister.  So you're 

not a very good person to talk about some perceived 

irregularities on some of the petitions. 

 

So, Madam Minister, you're right.  I'm going to support you on 

one of your comments, that we are saying that you have no 

right to do these things.  You don't.  You don't.  And we didn't.  

But you don't have that right because you were elected under 

false pretences.  Because you said you wouldn't do that. 

 

You don't have a mandate for what you are doing.  You knew 

the deficit was $14.2 billion.  Your Premier said that in the 

leader's debate for everyone in the province to hear. 

 

So you knew that.  You did not have a mandate -- you do not -- 

to make those changes.  You don't. 

 

People were not expecting that.  They were expecting better of 

you and more of you because you said you would.  And they 

took your word. 

 

You say, Madam Minister, that you are monitoring.  That's a 

colloquialism for something that I'm not quite sure of 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3255 

what you mean by that -- you're monitoring.  Is that supposed 

to be some solace for these people out there?  Are they 

supposed to take some comfort in it that you're going to 

change?  Because if you are, then please say so. 

 

Because if you're saying that you're monitoring it, the 

information that I'm getting back from these service providers 

is that patients are dramatically down -- patients are 

dramatically down.  That's what they're telling me.  So if you're 

monitoring it you should now be aware of some of the impacts 

that your program is having. 

 

Madam Minister, chiropractors, chiropractors, your 

consultation.  First of all, it says -- the headline here, also from 

August 12, '92, from the Star-Phoenix: Petitions oppose 

chiropractic fees.  I know for a fact, Madam Minister, that we 

have approximately -- and I will say approximately -- 15,000 

petitioners that have signed opposing your program.  Now if 

there are 11 of those names that are duplicates, then of course 

we'll have to subtract that from the 15,000. 

 

Again, Madam Minister, I ask you what is the entry level in 

terms of the number of petitions that must be signed before you 

will honour that petition?  I know that 4,000 obviously was not 

enough for the optometrists.  So I ask you, is 15,000 enough? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, we will be talking to the 

public of Saskatchewan and the professional associations 

involved as . . . in the months to come.  And if there is a 

hardship being created to low income people, we urge the 

professional associations to make sure that these people get in 

touch with us so we can provide them with coverage.  And 

other than that there is nothing else the government can say.  

We will make sure people who are on FIP (Family Income 

Plan), SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan), and SAP 

(Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) are fully covered.  And we 

will have ongoing discussions with the associations. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, let's make one thing 

perfectly clear once and for all for whoever is listening and 

watching and for whoever may be reading Hansard.  I am not 

talking about FIP, SIP, and SAP.  That's 90,000 people under 

social aid and some form of assistance.  We know that. 

 

Our concern are the low income people just beyond that, that 

are going to have to make choices; that are not going to go to 

an optometrist; people that are not going to go to a 

chiropractor; people that are not going to do what they need as 

far as diabetes is concerned and the resultant damage to their 

eyes -- glaucoma and so on. 

 

Those are the ones -- the ones that are just beyond that.  Those 

are the concerns that we really have because people are going 

to make choices in terms of their quality health care.  And very 

often those people are going to choose to buy a present for their 

daughter, or simply food for the table -- to use your 

terminology when you were on this side. 

 

I don't think you have consulted, Madam Minister.  And yet in 

this article on October 12, and I will quote, Mr. Chairman: 

Simard said the government consulted with the chiropractors' 

association before drawing up the legislation and the 

association agreed to the amendments. 

 

Madam Minister, that's what this newspaper article says, not 

me.  Now either the newspaper article is wrong, that James 

Parker from the Star-Phoenix doesn't know what he's talking 

about, or Madam Minister the chiropractors are wrong.  

Because the article continues: 

 

 But Jack Nykoliation, its president said the consultations 

were a joke. 

 

 "We had some talks with health officials.  You could 

technically call it consultation, (okay) although most of our 

ideas were summarily ignored.  The government has forced 

us to agree." 

 

Let that sink in:  the government forced us to agree.  I'll 

continue: 

 

 "The whole idea originated in the Treasury Board," said 

Nykoliation. 

 

 "They want it to look like they are saving money.  This isn't 

something that is well thought out.  And this isn't something 

that is going to save money." 

 

And that's the bottom line, Madam Minister, that all of these 

people are telling us -- all of the care givers, the professionals 

out in the field -- that this is counter-productive.  It's not 

cost-effective.  And you talk about consultation.  Now these are 

not my words.  As a matter of fact it's the words out of a 

newspaper article. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- That's the problem. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And the member across says, that's the 

problem.  All right, so James Parker is the problem.  I don't 

happen to think so.  I happen to think that I'm looking at the 

problem.  And not just you, Madam Minister.  Again, elected 

Treasury Board, the Treasury Board -- that's all you ministers 

there.  You're on Treasury Board.  You're the ones that are 

making decisions.  You're in cahoots with the Minister of 

Finance and the Premier.  It's your decision to save money, and 

you don't have the mandate to do that.  That's what I'm telling 

you.  Because you never said that you would do that. 

 

You said that you would spend more on health, more on 

education and universities, and I could go through that litany.  

And you're doing the opposite.  You knew all along what 

problems that you were developing. 

 

So, Madam Minister, how do you explain why you would be 

doing that and at the same time you didn't tell us about it?  

You're aware of this ad that appeared in the Leader-Post 

August 19: when you voted NDP did you expect Medicare 

User Fees?  That's what this ad says, Madam Minister.  That's 

what this ad says.  And then it goes on and talks about that: the 

Government has introduced legislation that would bring a $10 

user fee . . . 

 

User fee -- by the NDP government, Madam Minister. 



3256 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

 Do I have to remind you about what you said in the past when 

you were critic here, about user fees?  I don't think I have to.  

And yet now you're doing precisely that.  Madam Minister, 

that's where the disagreement comes in. 

 

Before I go into that, I want to ask you, Madam Minister, if 

you are aware of any studies that have been done to compare 

the relative cost-effectiveness of an entry-level chiropractic 

treatment as opposed, let's say, to going into the physiotherapist 

at that level?  Are you aware of any studies along that line? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to consultation, I want to 

advise the member opposite that on April 28, 1992, officials of 

Saskatchewan Health met with the Chiropractors' Association.  

April 30 they also met with Dr. Nykoliation, Dr. Howlett, 

Johnstone, Stewart, Armstrong, Johnstone.  May 13 there were 

further meetings.  In fact I was present at that meeting.  May 21 

there were meetings with the officials of the Saskatchewan 

Health with the chiropractic . . . May 29 and June 2, again, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

Now I know that when a group in another meeting on June 11, 

it's pointed out to me, when a group meets with the government 

and doesn't achieve what it wants out of the meeting, it 

naturally feels there hasn't been consultation.  That's a natural 

feeling that comes out of meetings where a group may not get 

what they want. 

 

(1515) 

 

The fact of the matter is we're talking one, two, three, four, 

five, six, seven meetings -- seven meetings, Mr. Chair.  The 

fact of the matter is, is that the department has had extensive 

consultations.  The government was facing a budget line, the 

government was facing a budget line, and it was . . . the 

government was facing a budget line and the consultations that 

took place with the Chiropractors' Association was asking for 

their consultation on how we implement and how we deal with 

the difficult financial situation. 

 

Now with respect to studies, there are studies that have been 

done about the effectiveness of chiropractic treatment and there 

is no question that chiropractic treatment is effective.  We've 

never said it isn't.  In fact members on this side of the House 

use chiropractors. 

 

The fact of the matter is we can't fund everything.  This 

government cannot continue to spend the sort of money it's 

been spending for the last ten and a half years which has 

caused this province to be virtually bankrupt.  We can't spend 

money we don't have.  So we try to set up a system that 

provides for low income people, and that requires more 

consumer participation because we can't continue to fund 

services endlessly. 

 

It's crucial that we get the debt under control.  When that is the 

situation -- when it's under control -- we can then take a look at 

improving social programs. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  If I may intervene, with the co-operation 

of the members of the House, the Chair would seek leave to 

introduce guests who are in the Speaker's Chamber.  Is leave 

granted? 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Ladies and gentlemen of the Assembly, it's 

always a pleasure to invite back to Saskatchewan someone who 

has served with great distinction at this Table -- for two 

decades as a matter of fact, from 1969 to 1989 -- Gordon 

Barnhart who was Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan and left the province in '89 to now serve as Clerk 

at the Senate and Clerk of Committees of the House of 

Commons. 

 

I assume that he's accompanied today by his wife, Elaine, and I 

believe his son and daughter, David and Sarah.  And I would 

ask all members of the Assembly to show a very warm 

welcome back to Saskatchewan to the former Clerk and his 

family, Gordon Barnhart. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  And I 

would be remiss if I did not add my words of welcome to 

Gordon and his family.  I was, as you're aware, presiding 

officer of this House as well, back in 1986 on, and Gordon 

taught me all I know about the rules.  And I'll tell you one thing 

Gordon, it's sure coming in handy now as being House Leader 

of the opposition side here. 

 

So I appreciate what you've been able to do for me from that 

perspective, and I hope I do you well for what you have taught 

me.  Furthermore, knowing Gordon and his family, I can just 

imagine that he bicycled all the way here from Ottawa.  But 

regardless, I hope you enjoy your stay here, Gordon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- On behalf of the government, I'd also like 

to welcome Gordon and his family back to Saskatchewan and 

to the legislature.  And I would like to say that I worked fairly 

closely with Gordon when I was legislative counsel and law 

clerk for the Legislative Assembly.  And he is definitely a 

hard-working individual, a man of integrity, and very 

competent.  And I'm sure that they're really benefitting from 

your participation down East.  Thank you, Gordon. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act (continued) 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  If we 

could bring our minds back to the previous answer that the 

minister was giving in response to some of my comments and 

my questions, I was about to say, Mr. Chairman, that if there 

are any chiropractors that happen to be watching proceedings, I 

think your response, Madam Minister, must have been an insult 

to them, quite 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3257 

frankly.  It was an insult to them the way you spoke about 

them. 

 

Now we're not only talking about being effective.  Madam 

Minister, we all recognize that chiropractic services are 

effective.  The point I'm trying to make to you is that they are 

cost-effective.  And there's a big difference between that, and I 

want you to recognize that, that you are not saving money by 

de-insuring chiropractic services, period.  That is the point that 

we are trying to make and the point that you have to come to 

grips with. 

 

You didn't answer my question to satisfaction, Madam 

Minister, because I have here copies of reports and studies that 

have been done literally all over the place that confirm the 

comments and confirm what the chiropractors are telling us, 

that yes indeed chiropractic treatment is cost-effective.  You 

can take a look at the project that was done, called Canadian 

co-ordinating office for health technology assessment, of 

February 1992.  Chiropractic treatment of neck and back 

disorders. 

 

There's the Curtis study of 1988, Madam Minister, the Cassidy 

study of 1992.  I draw your attention, to you and your officials, 

of those studies.  And then there's another study done by 

economic evaluation of chiropractic services, an economic 

analysis draws the same conclusion.  I invite you to read that, 

Madam Minister.  Then there's the famous Mead study, the 

Mead study done of 1992.  I could read you the results of those 

to re-emphasize perhaps the cost-effectiveness of this type of a 

procedure.  Then there's the Greer paper also of 1992 called: 

The issues surrounding chiropractic fee negotiations in 

Saskatchewan, Madam Minister. 

 

So, Madam Minister, the point again that I've been trying to 

make is that you should reconsider de-insuring these services 

because you're creating a dilemma for many, many people in 

this province.  You're creating a dilemma and being 

counter-productive again, both in terms of dollars and the 

actual health of our people. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I have a letter here from the 

Chiropractors' Association of Saskatchewan.  It's from Jim 

Nykoliation, and it's dated August 20 where he makes mention 

of the June edition of the chiropractic journal of Australia, 

entitled: mechanical low back pain, a comparison of medical 

and chiropractic management within the Victorian work care 

scheme. 

 

Now that particular thing doesn't mean too much here, but 

some of the results of those studies, Madam Minister, confirm 

the clear trend.  And it's the scientific literature that 

chiropractic management, while more intensive, produces 

major overall savings through reduced compensation costs and 

chronic cases. 

 

With respect to management cost, the average chiropractic case 

cost $1,345, that's for treatment and compensation, which was 

58 per cent less than the average medical cost, which is $2,308. 

 

Chiropractic patients were only half as 

likely as medical patients to suffer time loss from work -- 

another benefit, Madam Minister.  Chiropractic patients who 

did suffer time loss from work averaged half as many days -- 

half as many days.  Average loss for time loss compensation 

was $392 for chiropractic patients and $1,570 for medical 

patients. 

 

So, Madam Minister, this again illustrates that chiropractic is a 

low technology, wellness-based, Madam Minister, efficient, 

and cost-effective form of therapy for highly prevalent and 

costly disorders such as low back and neck pain.  And that's the 

letter that I said came from the president of the chiropractic 

association. 

 

I have another letter from him.  This letter, Madam Minister, 

was addressed to you, so this is no news . . . and I should point 

out that the other one was also addressed to you and 

carbon-copied or xeroxed to me, as is this one.  And this one is 

dated August 27 where he states that: 

 

 . . . we propose to you that the government defer passage of 

Bill No. 71 and refer the issue of chiropractic services to the 

recently formed Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission for review.  We would suggest that all interested 

parties be permitted to make submissions to the Commission, 

and that the Commission make its findings public (as you 

have agreed that the commission's findings will be made 

public).  The government would then be in a position to make 

an informed, rational decision on chiropractic care, based on 

the facts, in a depoliticized atmosphere; an approach 

consistent with the fundamental principles of wellness. 

 

 The chiropractic profession in Saskatchewan is willing to 

publicly put the cost effectiveness and efficiency of its 

services to the test. Accordingly, the CAS would respectfully 

request that the government invest the small amount of time 

required to make a logical, sound, wellness based decision 

concerning access to chiropractic care. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that sounds very logical to me.  That 

sounds logical to me, that you take Bill 71, defer its passage 

until you can do a proper assessment, a public assessment with 

public input by your own commission that you've set up. 

 

And then if it proves that that is not accurate, if it proves that 

the chiropractors and the 15,000 petitioners are wrong, then 

you would have at least removed all doubt about the driving 

force and the motivation as to why you are doing this.  And 

then indeed, Madam Minister, the citizens of this province will 

be well served.  Would you do that, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- With respect to the letter that the member 

has just read, I am going to read my response to the 

chiropractors' association: 

 

 Dear Dr. Nykoliation: 

 

 This is in response to your letter of August 27th requesting 

that we defer passage of Bill No. 71. 

 

 You are well aware of the fiscal problem facing this province 

and the need for us to make some very difficult decisions.  

We understand and are 



3258 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

 well aware of the scientific research concerning the 

effectiveness of chiropractic care.  I would point out that 

another aspect that must be considered is the degree to which 

coverage can be provided through publicly funded insurance 

programs. 

 

 We believe, perhaps even more than some practitioners, that 

individuals who feel that chiropractic services are of value 

will continue to seek chiropractic care even if they are 

required to pay a fee. 

 

And I want to just digress here a minute and say that there is no 

evidence in the provinces where chiropractic services have no 

insurance or where there is a co-payment that people do not 

seek chiropractic services when they are needed. 

 

 You should also bear in mind that Saskatchewan continues to 

be the only province in Canada (and I'm quoting again from 

the letter) that does not have visit or dollar limits for 

chiropractic services. 

 

 With regard to the involvement of the Utilization 

Commission there may well be issues related to chiropractic 

care that we will want them to look at.  It is important to 

understand that the activities of the Commission will 

undoubtedly influence the development of health policies in 

the years to come. However, government is not abdicating its 

management responsibility for health programs to the 

commission. 

 

 I appreciate your position, however, we'll be proceeding with 

the Bill and the implementation of the co-payment 

arrangement at the earliest possible date. 

 

(1530) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I have a letter here from a Shirley Prescott from Martensville, 

Sask.  I don't know the lady, but she has also written to you, 

and I want to put this letter on record because I think it 

summarizes quite succinctly her feelings and the feelings of 

many folks.  She says: 

 

 I am strongly opposed to the chiropractic user fee.  This is 

only going to force patients to tolerate their pain for longer 

periods of time while they wait to get on physiotherapists' 

waiting list.  Why pay a user-fee when a referral will get you 

to a physiotherapist for free? 

 

 I'm also opposed to the plan to divide Saskatchewan into 

health districts.  They will create more management positions 

-- just what we don't need -- and at the same time reduce the 

actual amount of care available to residents. 

 

 Your "team" of supporters lack the conviction to stand behind 

their own ideas by putting the responsibility onto regional 

boards instead of shouldering it themselves.  When an area is 

forced to close a hospital you can all sit back comfortable 

 in the knowledge that you didn't directly do it yourselves. 

 

 What happened to the foresight, direction, commitment and 

promises that got this government elected?  Have we been 

cheated again? 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Clause 5 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have advised the 

Clerks of the Table that I would be making an amendment at 

this time on clause 5 and I see they are giving the amendment 

to the minister at this point.  Mr. Chairman, I move that we: 

 

 Amend clause 5(b) of the printed Bill by adding immediately 

before clause 15(h) as being enacted therein the following 

clause: 

 

  "(g.1)  services provided by physicians to terminate a 

pregnancy unless a continuing pregnancy is likely 

to cause irreversible physical injury; and" 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I have asked you on a 

couple of occasions what the entry level of acceptance by your 

government is in its promise to be open, forthright, and 

listening to people.  I thought that perhaps I would be able to 

persuade you to do away with Bill 71 by promising not to 

de-insure optometrists.  There were only 4,000 people that 

signed petitions to object to optometry being removed as an 

insured service. 

 

Then we went to the second part of your Bill, and we find that 

there were 15,000 people that said don't de-insure 

chiropractors.  And I asked you, Madam Minister, was that 

enough for you to listen to the wishes of the people.  And you 

proclaimed, no that is not enough. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, if you're bound and determined to have 

your way with Bill 71, de-insuring vital services to the people 

of this province in a non cost-effective way, then I'm going to 

suggest to you, Madam Minister, that you agree also to 

de-insuring from public funding, abortions that are not 

medically necessary to save the life of the mother.  That is my 

amendment, Madam Minister.  And I say that, I think, with 

some force, not the force of my voice, but the force of the 

voices of the people of this province. 

 

You know, Madam Minister, that there were almost 63 per cent 

of the people of this province that unequivocally demanded that 

the Government of Saskatchewan cease and desist in its 

funding for abortions in this province -- 63 per cent.  More, 

Madam Minister, than the PC caucus got during the last 

election;  more, Madam Minister, than the Liberal Party got in 

the last election; and more, Madam Minister, than your party 

got in the last election.  Sixty-three of the people said no. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3259 

Subsequent to that, Madam Minister, there have been enough 

people willing enough to step forward and sign their names on 

petitions requesting that you stop publicly funded abortions in 

the province of Saskatchewan.  Thirty-six thousand people, 

36,000 petitioners, Madam Minister, have requested you to do 

exactly that.  Madam Minister, I ask you: are 36,000 people 

enough? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will not be agreeing to the 

amendment. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, I'll give you another 

opportunity because I'm sure that you would not want to insult 

63 per cent of the people of this province.  Do you not agree, 

Madam Minister, that they deserve more of a response than 

that?  Would you want to, would you mind, would you 

condescend, would you come down to the level of actually 

explaining to the 63 per cent of the population of Saskatchewan 

when here I presented you with a wonderful opportunity to 

concede that they are right, and do what they are wishing you 

to do?  Would you give those people an answer? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite has raised this 

issue in the Assembly throughout this session on numerous 

occasions, and we have responded in detail and at length.  And 

he still, for political purposes, tries to make this issue a political 

issue.  It has nothing to do with his personal feelings on the 

matter.  It has to do with politics. 

 

He knows full well that it's unconstitutional, against the charter 

of rights.  He knows that.  We've explained it at length.  There 

has been numerous debate in here and he's still trying to 

grandstand on an issue of this nature. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Chairman, I'm disturbed with the 

minister's answer, that she would deign to cast aspersions on 

my motivation, saying that I don't care.  Madam Minister, this 

issue -- now listen carefully -- this issue means so much to me 

that I'm going to make a statement that you will be able to use 

against me as a politician. 

 

In 1985 when I was out on the hustings to become elected in 

this province, one of the stands that I took was that there are 

certain issues that I will not compromise, and the life and death 

issue is one of them.  And I went from house to house and I 

made it abundantly clear to everyone that I talked to that if the 

occasion should rise and we formed government where a 

decision would have to be made for me to choose between life 

or politics, I would choose life.  And if the constituents of 

Rosthern said to me, Neudorf, you vote for abortion, I said I 

will not do that no matter how many of you say, Neudorf, you 

do that.  I made the commitment that I would not do that.  I will 

not compromise that.  And I said, then you can throw me out 

on my ears on the next election. 

 

So don't you cast aspersions as to what my motivations are.  

And it's not only my motivation; it's the motivation of 63 per 

cent of the population that galvanized me into action.  That's 

the strength of my conviction, and that's what I'm talking to 

you about, Madam Minister. 

 

Now you are trying to hide behind the constitution. 

You're trying to hide behind the charter of rights . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well if you say the Saskatchewan charter of 

rights stands in your way, the charter of rights in this province 

has been made by politicians.  It was created in this room.  It's 

the creature of the creation of this room and the will of this 

Assembly.  Why not change the charter?  It's within the will of 

these politicians within this room.  If there's something within 

the charter that stands in your way, Madam Minister, then 

identify that for me and we'll take care of that. 

 

Now as far as the other issues, you are fully aware, Madam 

Minister, you are fully aware that this is another situation 

where there are legal opinions.  And legal opinions are exactly 

that -- they're exactly that; that's all they are, legal opinions. 

 

I have a legal opinion here, and the conclusion of the legal 

opinion from these barristers or lawyers, whatever you want to 

call them, says:  a province could de-insure in hospitals any 

medical procedure not medically necessary for the purpose of 

maintaining health.  A law firm. 

 

Then it goes on and it's got about four other conclusions:  a 

province could de-insure physician services which are not 

medically required.  A province cannot collect user fees.  A 

province cannot prevent abortions in hospitals where the 

hospital charges the patient directly.  Ah ha, we're talking about 

publicly funded abortions here.  A province cannot reduce the 

compensation for medically necessary abortions to an 

unreasonable amount.  An example given here is like down to 

$1, which would be ridiculous.  A province could de-insure 

abortions where the pregnancy is not a medical risk to the 

mother, Madam Minister. 

 

So don't hide behind that.  I'd like you to respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I made a public statement on this several 

months ago.  We went into detail with respect to the matter.  

We released the legal opinions or a couple of them that we had 

received, to the public.  I have repeatedly said that to de-insure 

abortions would violate the Constitution Act, the Canadian 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the Saskatchewan Human 

Rights Code and the Canada Health Act. 

 

Several months ago we indicated that we were setting up a 

family planning committee that was going to take a look at the 

issue of unintended pregnancies and to try and work together to 

reduce the number of unintended pregnancies in the province.  

And we took a lot of time to research the area.  And I've 

indicated in this House -- not once but numerous times -- what 

the findings were with respect to our legal opinions. 

 

And the fact of the matter is, it would be unconstitutional; it 

would offend the Canadian charter of rights and it would 

offend the Canada Health Act.  And that is the advice that we 

have received and that's the advice that we're going to follow. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Those are not the facts, Madam Minister, 

about the Canada Health Act, quite easily, and in fact we've got 

records of response from the federal government and so do 

you, Madam Minister, that that is 



3260 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

not an impediment -- that is not an impediment -- it's an excuse.  

That's what you're talking about. 

 

And you're talking about teen-age pregnancies, and of course 

we're all concerned about that.  You've set up a committee to 

have a look at that.  We have a concern about that committee 

because you're . . . the Teen-Aid issue, these other kinds where 

the emphasis is not on abstinence, but rather on prevention.  

And that, Madam Minister, I take a lot of exception to. 

 

You indicated that abortions are a result of teen-age 

pregnancies.  I can only conclude that from your comment, 

Madam Minister.  And yet we take a look at the statistics, we 

take a look at the quarterly statistics from Saskatchewan Social 

Services, and we take a look on page 11 of the adoption issue.  

And we find out that on ward adoptions, on infant adoptions, 

there are 370 in 1992 waiting, applicants waiting; home studies 

that are under way, another 78; approved homes waiting 

placement, another 147; adoption placements, the quarterly 

total, 11.  When you add those together you get 595 people 

who would want to have adoptions on infant adoptions. 

 

Then we have on special adoptions, applicants waiting, 116; 

home studies under way, 151; approved homes waiting, 151; 

and 23 adoption placements on the quarterly total.  When I add 

those all together, Madam Minister, I come out to the total of 

1,013 parents who are waiting to have adoptions.  Madam 

Minister, every child is a wanted child, number one. 

 

(1545) 

 

One way out is to kill those children before they are born.  

That's what abortion is all about, Madam Minister, that's what 

abortions are all about.  So this is a matter of life and death, 

and I don't intend to get into the dramatics of it.  That's not my 

intent here. 

 

But what I'm asking you, Madam Minister, as sincerely as I 

can, having and considering all the other things that we've been 

doing this afternoon, could you then at least be consistent and 

say that if it's not a medically necessary operation for a mother 

to have an abortion to save her life, if that's not the case -- and 

goodness knows we know it's a very small percentage of 1 per 

cent -- then that it will not be paid for by taxpayers' dollars. 

 

That's what we're asking, Madam Minister.  So on behalf of 63 

per cent of the people of this province I ask you again, don't 

hide behind the law.  Don't hide behind the law because that is 

not an impediment.  It's a likely option for you to pursue now 

to hide behind.  And that's all it is, Madam Minister.  Will you 

listen to 63 per cent of the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, or is that not enough? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is it's a 

doctor and the woman who determines whether or not it's 

medically necessary.  The suggestion the member made 

opposite is simply a red herring.  A committee cannot be 

established.  The Supreme Court has struck down therapeutic 

abortion committees.  The decision is left to a woman and her 

doctor. 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to make a couple of 

comments regarding the amendment brought forward by my 

colleague, the member from Rosthern.  I must indicate to the 

minister and to the government that certainly when we look at 

the vote and the results of the plebiscite that was placed last fall 

and you take a look at the different constituencies, and there 

were substantial differences in constituencies.  In my 

constituency it was almost 70 per cent of those who placed 

their X on that ballot who indicated that they did not agree with 

funding for abortions. 

 

And, Madam Minister, it wouldn't be right for me not to stand 

up and indicate the support that has been given in my 

constituency regarding that question.  And the minister has 

also, over the period of the last few hours, continually said that 

the government would be responsive to people, that they would 

listen.  We've heard that for a number of years regarding 

consultation or the number of months we've been in the 

Assembly regarding the consultative process.  And yet the 

results of a plebiscite . . . 

 

And certainly we can take a look at most recent days regarding 

the constitutional question.  For a period of months, the 

Premier of this province indicated that he wasn't in favour of a 

referendum even though some 80 per cent of the population 

asked for a referendum on the constitution.  But most recently 

we find now that the Premier has changed his mind and 

indicated that he felt a referendum would be appropriate. 

 

However, we find that there is continued silence, other than 

that the Madam Minister indicating that even though the 

Saskatchewan public have voted very loudly regarding funding 

of abortions, publicly funding, that the government is not 

willing to listen.  And one must question where the 

government's real objectives are in light of the fact that many 

of the constituencies represented by NDP members also voted 

very strongly and very openly regarding their views regarding 

publicly funded abortions. 

 

Therefore, Madam Minister and Mr. Chairman, I find today 

that I must support my colleague, the member from Rosthern, 

and his amendment. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, I 

too would like to speak in favour of the amendment.  I would 

like to draw to your attention, Madam Minister, one or two 

things that you have not taken into consideration.  They talk 

about 63 per cent.  Madam Minister, in my constituency the 

favourable vote was almost 80 per cent saying no to funding 

abortions. 

 

Madam Minister, I can't understand your logic.  When we will 

not fund diabetics, we will not fund chiropractic treatments or 

eye examinations . . .  These are things that people have no 

control over.  Madam Minister, I submit to you that pregnancy 

can be controlled, and abortions are avoidable. 

 

And I can't understand your logic.  When you will . . . I believe 

the figure you quoted was $1.4 million that you're charging 

extra to these people who have an affliction or a 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3261 

sickness that they have no control over.  They didn't go out and 

do anything and contract these problems, whereas in pregnancy 

there is a responsibility of the persons involved. 

 

Madam Minister, I hope you don't question my motivation in 

this.  Madam Minister, I am very, very happy that my mother 

did not abort me.  And I would ask you to look at your own 

children and wonder if they would want to be aborted. 

 

Madam Minister, I believe you need to take another look at 

this.  I don't think you have truly told us the truth about your 

resolve.  Madam Minister, I don't believe the impediment is 

because you believe that you don't have the legal right to do so.  

If you were truthful and if you would follow what you said you 

were going to do, listen to the people, you would find out for 

absolute sure whether this is legal under the charter of rights in 

the constitution.  But you're hiding under the umbrella of an 

illegal opinion. 

 

Madam Minister, while this is not on the subject, let me remind 

you of the debate we've had quite extensively here on the GRIP 

program.  That is just the opposite.  You're taking a . . .  We 

have legal opinion.  You have a legal opinion.  Madam 

Minister, I suggest to you, you really and truly won't listen to 

the people of this province.  Thank you very much. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, people of 

Saskatchewan, 68.9 per cent of the voters in my constituency 

voted no to the funding of abortion with public money.  I stand 

here today in support of that majority. 

 

You say, Madam Minister, that the court may rule against you 

if you try to do what the people have asked you to do.  At this 

point I would say to you that the people are simply saying, will 

you do the proper thing and put it to the test?  If you are 

legitimately beaten by a higher authority, they could forgive 

you.  But if you don't put it to the test, then they can't forgive 

you. 

 

I stand here in support of the amendment, and I ask you if 

you'll do the proper thing and listen to the people and put it to 

the test. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support my 

colleagues on this amendment, and I made my stand prior to 

the election when I declared my support for no funding for 

abortions. 

 

And I ask the Madam Minister why she is willing to cut 

funding to other medical procedures such as chiropractic care, 

such as the diabetics, such as optometrists when she is not 

willing to cut the funding to this medical procedure as it has 

been expressed by the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

In my own constituency it was a higher than 63 per cent vote 

against funding.  It was 68 per cent, Madam Minister.  And 

even in your own constituency there was over 4,600 people 

who voted no to funding of abortion -- better than 51 per cent, 

Madam Minister, in your constituency. 

 

Madam Minister, will you screw up your courage and 

follow the direction of the people of Saskatchewan rather than 

following the dictates of your NDP membership? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, last 

fall during the general election, one of the questions that was 

put before the people of this province was the following: 

abortions are legally performed in some Saskatchewan 

hospitals.  Should the Government of Saskatchewan pay for 

abortion procedures? 

 

Madam Minister, I'd like to report to you that in the 

constituency of Kindersley, the constituency that I am proud to 

represent, the people responded in the following fashion to that 

question.  Sixty-five per cent of the people believe that the 

province of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, 

should not pay for abortion procedures.  Madam Minister, I 

campaigned that if elected I would oppose abortion funding.  

The people of the constituency of Kindersley support that view.  

Madam Minister, the people of Saskatchewan do not want 

abortion procedures to be paid for by the Saskatchewan 

taxpayer. 

 

Madam Minister, I will be supporting my colleague in his 

amendment.  And I firmly believe the people of Saskatchewan 

also would support that amendment.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam 

Minister, in my constituency of Arm River there was about 68 

per cent supported the vote on not paying for abortions.  And I 

feel very badly that 68 per cent of the people in my riding can 

voice their opinion, and you as the government don't take it 

serious.  You're not taking it seriously because it's not washing 

with the member from Arm River when you're saying, oh it's 

not constitutional.  You're not even trying.  You've never even 

tried. 

 

And I can't believe that you're not doing what you can to try to 

. . . for one thing, is dollars and cents . . . but most importantly 

to try to slow down the killing of these little babies.  To try to 

stop that, there's what's wrong here. 

 

And I challenge, before we're through that there's a few 

members that should be getting up to speak on this.  There was 

several pro-life people that . . . 4 or 5 or 6, the member from 

Swift Current, the member from Weyburn, the member from 

Nipawin.  I'd like them to get up and voice their opinion.  And 

I'm sure there's lots more.  I'm sure that the Deputy Premier of 

this province -- I'm quite sure he was one of the ones that said 

he was a pro-life.  But what's happening here, that you've 

silenced them.  You don't even let them speak. 

 

They weren't even able to speak, Madam Minister, on the GRIP 

Bill because somebody said, no you don't.  So if I'm not right, 

if I'm wrong, Madam Minister, I want to see the member from 

Swift Current on his feet immediately and maybe the member 

from Weyburn and the member from Nipawin.  Stand up and 

be counted. 
 

Because when I was elected in Arm River -- nominated in 1977 

-- my nomination night I told the people of my constituency 

that if you want to . . . on some moral issues, never ask me to 

carry a message against my moral issues.  Any other message 

I'll carry to the legislature.  And I've only had three letters in 

fifteen years from pro-choice 



3262 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

people.  They've all been from the pro-life people because they 

know better than to ask the member from Arm River to go out 

and take a stand on not saving the life of the unborn. 

 

The trouble is that we have an NDP Party in Saskatchewan that 

supports abortion on demand.  That's the problem.  They 

support it.  They've never had a convention that they don't have 

60 to 90 per cent . . . let's kill the babies.  You know that. 

 

Let's have the Minister of Health stand up in this House and 

say that I am a pro-choice or a pro-life and take her stand.  I've 

taken my stand and you know perfectly well if you were a 

pro-life party and you believed in the life of the little child, that 

you believe that there's life at conception . . . if you believe that 

you would stand up and this would be no problem about 

anything to do with whether you pay for it in hospitals or not.  

You would see what could happen in a hurry.  You could do it.  

You know you can do it.  You don't want to do it. 

 

And I just feel so sorry for the individuals that believe other 

than you people.  But this is different.  This is not, Mr. 

Chairman, Madam Minister, this is not getting into which party 

has the most majority here.  Of course, we only got 10 

members; the Liberal have one; and you've got 55 or 56. 

 

Sixty-five per cent of the people in the province have spoken, 

and you don't care.  You don't care because you don't believe in 

the concept of saving a child's life.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

(1600) 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just have a few 

words to say.  I want to take this opportunity to point out that I 

will be supporting the member from Rosthern's amendment to 

the Bill.  The reasons are, I guess, two basic reasons.  One is 

that over 70 per cent of the people in my constituency said that 

I should support that kind of a move.  I am going to go on 

record as saying that I am doing that at this time. 

 

The second reason is because I firmly believe that this is the 

right thing to do.  In my mind it has nothing to do with politics; 

it has to do with morality.  It has to do with the fundamental 

right of an individual to live.  I want to point out to this 

Assembly that my mother was the youngest child of 17.  And I 

want to point out to this Assembly that under circumstances 

that exist in the province of Saskatchewan and across Canada 

today, that in a different kind of a home that that individual 

would not have been allowed to live. 

 

The people in the Soviet Union, for example, the average 

woman in the Soviet Union has eight abortions, and I don't 

think that that's right.  I don't think it's the right thing to do.  I 

don't think it's the right thing for anyone to do. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I support the 63 per cent roughly that 

said no to funding abortion in the province, and I am hoping 

that the members of this Assembly will also participate in that 

vote and say yes to this amendment and no to the question as 

other people in the 

 constituency and my constituency and in the province said.  So 

I want to thank the Assembly for this time.  And I will be 

definitely supporting the amendment to the Bill. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I 

just want to rise today in consideration of this Bill and say that 

I'll be supporting the member from Rosthern.  And I do that 

because I fundamentally believe that the process of 

referendum, the process of large-scale democracy, is something 

that we as Canadians have to accept.  Our country is probably 

going to face a national referendum on the issue of unity in our 

country.  We as Canadians will expect to live by that vote. 

 

Mr. Chairman, the vast majority of people in my constituency 

-- a majority that I could never even dream of attaining as a 

partisan political person in this province, a majority that I could 

never possibly attain, I don't believe -- said to me that they 

don't believe that the public funding of abortion is proper, that 

their tax dollars being invested in this particular procedure do 

not have any return, any return to the well being of this 

province. 

 

It's not a question of my partisan politics.  It's not a question of 

anyone's politics in this room.  It is a question that people 

fundamentally base decisions upon on moral values and on 

their ability as taxpayers to say what they believe is right and 

wrong in the province.  And any politician that in the face of a 

majority, such as that on an issue that goes far beyond what he 

or she could ever hope to attain in a partisan role in this 

province, has to give a second, sober thought to a question such 

as this. 

 

And it will be no different, I suggest to you, Mr. Chairman, 

than the vote that may be upon each and every one of us as 

Canadians in a very short time in a national referendum where 

an expression of the will of the majority will determine the 

make-up and indeed the moral values that we place on being 

Canadians.  And we . . . and I hope vote in the majority, and we 

vote strongly in the majority to maintain that thing called 

Canada. 

 

Saskatchewan people have voted, and voted in the majority 

overwhelmingly that this tax dollar being spent on this issue is 

absolutely, fundamentally wrong.  And any member in this 

Assembly, any member of this Assembly in the face of that 

majority has no choice, in my view, but to support the 

amendment from the member from Rosthern. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to get the 

attention of the Minister of Health, if she would engage in this 

conversation.  And she tells me that I should listen.  Maybe you 

could just take the time to listen to the public who have spoken 

out -- the public.  And the public is wrong.  Is that right, from 

the member from Rosetown?  The public is wrong when they 

vote.  The people are always right. 

 

The public, Mr. Chairman . . . We're going to get all of these 

people who are talking from their seat, on the record on this 

issue.  And the reason they're chirping from their seat, because 

they're getting uncomfortable.  They don't know whether to 

leave or stay or stand with their 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3263 

convictions.  And I want to talk about that for a minute because 

I'm going to support the amendment. 

 

A combination of things, Madam Minister -- one, we have an 

opportunity to express your personal views, your personal 

views.  You have and others have in the NDP caucus said you 

are pro-life supporters.  What does that mean?  You don't agree 

with abortion and you don't agree with the funding of abortion.  

That's what you've said.  And if I'm not mistaken that's what 

the Deputy Premier said and I believe, because you go to the 

same church that I do, that's what you have said. 

 

And members across the way and members on both sides of the 

House have said this is their view; they don't believe in 

abortion.  It is wrong and it should not be funded.  Your church 

says that, your congregation says that, you have said that.  And 

you have an opportunity now to stand in your place and be 

counted, to say I don't believe in abortion and I don't believe in 

funding it.  And we're giving you that opportunity.  And what's 

more, the majority of Saskatchewan people will support you. 

 

In my riding approximately 70 per cent said don't fund 

abortion; across the province, over 60 per cent.  So they will 

get your support.  You will have their support and you will 

have your church's support and you will have your colleagues' 

support and you'll have your own conscience as support.  

Because you have an opportunity here to say, I will include this 

amendment in the Bill because, Madam Minister, you have 

opened this door.  You've said, well certain things don't need to 

be funded; insulin doesn't need to be funded. 

 

Well for Heaven's sakes, imagine all the cards and letters, and 

petitioners have said, I have to have insulin.  How can you not 

fund that?  And you say, well I guess we have to charge 

because we've got a budget problem and some other things.  

And then 63 per cent of the people said, well for Heaven's 

sakes, don't fund abortions, and it will probably save you some 

money at the same time.  But no, you charge for insulin and 

you turn around and you won't de-insure abortions which you 

tell me you believe in, your church tells us you believe in, your 

colleagues have said they believe in.  And you stand up in front 

of your neighbours and your friends and others in this 

legislature and say, but I can charge for back pain and I can 

charge for insulin and I can charge for eye examinations but I 

can't de-insure and charge for an abortion. 

 

It makes no sense, Madam Minister.  It makes no political 

sense.  It makes no democratic sense because the majority of 

people believe that you should have some financial support for 

insulin.  And if you have eye problems and if you have back 

problems, some support.  You shouldn't de-insure those. 

 

But if you have an opportunity to save money with the moral 

support of churches, congregation, political parties, and others, 

here it is.  So we got to ask, Madam Minister: why are you 

doing this? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- What happened to the dental program 

under you? 

 

Mr. Devine: -- The member from Quill Lakes can stand 

 in his place and vote as he sees fit, and we'll all know.  We'll 

all know.  He can stand in there and he can preach that he's 

pro-life and we'll find out how he's going to vote.  He'll charge 

for insulin and vote for it.  He'll charge for eye examinations 

and vote for it.  And when he stands in here and says, well but 

I'll pay for abortions, we'll see if he'll vote for it or not. 

 

So you are going to be examined today, examined by yourself, 

your conscience, your community, your church, your 

colleagues, members of the legislature, and the public.  And in 

democracy the public said, I don't want you to fund it.  And 

then you go on, Madam Minister, and you say, but it might be 

unconstitutional.  Well for Heaven's sakes, that never slowed 

you up before. 

 

The Law Clerk . . . the Legislative Law Clerk here says you 

have introduced and you have now passed legislation in his 

view that is unconstitutional and violates the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  And you steamrolled right through it because 

you didn't care at all.  You wouldn't even refer it to the courts.  

And you have lawyers inside, outside.  And the legislative 

Clerk of this Assembly said you have violated rights and 

freedoms.  And you didn't care -- not one bit. 

 

And you've got 60,000 farmers that have been violated, their 

communities violated, their rights violated.  And in this case, 

Madam Minister, you've got 63 per cent of the population that 

encourage you to take it to court if you have to, and say you 

can change the Saskatchewan charter of rights.  You can take 

this to the Supreme Court if you like.  We support you.  And it 

would be non-partisan support. 

 

So nobody's going to buy your argument that you haven't said 

morally what you believe, and you've got a chance to defend it 

democratically because people have voted in a plebiscite and 

they've said clearly this is non-partisan.  They voted for all 

different parties and different percentages, but they voted on 

this in a vast majority.  And then you come up and say in your 

view it might be unconstitutional.  Well what about the GRIP 

Bill?  You've had lawyers inside and outside that say you are 

unconstitutional -- never stopped you at all. 

 

When you have the political courage, the partisan courage to 

rip up contracts for farmers and thousands of people, tens of 

thousands of people, no problem.  Take on the Supreme Court; 

challenge it. 

 

Now when it comes to your own moral convictions, it comes to 

the things you say inside the legislature and out, when it comes 

to plebiscites and sticking up for democracy and the rule of 

democracy which means the majority should be respected, 

what do you do, Madam Minister?  You hide.  No conviction at 

all.  No legal conviction, no moral conviction, no democratic 

conviction -- no conviction at all. 

 

And the public you say . . . And the members opposite say well 

the public must be wrong, or you don't like to listen to this 

because it makes you tired or you don't want to hear about this.  

They voted and they believed that governments would listen to 

people.  To date now what do we see?  We see there will be a 

national referendum, 



3264 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

and I whole-heartedly support that as I did when I proposed the 

suggestions to the Senate hearings that went across the 

province. 

 

If you can have a plebiscite where people can vote for 

something, not even vote for the person that put it out there, but 

said this is the right thing to do . . . whether I vote NDP, 

Liberal, or Tory, or whatever, I want you to stop funding 

abortions.  And I heard the cabinet ministers say they were 

pro-life.  And I heard the member from Swift Current say they 

were pro-life.  And I heard the member from Nipawin say they 

were pro-life.  And I heard the Deputy Premier say that he was 

pro-life, and I heard lots of people that belong to the Mennonite 

Church and the Catholic Church and the Anglican Church and 

all kinds of churches say we are pro-life, but we happen to be 

NDP.  Give us a chance, and we will defend our beliefs. 

 

Well you have that chance.  You have that chance.  We 

introduced the legislation so that in fact . . . And you voted for 

it.  You voted for plebiscite and referendum legislation so we 

could take fundamental questions to the people.  You stood in 

your place and said, good idea.  And it's on the record in 

Hansard and in this Legislative Assembly.  You voted for 

plebiscites and referendum. 

 

You said it was good.  Then when you get in power, oh it 

doesn't matter any more.  My moral principles don't really . . . 

(inaudible) . . . Well it doesn't matter.  The Supreme Court 

might call us, say that it was . . . Ah, come on.  You have 

challenged and broke every commitment.  Here's a chance to 

come clean.  Here is an opportunity. 

 

It would be democratic.  It would be moral.  It would be 

consistent with democracy because people voted for it.  And if 

you're going to believe in the referendum that takes place in the 

country, then you could believe in the referendum that took 

place on life in this province.  We were the first province in the 

history of Canada to give people an opportunity to vote with 

respect to pro-life or not.  And they were clear in their 

majority.  And all they asked you to do was exercise it, and 

you've cut and charged all kinds of fees.  And you can't bring 

yourself to do this because we did it.  Is that it?  What other 

justification?  The courts might challenge you?  Well take it to 

the court.  You'd have total public support.  You'd have the vast 

majority of the public right behind you.  And if you needed 

legislative changes here, we'd be behind you.  And you might 

even win.  Wouldn't that be historic? 

 

(1615) 

 

Well you have a chance, Madam Minister, to stand on your feet 

and defend this.  Your colleagues will have an opportunity to 

vote their conscience.  Let them vote their conscience, and we 

will stop funding abortion like we have de-insured all kinds of 

other services.  It would be perfectly consistent and logical.  

This is the time to do it. 
 

So, Madam Minister, I will whole-heartedly support the 

amendment, the motion put forward by my colleague, the 

member from Rosthern.  He is right, the people are right, they 

voted in a plebiscite so that in fact we could have this move.  

Here is your opportunity.  It fits with your whole agenda of 

balancing budgets or cutting expenditures, and it has the moral 

support of the majority of Saskatchewan 

 people, and we hope it has the moral support of the members 

of the legislature in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 4:17 p.m. until 4:27 p.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

Yeas 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 10 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lyons 

Thompson Lautermilch 

Wiens Johnson 

Simard Trew 

Tchorzewski Draper 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Cline 

Anguish McPherson 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Kowalsky Crofford 

Carson Knezacek 

MacKinnon Harper 

Penner Keeping 

Cunningham Carlson 

Upshall Langford 

Bradley Jess 

Lorje  

-- 37 

Clause 5 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 6 and 7 agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, I move to: 

 

 Amend section 18.01 of the Act, as being enacted by section 

8 of the printed Bill: 

 

  (a)  By striking out "No chiropractor" and substituting 

"Where regulations are made pursuant to clause 

48(1)(i.2), no chiropractor"; and 

 

  (b)  By striking out "the regulations" and substituting 

"those regulations". 

 

These were amendments requested by the chiropractors. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 9 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3265 

The division bells rang from 4:33 p.m. until 4:43 p.m. 

 

Clause 13 agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Thompson Johnson 

Wiens Trew 

Simard Draper 

Tchorzewski Whitmore 

Lingenfelter Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Bradley Keeping 

Lorje Langford 

Lautermilch Jess 

-- 34 

Nays 

-- Nil 

The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended on 

division. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I move the 

amendments now be read a first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to on division. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move the 

Bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The division bells rang from 4:51 p.m. until 5:21 p.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

YEAS 

Van Mulligen Johnson 

Thompson Trew 

Wiens Draper 

Simard Whitmore 

Tchorzewski Sonntag 

Shillington Flavel 

Koskie Roy 

Anguish Cline 

Solomon Scott 

Kowalsky McPherson 

Carson Wormsbecker 

Penner Crofford 

Cunningham Knezacek 

Upshall Harper 

Hagel Keeping 

Bradley Langford 

Lorje Jess 

 Lautermilch t 

-- 35 

Nays 

Devine Martens 

Muirhead Britton 

Neudorf Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Boyd D'Autremont 

-- 10 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

Item 1 (continued) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

I have a few questions in relation to a few events in Moose Jaw 

in the health business.  I'm wondering if you could give me a 

quick update as to where the negotiations with Providence 

Place are. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  The Department of Health 

has been having ongoing discussions with the officials with 

respect to Providence Place and integration of health care 

services in Moose Jaw, and it's my understanding that all the 

basic principles have been agreed upon and there are ongoing 

discussions that are taking place on a day-to-day basis. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I was looking for a little more elaboration, 

Madam Minister, than that.  When I asked you this question in 

question period some months ago, that's basically what I got 

from you.  There are a whole lot of things have happened that I 

don't think we need to discuss in here that I'm well aware of. 

 

And you know the issues that were there.  There was 

governance with the sisters.  There was the question of money 

as the amount that was initially proposed by your officials 

some months ago, and there is the whole question of going to 

one acute care hospital.  And I think that it would be 

appropriate now for you to elaborate on some of those issues 

fuller. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that Sister Muriel 

and her board are attempting to resolve the issue of 

governance, and that that is being discussed at this time and 

that there are ongoing consultations and meetings taking place 

to resolve that issue.  I don't think it's appropriate for us to give 

any more details in this forum because it is a question of 

negotiations and ongoing consultations.  And for us to give 

details of exactly what's happening would be inappropriate in 

this setting. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, you may consider it 

to be inappropriate, but the people of Moose Jaw have waited a 

long time.  Moose Jaw and area has waited a long time.  St. 

Anthony's Home, quite frankly, is a disgrace -- not because the 

sisters and the board have made it a disgrace, but because 

government for too long, 



3266 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

 including the one that I served under, did not get on with the 

job.  And it was bricks and mortar, Madam Minister, that was 

the problem -- bricks and mortar. 

 

Now the citizens of Moose Jaw and area, well in advance of 

Madam Minister, well in advance even of the previous 

administration, had decided that some things had to change; 

that they came upon the wellness concept well before Madam 

Minister probably even thought about it.  And they said, we 

need one acute care facility but we need our St. Anthony's 

upgraded, that we need to get into assessing how a rapidly 

rising seniors population is going to remain a viable part of our 

community -- one of the highest seniors populations in our 

province. 

 

(1730) 

 

And they looked around and said, what have we got?  And they 

haven't had to be coerced into anything, Madam Minister.  All 

on their own, discussions over a number of years have said that 

we can do away with expensive acute care beds, that we can 

upgrade, and we can also take on that particular entity in our 

society, the aged, and do some things that will allow them to 

remain in their homes with their families, as productive parts of 

their community.  And what that's going to require in our 

community is to reduce to our institutions from three to two, 

get innovative, work with our home care system. 

 

And, Madam Minister, when they came to that realization 

amongst themselves without pressure from government, and 

came to the former administration and laid out the plan and 

said, here it is, this is the way that we should be going; this is 

how we can save the government money; this is how we can 

make our community a better place to live; this is how we can 

enhance the trading area of 60,000 people -- it was very 

difficult for the government of the day to say no.  And that's 

why the commitment was made to Providence Place. 

 

And now we have a concept, a concept that talks about 

wellness like no other that I've seen in this province, a concept 

that talks about saving the government money, talks about 

cutting back acute care beds in a very dramatic fashion.  It talks 

about incorporating all of the people in the care-giving business 

into a cohesive unit.  And now all of a sudden, we're running 

into problems. 

 

You come along as Health minister and your department and 

you say, well, Sisters of Providence, you've got to get out of 

town, when St. Paul's in Saskatoon isn't told the same thing.  

And now after months and months and months, after the 

argument has been made over and over and over again to you 

and your officials and we're starting to see some give that we 

aren't going to kick out of town one of the most important parts 

of our home care . . . of our care-giving component that we 

have had in that city, and we're still fooling around and 

dodging and not coming forth with straight answers. 

 

So the only thing I can surmise, Madam Minister, with these 

people who were way in front of you, who were showing the 

way in saving money, it's all got to be coming down to one 

thing, and that can only be that the community has not bought 

into your concept of health boards where you wouldn't 

incorporate any of the 

existing people, and that it's strictly something to do with the 

budget initiatives of the Finance minister.  It must be. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you maybe don't like it, you maybe 

don't like it, but the simple fact is that people in that 

community don't like what you're doing either.  They don't like 

it one bit. 

 

And that's why I think it's time, after all of these months, that 

people that led the way deserve better than what they're getting 

from you and your officials.  And I think it's time that you 

stood in this legislature and gave the people in that community 

and surrounding area some definite things to hang their hat on. 

 

That because they led the way, that they've been working for 

years and years and years on this concept, that there should be 

some rewards at the end of it, that St. Anthony's Home is going 

to be replaced, that Moose Jaw can expect assistance that 

enables their ageing population to stay viable in the 

community.  And if that means a component of geriatric 

assessment, it makes sense.  And that they not be sacrificed to 

some other plan that Madam Minister has, perhaps involving 

the Plains Hospital, perhaps other things that are going on. 

 

And I think it's time . . . If Madam Minister has problems with 

what I say, then she can stand in her place today, she can set 

the record straight in such a way that no one in the city of 

Moose Jaw or surrounding area has the least bit of doubt as to 

where this government's going, what commitments they're 

going to live up to, and that we can look forward to the 

beginning of construction on the big, bare lot in downtown 

Moose Jaw that was purchased by the Sisters of Providence to 

provide ongoing care to the citizens in Moose Jaw for another 

50 or 60 years. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's exactly comments like the member 

made just now that are designed to incite fear and to cause all 

sorts of dissension in Saskatchewan society.  He talked about 

kicking the nuns out of Moose Jaw.  Well that's absolutely 

ridiculous.  This government never intended to do that and 

never, never tried to do that. 

 

What the member opposite was doing was trying to incite 

public fear about negotiations and discussions that were going 

on, which seems to be a pattern over there.  It's not constructive 

opposition that we see.  It's partisan . . . Fearmongering is what 

it is, and political partisanship.  It is not constructive and 

effective.  It is an opposition that stands up and distorts facts, 

tells untruths, and fearmongers.  And the people of 

Saskatchewan are saying, stop it, because we want some health 

care reform. 

 

Now there have been ongoing discussions with Sister Muriel 

and her board that are very positive.  And the governance issue 

is being discussed and taken care of.  And it's my 

understanding that people are agreeing as to the best approach, 

and that's the NDP approach -- consultation and discussion and 

working it out with communities -- while the members opposite 

try to incite people into having unnecessary fears while they try 

to cause obstruction and dissension in our communities; pitting 

people against each other, instead of trying to pull this together 

in a fair and constructive fashion. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3267 

The fact of the matter is is that there are discussions going on 

with respect to St. Anthony's and this government does 

recognize the need for a replacement.  The question is how 

much and when? 

 

And at the present time we're dealing with the governance 

issue.  And as the member opposite knows, there was funding 

in this budget for planning and the first steps in that regard.  He 

knows that, but he still wants to say that we're not going to be 

following through with something.  The question is is how 

much and when?  That's the question in Moose Jaw. 

 

The members opposite, let's take a look at Gravelbourg and the 

members opposite -- 1986, 1988, 1991 -- promising the foyer 

every single election and never delivering. 

 

I'm telling you, I think that it is time for this legislature and the 

people of Saskatchewan to pull together.  We have a situation 

in Saskatchewan that is unprecedented in our history.  We need 

to reform the health care system and we have to get a handle on 

the deficit.  And instead of running around and muttering like 

the member from Morse is muttering in his beard here causing 

all kinds of dissension, he should be working co-operatively 

with people to do what is best for the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And that's what we are doing with Moose Jaw.  We are 

working co-operatively with the health care providers in Moose 

Jaw.  We're coming together to try and set up a system that's 

going to benefit everybody.  And as far as St. Anthony's is 

concerned, they know that there will be something.  It's a 

question of how much and when. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, that's about what I 

expected out of you.  That's all we ever get out of you is some 

kind of a harangue.  I mean if anybody taught this legislature 

about politics in health, it was Madam Minister. 

 

Madam Minister, now Minister of Health, who the day that the 

Murray Commission was dropped in this legislature ranted and 

raved.  I mean talk about scare tactics, Madam Minister, you 

taught the world how to do it.  You taught the world how to do 

it.  Politics to the hilt.  Get well, stay well, or get out of town.  

Yes. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, the reason I bring up Moose Jaw is 

they didn't believe your rhetoric when you were in opposition.  

They got on with designing wellness for the community.  They 

got on with talking amongst themselves about how we cut 

down from two acute care hospitals to one; how we reform our 

care giving with the aged; how we look to the future so that 

we're out in front of the game; how we get rid of those 

expensive beds.  And they did all of that without Madam 

Minister's help. 

 

And then they went and they bought a bunch of property and 

they cleared it off because the government of the day said, your 

plan makes sense.  Geriatric assessment in conjunction with St. 

Anthony's makes sense.  Fewer acute care beds makes sense.  

That's why they had funding approval, which you have 

withheld. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, the questions are getting down to: 

 are you going to help these people, who are out in front of the 

wellness model, do for their community what, by a very large 

consensus, everyone wants done?  And are you going to allow 

the people best qualified to deliver the health care, stay in 

place?  It's a question of funding and who runs it. 

 

The citizens of Moose Jaw have no desire to have happen to 

them what you evidently have done in Prince Albert.  I've 

discussed it with a number of people involved.  And I agree 

with you, we shouldn't use names here.  But the simple fact is 

that the board in Prince Albert is viewed as partisan and under 

the control of Madam Minister by many people in the health 

care field in Moose Jaw. 

 

It was well-known that some of the people were partisans; that 

they were known contributors to the NDP Party.  And that 

raised suspicions as to how they got on the health board.  

Everybody else that was up there, whether it was from the 

catholic institution or from the public institution was ignored.  

And quite frankly, Madam Minister, Moose Jaw doesn't want 

that.  They don't want that at all. They have people in the care 

business who are eminently qualified, people that have 

developed this plan over a number of years.  And they're 

eminently qualified to deliver the goods. 

 

And I would suggest to you if you want to check their books 

about the cost benefit, the cost benefit analysis that you would 

do, you would find that you are getting your bang for your 

buck out of the Sisters of Providence.  You've been getting 

your bang for your buck out of St. Anthony's.  And you've been 

getting your bang for your buck at the Union Hospital.  And 

you can compare them with any other area in the province of 

the same population, the same demographics, and you'll find 

that those people knew a value of a dollar. 

 

Now what they're asking you is, to go along with the plans that 

they've developed and to give them the ability to keep giving 

care in that community on a wellness model that is way in front 

of everybody else.  And the plans have been in place, the desire 

is there.  And what I'd like from you, Madam Minister, is not a 

speech like you might deliver to a class-room full of children, 

but a speech to the TV cameras in this Assembly, to the people 

in the city of Moose Jaw that says the commitment is there, the 

co-operation is there. And that when the local community 

decides who will run these health care institutions, that you're 

going to back them 100 per cent, and that you're not going to 

try and impose some other body over top of them that they may 

view as being tainted. 

 

Those are the commitments they want from you.  That's what 

they want to hear.  They don't want any more excuses; they 

don't want any more attempts by Madam Minister to take over.  

They're quite prepared to do the job.  They just need a little 

help from you. 

 

(1745) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The government isn't taking over.  The 

government's having consultation with communities and with 

people who are involved in the health care area.  In Saskatoon 

and Prince Albert that resulted in the 



3268 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

canonical law, the control with respect to the canonical law 

issues, and the catholic philosophy being carried through in 

those communities. 

 

That was done in conjunction with the government through 

consultation and it was written into the agreements, and that 

will be preserved in Moose Jaw.  There was never any threat to 

that except by some people with political partisanship who may 

have raised it as a concern . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 

such as the member opposite. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that the canonical . . . The threat 

with respect to the catholic faith was never there.  It wasn't 

there in Saskatoon; it wasn't there in P.A. (Prince Albert).  Now 

the fact of the matter is, is the nuns are concerned about their 

ability to enforce canonical law, and we will guarantee them 

that ability.  And we are trying to work out the details of a 

governance issue with them. 

 

We know they have made a valuable contribution in Moose 

Jaw.  We know they've made an extremely valuable 

contribution, and they have done a lot of the work that the 

member opposite raises.  And that's correct and we recognize 

that.  Now what we are trying to do is work to maybe take 

advantage of the common administrative services, for example, 

and to work collectively with people in Moose Jaw.  That's 

what we are doing at this time. 

 

When a board is set up in Moose Jaw it will be done with 

consultation with the stakeholders and they will be asked.  We 

will run all the names by them so that they participate in the 

selection of a board as we did in Saskatoon and P.A.  They will 

participate in the selection of a board. 

 

The situation in Moose Jaw is changing on a daily basis.  And 

I'm hoping that we can have some sort of agreement some time 

in the near future.  And it will be an agreement where everyone 

participates and agrees because that's what this government is 

doing.  It's consulting, and it's accommodating the wishes of 

people and their concerns. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, do you deny that the people 

in Moose Jaw were told that the deal that St. Paul's got would 

never be duplicated again in the province by anybody else?  Do 

you deny that? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The difference in the St. Paul's agreement 

is that there was a clause in there that gave an option for the 

purchase of the hospital by the government.  The nuns had the 

option to sell the hospital to the government under certain 

terms.  That clause will not be in a Moose Jaw agreement.  And 

when the statement was made that the St. Paul's agreement was 

different, it was made on that basis. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, maybe what we need 

to do here then is to have you table in this Assembly the 

agreements reached with St. Paul's, the agreements reached 

with Prince Albert so that the people in Moose Jaw, the 

ordinary folks that are concerned about this, can make 

comparisons.  These are the people that you're going to be 

asking to co-operate with you that are supposed to accept this 

board.  And from Madam Minister's answers, all I can 

determine out of this process 

is that it's not a question of governance any more.  It's not a 

question of money.  The only thing Madam Minister said that's 

in question is this super board of hers. 

 

So what's going on here?  Governance isn't an issue any more.  

Why do we have to have Madam Minister's super board when 

these guys have been so far out in front of the government on 

cutting back on costs and centralizing and doing everything 

else, they don't need Madam Minister's super board.  They've 

figured this out a long time ago.  I mean I want to know what's 

holding the process up here. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, with respect to tabling the 

documentation I will have to consult with St. Paul's and P.A. 

and the health boards in order to . . . because the agreement 

was with the health boards and the hospital people.  It wasn't 

with the government. 

 

And so I will have to consult with them.  And if they don't have 

any difficulty with us tabling it, we can do that.  I'm advised by 

my official that Sister Muriel already has a copy of those 

agreements and is aware of the contents of them and so does 

the Catholic health association. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Madam Minister, would you answer the rest 

of the question then.  I said it doesn't appear to be a matter of 

governance; you say that's been solved.  It's not a matter of 

money, but that's been solved.  All that seems to be left here is 

your super board. 

 

Now if these people have been so far out in front of 

government on amalgamating and cutting back and getting on 

with wellness, why do we need Madam Minister's super board 

before we can get on with building Providence Place.  It's not 

money.  It's not governance you say.  That's all been ironed out.  

Then why do we have to have your super board?  What is there 

about this that is going to improve on what people in Moose 

Jaw figured out by themselves years and years ago and have 

gone on with life? 

 

And I might remind Madam Minister they not only thought of 

it; they dug into their hip pockets -- the citizenry, the RM (rural 

municipality) surrounding, my RM, the RM where the member 

from Estevan farms, RMs all around and organizations and 

clubs -- have all dug into their hip pockets and they've ponied 

up.  And there are over a million dollars in trust accounts, 

Madam Minister, sitting there, waiting to be used.  And there 

will be more.  They're not asking for a free ride.  They will 

raise more. 

 

Now you tell me why Madam Minister has to have this super 

board in place when all of those other things are in place to 

allow these people to get on with life?  Can you answer that, 

Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite obviously wasn't 

listening very carefully to my comments.  I told him with 

respect to St. Anthony's, that it was a question of when and 

how much would be spent.  I didn't say it was going to be 

constructed immediately which is what you're implying by 

your comments.  I said that was still to be worked out and 

would have to be worked out within the fiscal plan of the 

government. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3269 

Now with respect to the governance issue, if we can 

co-ordinate and integrate services more effectively . . . home 

care services, for example, in P.A. and Saskatoon have come 

under the board, so has public health.  And there's discussion of 

mental health being incorporated, a housing unit in P.A., 

community health in Saskatoon.  So there's much more 

happening than simply the acute care facilities and special care 

homes getting together.  It's a totally comprehensive delivery, 

co-ordination, and integration of services, and that's what we're 

hoping to encourage. 

 

With respect to St. Anthony's, it will depend on the budget 

because the money's not in the budget this year.  And we are 

having discussions with them on that as well.  We recognize 

the need for movement to a new facility.  It's a question of what 

and when. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I asked the Madam Minister a little earlier: 

was the commitment there before?  You didn't answer that 

question. 

 

And I would remind Madam Minister, that as part of the plan 

presented to government some time ago, well before your 

government came to power, most of those issues were 

addressed.  Thunder Creek home care has been part of those 

discussions from the very beginning.  The housing of some of 

those components in Providence Place was in the initial design 

of the structure.  Every last item that Madam Minister ticked 

off has been talked about by the local people, the local boards, 

and they know full well that they had to play an instrumental 

role in Providence Place occurring because of the expenditure 

of taxpayers' money. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, that was all in the plan, so don't run 

that one out as a red herring.  That is simply not true, all of 

those people that were in on those discussions. 

 

So, Madam Minister, I want you tell me: was the funding in 

place?  And do you deny that the people in Moose Jaw, long 

before you came along, hadn't in fact addressed many of those 

concerns around the design of Providence Place? 

 

I mean I know that they had laundry facilities built in that were 

coterminous between Providence Place, the Union Hospital.  

Diagnostic services okay, all of your various machines that you 

use in a hospital setting, your lab work -- all of those things 

were taken care of in the plan, Madam Minister.  There was all 

sorts of things that were going to be worked out amongst the 

two of them, so don't tell me that those things have to be sorted 

out by your super board.  You are simply looking for a method 

to control.  And I'm saying to you that Moose Jaw doesn't need 

your control. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- There was no commitment by your 

government, like there was no funding in your budget for 

construction of St. Anthony's; there was only planning money.  

And we delivered planning money this year. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that there are very co-operative 

discussions taking place.  There are co-operative discussions 

taking place.  And I urge you to 

check it out because what you're trying to do right now is cause 

trouble.  And the fact of the matter is, is there are co-operative 

discussions taking place, and you're trying to make it more 

difficult rather than to facilitate. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well, Madam Minister, I guess what you 

would like me to do is start dropping names in here and the last 

time I had a discussion with them.  Well I'm not going to do 

that. 

 

But I can tell you, in preparation for these Estimates, that I 

have taken the time and the opportunity to discuss with a great 

number of people of where it's at.  And I know the kind of 

tactics that Madam Minister has used and, quite frankly, I don't 

agree with those tactics. 

 

I was with the former minister of Health at St. Mary's when the 

announcement was made, and the people were overjoyed and 

went out and made commitments.  I was there, Madam 

Minister; the commitment was there.  It was a done deal to 

build Providence Place. 

 

And now you say, well sometime in the future after we . . . 

What I see from this, Madam Minister -- and I'm not going to 

drop names in here, and I have checked -- everyone that is on a 

board in that city today I know very well, personally very well, 

have worked with over a number of years very well with.  And 

it doesn't matter whether it's St. Anthony's or Providence 

Hospital or Union Hospital or Thunder Creek Home Care; 

there's no mysteries there. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, what I need from you is a commitment 

that your board, your desire to exert control, total control over 

Moose Jaw and area through your super-board, is not going to 

be the thing that stands in the road of getting on with providing 

senior citizens in our community proper housing.  It isn't going 

to get in the road of providing senior citizens in our community 

proper assessment, that it isn't going to stop us developing a 

good acute care facility in our community, that isn't going to be 

shoved aside by Madam Minister's wont to do something else.  

That's what I need from you, Madam Minister, today, is that 

kind of commitment that that board of yours, that sticking point 

isn't going to be what stops people in Moose Jaw and area from 

getting a good quality of health care designed by themselves, 

paid for in a large part by themselves, and prepared to govern 

with proper governance by themselves.  Would you give me 

that commitment, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Many of the community service issues, 

for example, surrounding mental health and other community 

services were not worked out in your government's deal, and it 

has an effect on the number of acute care beds in the province 

if you move towards integration of some of these other 

services.  And they were not worked out.  They were not 

worked out. 

 

Now the fact of the matter . . . you don't look at one institution 

in isolation.  You look at the whole plan.  This is what we're 

talking about.  You look at everything in the community and 

what's being provided.  Not institution by institution, or town 

by town -- you do it in a more comprehensive fashion.  That's 

what the health care reform is all about. 



3270 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

With respect to the board, the Sisters of Providence and the 

other stakeholders will be able to nominate representation to 

that board.  Ultimately these boards may be completely elected.  

In the course of the agreement, we will ensure that they retain 

their ability over canonical law, and I'm not sure what the 

agreement will look like.  It may leave them with a board of 

governors.  I don't know at this point what is being agreed to, 

and I don't want to get into the details because I don't know 

what the details are.  It's being negotiated. 

 

But these concerns that you raised are being addressed in the 

negotiations, and the issue is much broader than what the 

member mentions.  It isn't just a question of home care.  There 

are other community services we're talking about.  It has an 

effect on the plan in the city.  And we are exploring that with 

all the stakeholders. 

 

(1800) 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well it was Madam Minister that wasn't 

listening very good because everyone of those entities you 

listed earlier I said people in the local community had 

addressed in preparation for Providence Place.  Now you may 

not trust them.  You may not believe them.  But I can tell you, 

Madam Minister, from sitting in at meetings, that mental health 

is a big issue.  And one of the propositions was to build 

Providence Place on government property out beside the 

Valley View Centre because of the questions of mental health 

revolving around Moose Jaw and area.  That was one of the 

propositions. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, I for the life of me don't know why you 

would not invite someone like the Sisters of Providence to take 

their place on your new board, why you would not invite 

someone from Thunder Creek Home Care to be on the board.  

Why should they have to nominate somebody?  Why should 

they have to go through this charade that Madam Minister 

ponies out about this super-board? 

 

People in that community know who each other are.  They 

know who's doing what.  They don't need to nominate 

anybody.  They've got qualified people that can step into the 

place and do the job.  And I can guarantee, Madam Minister, 

that I won't have to go through the electoral givings of the New 

Democratic Party to figure out who people are.  Everybody in 

Moose Jaw knows who's what on every one of those boards 

right now, and you won't have to go check out the contribution 

list of a darned one of them -- and there's some New Democrats 

there, by the way. 

 

You won't have to do that.  You can get on with the job.  You 

can simply say, Sister Muriel, would your board be pleased to 

put someone onto my new board, take the name, and get on 

with life.  And you can say the same thing to the city of Moose 

Jaw and the RM of Baildon and the RM of Marquis and around 

and around you go.  I mean these are the people that are 

ponying up the money.  These are the people that if there's 

taxing power put in place over and above what you have now, 

that'll have to pony up the money. 

 

What we need from you is not more studying and fooling 

around; what we need from you is some commitment that the 

people that have built and put in place a plan that is far in 

advance of anything else in this province be given the 

opportunity to implement it and that they be given the 

governance over it. 

 

So I don't know why you wouldn't want to give today to this 

Assembly and to the people in Moose Jaw your commitment 

that if the Sisters of Providence want to put somebody on the 

board, that they can put it on and so can everybody else.  And 

we just get on with life, and we build the thing.  That we get on 

with the job. 

 

And that's what you seem so reluctant to do.  And I think your 

reluctance stems right from the fact that your seat-mate across 

the place here has said that we will sacrifice the city of Moose 

Jaw and its health needs.  We'll sacrifice that on some other 

agenda -- an agenda that was so aptly pointed out to him last 

night in this Assembly -- and that that agenda simply isn't 

compatible with what people in that community have worked 

on for so darn long. 

 

And they don't like seeing the weeds growing downtown on 

those big vacant lots that the Sisters of Providence have 

purchased to build that new facility to start implementing care 

in our community.  They would rather see bricks and mortar 

there, Madam Minister, not weeds.  What they need from you 

is some assurances tonight that you're going to get on with 

allowing local people to run their own issues as they have done 

up to present, and you're not going to stand in their way, and 

we'll get on with building.  Can you give that commitment? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I've answered the member's question 

several times.  I've answered them before.  I have said that the 

sisters will have input as to who is on the board.  In fact I think 

the deputy minister spoke to Sister Muriel herself and 

suggested she might want to sit on the board. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is there's a co-operative situation in 

Moose Jaw, not a confrontational one as you want to create.  I 

have indicated that we recognize the need for a facility 

replacement with respect to St. Anthony's, and I've also 

indicated the question is, is what size of a building, how much, 

and when.  And it will have to be done within the fiscal plan of 

the government. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Chairman, we're making a small bit of 

progress now, small bit of progress.  I mean if Madam Minister 

had been so forthcoming about a half an hour ago, Mr. 

Chairman, if Madam Minister in her first response had stood up 

and said well -- guess what? -- we've just made the offer to 

Sister Muriel that if she'd like to sit on the board she can do it, I 

suppose I maybe would have negated a few questions.  But 

instead we have to drag it out of you. 

 

So now governance isn't the problem any more.  You said 

funding isn't really the problem; it just has to fit in the 

framework.  So we need to know what the framework is now. 

 

What is the hold-up with some kind of announcement, Madam 

Minister?  I mean just say to them, the budget says 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3271 

you can't have the bricks and mortar until the spring of 1994.  

It's that simple.  If Madam Minister has made the commitment 

that if Sister Muriel wants to sit on the board, Sister Muriel can 

sit on the board, and I presume the other stakeholders have 

been given the same offer, that we've allowed the stakeholders 

to sit on the board so governance is out of the issue now. 

 

You can now get on with . . . You say it's funding and the 

priorities of the government.  All Moose Jaw wants to know 

now is when the time frame.  And if that's when it is -- it's '93, 

it's '94, it's '95 -- we'll accept that. 

 

But I've got RM councils right now asking me: do I make my 

next commitment, the commitment that they made on behalf of 

their ratepayers to the Providence Place fund?  Do I make that?  

Do we go ahead and make that next commitment into the trust 

account, or do we hold it back?  Is this government going to do 

something different?  Are they going to renege on the promise?  

And what is the point of our ratepayers making another 

commitment to the Providence Place fund if the government's 

going to do something else?   We might as well take our money 

and go somewhere else. 

 

Madam Minister, all you have to tell those people is, this is the 

time frame.  This is when the bricks and mortar happen.  And I 

tell you those commitments will come in.  As they have in the 

past, the people in the community will raise money; they will 

work.  They will do whatever they have to to look after their 

needs of the people in that community and their senior citizens.  

And that's all you have to do, Madam Minister. 

 

And I don't know why you're so darn reluctant to tell this 

Assembly and tell that community why they can't have that 

commitment out of you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite wants to negotiate 

a deal on the floor of this Assembly with respect to Moose Jaw, 

and we're not going to do it.  Nor are we going to go into the 

details of the discussion with respect to governance more than 

we have already.  So I'm not going to deal with that. 

 

And you can ask all the questions you want, but we're not 

going to make a deal on the floor of this Assembly.  This deal 

is going to be made in Moose Jaw.  That's where it's going to 

be made -- with the people and the stakeholders and with 

discussions with them. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is, is that with respect to the 

facilities and when they'll be built, it will depend on the 

financial situation of the province.  And I want to know why 

you reneged on your promise, the member from Estevan there, 

to mismanage this province and still break even.  And why did 

he renege on that promise. 

 

Because that's the statement he made, that he could afford to 

mismanage this province and still break even.  And what he's 

created in this province is a deficit that's unprecedented in the 

history of Canada on a per capita basis for any province -- 

unprecedented. 

 

And any capital construction that takes place will be done 

within the context of the mess they've created and that 

we're trying to clean up. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Well it appears, Mr. Chairman, it's going to 

be a long evening, a long evening . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. it's fine by me too; fine by me too.  Because what Madam 

Minister just said to me in her last response is that I don't give a 

good . . . what you or any other taxpayer, ratepayer in the city 

of Moose Jaw or surrounding area cares.  I'm going to do it on 

my time, on my rules, and I'm not going to negotiate anything 

with any of you. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you might not want to do it with me, 

but I can tell you that there are lots of people in that community 

that talk very freely with me.  And if you keep negotiating the 

way you are, if you keep negotiating the way you are, the sad 

thing is that we not only aren't going to get a facility, there's a 

whole lot of people in our community and area that are going 

to suffer because of it, because Madam Minister says, it's my 

way or the doorway.  And to cover that up we get a 

long-winded speech, a long-winded speech about other people's 

problems. 

 

Well, Madam Minister, you've got a problem.  And there's a 

whole lot people that have worked very, very hard.  And they 

expect you, they expect you to take their problems very 

seriously.  And they don't expect games being played.  They 

don't expect any of Madam Minister's hand-picked 

appointments to tell them what to do, they expect their 

community.  And when they make a decision, they expect that 

you stand behind it -- not Madam Minister, but the community. 

 

And you have an example here that you can hold up to the rest 

of the province on a wellness model.  It has every single 

component that means anything to wellness built into it.  

There's something that you could hold up to every other 

community in this province and say, see this is how it works; 

this is how it will happen.  And instead, we drag them through 

a knot-hole.  And I don't know why you want to drag those 

people through that knot-hole when they've solved all of these 

problems a long time ago. 

 

So I just want the commitment, Madam Minister, just say 93, 

94; just make it. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- When St. Anthony's is going to be 

replaced is going to depend on the budgets and the fiscal 

situation of the province. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- I have two things, Madam Minister, that I 

want to talk about. One is that . . . I want to give a little bit of 

history into the beginning of a health region system in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Health region no. 1, Madam 

Minister, was the Swift Current area, and it was in existence 

from about 1948 on.  The RMs joined together to provide the 

background for the development of the health region no. 1. 

 

And I find it rather striking, Madam Minister, that today you're 

building them and in the '70s you were tearing them down.  

And in fact, Madam Minister, I was on the RM council and 

was a part of that, observing the tear-down of health region no. 

1 by, I believe, it was Walter Smishek that did it. 



3272 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

In that tear-down there was some significant things that 

happened that I thought were of interest, and I took note of 

them.  And one of them is that Mr. Wood, who was the 

Speaker of the House and the member for the city of Swift 

Current, had to put Mr. Smishek in his place, because he said 

I'm not going to allow this to happen because he had been the 

minister responsible for Rural Affairs.  And he said at the 

meeting that I was at, that I am not going to allow this to 

happen and he didn't allow it to happen.  But when Mr. Wood 

was relieved of his responsibilities it proceeded to happen, 

Madam Minister.  When he decided to quit, then is when this 

began to happen. 

 

(1815) 

 

And you know what, Madam Minister?  They were threatened.  

They had a million dollars in surplus. And then when they were 

dealing with that million dollars of surplus, Madam Minister, 

the Department of Health said to them, we're going to take that 

money away from you.  And then what the health region no. 1 

did, it went and bought specific kinds of equipment for various 

hospitals and they lowered their reserve down to a little over 

$400,000.  And then, Madam Minister, when that was done, 

then they decided in the Department of Health to take that 

$400,000 away. 

 

And you know who had put that money together?  It was the 

doctors and municipalities who had put a bond together, a 

50-year bond for $200,000, and it was just about due right 

about now, Madam Minister, that the Department of Finance 

would have that money in that bond -- a 50-year bond, Madam 

Minister. 

 

And I find it very, very interesting that today you're trying to 

build them, in the '70s you were trying to tear them down.  

Now I begin to ask the question: why?  Why would you do it?  

Why did you do it then and why do you deal, as the member 

from Thunder Creek talked about, why are you dealing it in the 

context that you're dealing with it? 

 

Because, Madam Minister, you want to number one, control 

the board, dictate the focus and the attention that that gets, and 

then require that the municipalities provide the funding.  All of 

that we'll say, okay this is as far as we go and then the 

municipalities will have to provide the funding underneath that. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is what everyone of the 

municipalities in my part of the world believe.  Because it was 

done once by your government it can be done twice by your 

government.  That causes us a serious problem, and that, 

Madam Minister, is . . . And if you want your department 

officials to check that out, that is exactly what happened.  We 

have a very, very serious problem in reflecting on some of the 

things that historically your party have done in the south-west 

part of the province.  And we don't like it.  And I'd like to have 

a response to that from you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am informed that with respect to the 

region that the member opposite, region no. 1 that the member 

opposite was talking about, that what was happening there is 

they were administering their own medicare program.  And 

they weren't within the 

province's universal program.  So they were processing their 

own information and their own Bills. 

 

And what occurred back then was that there was an 

amalgamation of this function.  It was brought into the 

province's program because it was more efficient to do it on a 

provincial basis with respect to the processing of Bills. 

 

What we are trying to do here with the creation of districts is to 

co-ordinate community services, is to co-ordinate all the health 

care services that are being provided in an area, services such 

as home-based services and public health and mental health 

and so on, which is . . . And that is the exercise that is taking 

place here. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, I'll give you another 

fact of history.  I was hoping you'd say that as a matter of fact 

because the doctors in that health region were practising at 80 

per cent of the fee schedule.  That's what was happening. 

 

And at 80 per cent of the fee schedule, the health region then 

had an opportunity to determine and self-determine what they 

were going to use those funds for.  And that self-determination 

led to some innovative things in the dental care program and 

many others. 

 

Madam Minister, they were running their own show and they 

were doing it very well, thank you.  And it was an irritant to the 

province to have them run their own show because their 

efficiencies were higher than the efficiencies in the province.  

And that, Madam Minister, is a fact. 

 

I want to just add one . . . the second point I want to make for 

your consideration, Madam Minister.  I had attended a 50th 

wedding anniversary in the Vanguard area and, Madam 

Minister, there were some allegations made by the former 

member of the legislature from that area.  And I have received 

a whole lot of letters about the closure of the Vanguard hospital 

because of the references made by him in your presence. 

 

And I want to read a letter into the record because I know it's 

important for my community, and it goes like this.  It's a letter 

to the Premier: 

 

 Dear Mr. Premier, 

 

 You cannot seriously be considering allowing the Health 

minister to go ahead with her plans for rural health care in 

Saskatchewan.  This gallant dumping of responsibility will 

have such severe ramifications it is impossible even to 

imagine the chaos that will result. 

 

 1. As each hospital, nursing home, etc., jockey for funding in 

the districts, communities will be pitted against each other, 

and even within communities, there will be strife.  The 

effects of that will last for generations to come. 

 

 2. There will be no quality people on those boards. No 

intelligent person would even consider accepting any 

responsibility for the mess you will 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3273 

be creating. 

 

 3. The cost to health care will be far greater than it is now, 

with the bulk of the money being spent on these boards and 

administrations with little left over for actual health care. 

 

 4. The deficit must be addressed and some changes will be 

necessary.  This fiasco will create an increase rather than a 

decrease in that deficit.  Firstly, the plan itself will cost a 

very, very large sum of money to implement before you 

admitted it totally unworkable.  Secondly, as people lose their 

jobs, not just health care workers, but nearly every industry in 

the province they . . . and hopefully move out of the province 

to find work.  If not, they will create a further drain on our 

welfare system.  In either case there will be an acute drain on 

the tax base.  This alone will have a negative effect on the 

deficit. 

 

 5. The quality of health care will suffer.  The best people in 

the field will leave the province rather than try to work under 

the stressful conditions the government is creating. 

 

 6. People, patients will not know where to turn for their 

health care needs.  The very thought of trying to get help in 

emergency situations in rural Saskatchewan makes the blood 

run cold. 

 

Madam Minister, it takes a lot of fortitude to live 150 or 200 

miles from a hospital to serve acute care patients and 

emergency care.  And that, Madam Minister, is exactly where 

you're headed.  That's exactly where you're headed. 

 

The city of Swift Current will get the facility.  What will 

Eastend get?  Nothing.  What will Climax get?  Nothing.  

Madam Minister, what will they have for acute care? 

 

My family have been involved in this kind of service, Madam 

Minister.  They have been involved in this kind of service at 

Cumberland where a doctor serves once a week.  And that, 

Madam Minister, was very significant kind of health care.  Is 

that the profile or the kind of opportunity you're going to have 

down in the south-west part of the province?  And we say no, 

we don't want it.  A doctor once a week is not enough. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is exactly what you're aiming at.  

Going on in this letter, Madam Minister: 

 

 Mr. Premier, I realize this that whole thing is political and the 

government is trying to get out of a very tricky responsibility.  

However, I would have expected you to learn from GRIP.  

Slow down.  Take time to work out a concrete plan that can 

work.  No one expects you to solve the deficit overnight. 

 

 We do expect you to take responsible steps towards a 

solution.  Rushing into it will only make the situation worse 

instead of better.  The solution will take time and hard work 

on the part of each of us, but we must begin with common 

sense, 

 Madam Minister. 

 

 I am wondering if Madam Minister had a nightmare one 

night and presented it as a health care plan.  That is how 

much sense it makes. 

 

 Again I cannot stress enough that you must put an immediate 

stop to this nonsense.  Get rid of the Health minister and put 

someone in there who at least has some common sense.  This 

advice is for your political well being. 

 

And this is a letter to the Premier.  You got a copy of this letter.  

The Minister of Finance got a copy of this letter.  The minister 

responsible for Social Services got a copy of this letter.  The 

Minister of Justice got a copy of this letter.  Madam Minister, 

you know what I'm going to do?  I'm going to ask this lady, I'm 

going to ask this lady if she would be prepared to put it in The 

Southwest Booster so that everybody has a chance to see it 

because this is the kind of thing that people are worried about. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I never was in that community to stir 

that up.  You and the people who are involved with your party 

were the ones that involved there.  And I never was in that 

community . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That is a hogwash 

from the member from Canora.  I live in my constituency, and I 

have all the time that I've been a member here.  And, Madam 

Minister, that was perpetrated on that community by you.  I 

have had only one other instance where I have received as 

much information regarding a hospital, and that was when a 

school closed down when nobody wanted it, and I didn't have 

control of that either. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I never made this happen.  You did.  

And the former member from the Morse constituency should 

be . . . if he went down to that community, he'd probably be 

tarred and feathered.  That, Madam Minister, is the kind of 

thing that the people think of your wellness model because they 

have a long way to drive.  They wanted a level 4 care facility 

there instead.  And what are you giving them?  The boot.  And 

that, Madam Minister, is not what they want. 

 

And if you can tell me different, so that I can take it out to that 

community, I'd be pleased to do that . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Well, Madam Minister, the member from Swift Current 

said I never went there.  Well, Madam Minister, I still live in 

my constituency. 

 

And, Madam Minister, I want to have your assurance that that 

hospital will stay open, and that it will serve the people in that 

community, as well as Kincaid and Mankota, Lafleche and 

Ponteix and Climax and Eastend and Shaunavon, Gull Lake, 

Cabri.  All of those facilities need to stay open, Madam 

Minister.  And they need to provide the kinds of care that is 

available. 

 

I wonder, Madam Minister, if you would be able to provide to 

this Assembly the cost per patient bed in those communities 

versus the cost per patient bed in any hospital in Saskatoon or 

Regina. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- My understanding is, Vanguard has one 

ADC (approved daily census), and it operates at the 



3274 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

expense of approximately $750,000 a year, has an average of 

one patient per day. 

 

Now I will get the detailed information generally as to the cost 

per patient day with respect to hospitals.  Under 6 ADC the 

cost per year, per bed is $173,217.  From 5 to 9, it's $102,045.  

From 10 to 16 it's 83,178.  And 17 to 24, it's $76,207 per bed.  

Okay? 

 

Okay with respect to a regional hospital, the difference per 

year, per bed is approximately $50,000 a year -- $50,000 a year 

being in the smaller hospital. 

 

Now with respect to Vanguard which is the thing you were . . . 

the letter you were raising, Vanguard Hospital has not been 

closed nor has the department said they were closing the 

Vanguard Hospital.  What we are going to be doing is asking 

communities to come together and take a look at the 173,217 

per year, per bed and to see whether we may be able to move to 

an integrated facility, for example, with fewer acute care beds 

or whether there's some other options that can go in. 

 

(1830) 

 

So we will want to generate these discussions with 

communities.  And as they get together and talk amongst 

themselves as to whether they want to explore options and look 

at options, I think that would not be a bad suggestion to look at 

options and explore them because what we're talking about is 

173,217 per bed, per year on average in a hospital such as 

Vanguard. 

 

Maybe they want to use some of that money to do some other 

health care programming, get some other health care 

professionals out to their community and use their hospital in a 

broader sense.  That's what we're trying to do with this health 

care reform. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Well, Madam Minister, that hospital has 10 

beds in it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know what the 

average daily census is, and it also is providing level 4 care for 

all of the rest of them because they don't have any place else to 

go.  They don't have any place else to go, Madam Minister.  

They don't have anywhere else to go, Madam Minister, and that 

is the problem.  That's the problem all the way through the 

south-west, and that's the part of the problem. 

 

Then you say well we'll shut down levels 1 and 2.  Swift 

Current doesn't have any room; no place else has any room.  

Where are you going to send them?  Madam Minister, that's 

where the problem lies. 

 

You know who's picking up the health care costs for those level 

1 to 4?  The RMs.  And I make my point, Madam Minister.  I 

rest my case.  That's where the costs comes in, and that's where 

the people have to pay. 

 

And that's exactly what you're going to do with your wellness 

model.  You'll say, okay we'll just provide this amount of 

money and then the rest gets paid for our of the property tax.  

And that's what's wrong with it. 
 

I can see this coming right down the pipe.  If I'm wrong I will 

apologize, not only to this House but also to the 

people in that community.  But I am more of the belief that I 

am accurate in what I'm saying than not because of the history 

that I explained to you earlier.  You did not provide a 

reasonable enough amount of funding to provide services, so 

the people are taxed for it.  And I don't see you doing anything 

different this time because you're going to take it from history 

and do it exactly the same way. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Chairman, a number of concerns have been 

raised in our office regarding the Whitespruce youth treatment 

facility.  We have many people wondering exactly what is 

happening with regards to the Whitespruce treatment facility.  

Over the period of the first part of this year, certainly since 

November and into the spring, a number of people have 

resigned from this facility.  There's been a number of problems 

in the facility and now recently, as of June 24 '92, a letter from 

the president of the facility . . . of the Whitespruce youth 

treatment foundation incorporated to the minister.  And it's, 

first of all . . . one question, number one question is the board 

of the centre now to be represented largely by people from 

government departments and agencies? 

 

They would like to know what the mandate is, what the copy of 

their new mandate is for the facility so that the board knows 

how to proceed and whether they should be getting funding.  

They want to know where the clients are coming from.  In fact 

from what I gather, Madam Minister, the facility that was built 

that has had a lot of raving reviews and have got a number of 

letters, complimentary letters, that have been sent to the 

administrative staff regarding the work done at the facility. 

 

It appears, Madam Minister, that the present government has 

just forgotten or has no intention of continuing the services, in 

fact may be caving into SADAC (Saskatchewan Alcohol and 

Drug Abuse Commission) because SADAC certainly wasn't 

happy with the Whitespruce facility.  They felt they should 

have more say or involvement.  And yet the board was, I 

believe, built and the centre was built on the basis of having 

been somewhat independent of the government. 

 

So I'd like to know where things sit regarding the Whitespruce 

treatment facility at this time. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- As the member opposite knows there had 

been considerable turmoil in the White Spruce Treatment 

Centre, and the government moved to appoint a board 

consisting of community members and some officials from the 

Department of Health.  It is my understanding that there's an 

interim director appointed who will be there until November 

and that the situation is been substantially stabilized, that there 

have been good links made with the referring communities 

because that was one of the problems if the member opposite 

recalls. 

 

There have been very good relationships established with the 

referring communities so that the family link can be made more 

effectively than what was occurring in the past.  I'm advised 

that there are a number of very positive improvements that 

have taken place since that board was established. 

 

And the Saskatchewan Alcohol and Drug Commission and the 

government will continue to monitor what is 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3275 

occurring there, and there will be sometime in the future a 

long-term decision made as to who is going to be on the board 

and the direction White Spruce will be taking. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Madam Minister, how many clients are presently 

being served by the facility? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The officials advise me, Mr. Chair, that 

there are 14 in residence, people in residence today, which is 

sort of the average summer amount because the numbers go 

down in the summer.  In the winter-time I'm advised they're at 

approximately 21.  That the board is working towards trying to 

incorporate more native youth into the facility because that 

component has not been there in the way it should be in the 

past. 

 

And I'm further advised that they are dealing with more 

difficult to treat cases, and this requires a little more intense 

treatment. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Well, Madam Minister, I guess a major concern 

and the concern of a number of staff members . . . and it's 

certainly apparent that there was some disunity amongst the 

staff, and I'm not going to get into where the disunity was 

really arising from.  But I look at a report put together by the 

member from Saskatoon Eastview-Haultain, July 1991. 

 

It talked about Whitespruce very . . . in fact it gave it a pretty 

good rating on here.  It talked about its concept should be 

introduced to several other areas within the province, 

particularly to areas with higher populations of youth such as 

large urban centres in the northern part of the province.  It 

talked about the client operating capacity and how . . . the fact 

there was a waiting list. 

 

And I also look at a number of . . . the numbers of clients that 

have been in the centre.  And when you look at the June period, 

and I don't know if this is . . . these could be '91 numbers or 

earlier.  But there were figures of 27 at one time, June 10 -- just 

taken randomly even through the summer -- July, of 29 people; 

and October, of 27.  And certainly the numbers have been right 

up there. 

 

And yet this past little while -- I believe since last fall or so -- 

the numbers have been really down.  And I think what it has 

indicated and what the staff is really concerned about, they just 

don't feel there is a commitment by the province to this facility.  

And I wonder if the minister would respond. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I'm advised that Alberta used to refer 

patients to Whitespruce and that they have just opened a new 

facility and are not using the Whitespruce facilities any longer.  

I am also advised that there is a real sense of unity at the 

Whitespruce facility these days, and that we're going through 

this stabilizing period, at which point we want to make sure the 

facility is perfectly safe for young people. 

 

And as far as whether or not the government is committed to 

Whitespruce, it's always been committed to Whitespruce and 

it's committed to Whitespruce as of today. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One other question, and certainly we could 

get into a lot further regarding the Whitespruce facility and 

some of the concerns that have been raised.  But another area, 

and it's been brought to my attention and it's certainly 

something that we've been trying to follow up on, we've given 

a chance for the proper channels to be followed, is the status of 

one Ellis Quarshie, the former clinical director. 

 

And I understand here, first of all, the board, a Mr. John Labatt, 

chairman, board of directors, wrote a letter to Mr. Quarshie, 

indicating that the board, once the board had established their 

findings, they would present a copy of our findings and give 

Mr. Quarshie an opportunity to respond accordingly.  And 

subsequent to your response, the board will review the 

situation. 

 

To my knowledge, those findings have never been given to Mr. 

Quarshie.  And maybe the minister could talk to the member 

from Churchill Downs and find out what's happening. 

 

And also a subsequent letter to Mr. Quarshie indicated that the 

board was just terminating his employment and that it was 

prepared to work out, basically said this is what we'll give you, 

but it is conditional to the board's offer that you execute a 

release in a form as prepared by the board. 

 

(1845) 

 

It appeared to me that there was no room for the board even to 

work with or to come to an amiable settlement.  In light of the 

fact when I look at the credentials . . . and Mr. Quarshie came 

to Whitespruce with some very high credentials, and in fact as 

recently as February has been contacted by the personnel 

department from the citizen ambassador program to go with 

them to the Soviet Union, to work on a program regarding drug 

and alcohol abuse, which appears to me, Madam Minister, that 

a lot of people across North America realize the experience and 

the work of Mr. Quarshie. 

 

And yet I find that here in Saskatchewan and at Whitespruce it 

appears that his work and the work he has done is certainly not 

worth the efforts.  And at the present time, Mr. Quarshie just 

doesn't know where things are at because everything just seems 

to be stalled. 

 

And if you were to look at the National Black Coalition of 

Canada, a number of accusations have come out of this.  And 

I'm sure many people would like to know where things are at 

because the reputation of an individual who has worked and 

dedicated himself to the furtherance of helping young people is 

at stake. 

 

And I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you would make a 

commitment that you would allow the proper process; indeed 

that in the end, Mr. Quarshie will be treated fairly.  That it 

wasn't just politics and just a few individuals in the Yorkton 

area who decided that they didn't like Mr. Quarshie, who have 

used the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) and 

maybe even the minister in the department to have a man 

removed from his office, rather than not being treated as fairly 

as he should be. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The matter of Mr. Quarshie is a matter 

between the board and Mr. Quarshie and I'm not 



3276 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

going to get into that in this legislature. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to 

ask a very quick question and make a comment, Madam 

Minister.  I know that we want to try to get finished here as 

soon as possible, so I'm just going to give you an outline of the 

hospitals and nursing homes in my constituency. 

 

Madam Minister, and I've been requested by all my hospitals 

and nursing homes to do this, so I must do this.  In my 

constituency, in Craik and Imperial is an integrated facility and 

then they have their acute care beds; Davidson, Outlook, they 

have full hospital and facility; Elbow and Dundurn have level 1 

and 2 level care; Outlook and Davidson also have a level 3, 4 

level care; and Hanley -- it's a big large area and they've been 

asking for a new nursing home, and it was approved under our 

government.  And now they're worried about whether it's going 

to get built or not. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, this board's going to be set up, and 

they're going to all sit in this board you're talking about, this 

master board.  And they're going to be sitting down and 

discussing what's going to happen in my constituency 

pertaining to all these hospitals and health care.  And I know 

what they're going to come up with; I know exactly what they 

want now.  So they're not going to start fighting one to another 

unless you see that they do.  And it's very simple, very simple, 

Madam Minister. 

 

Craik and Imperial, all they're asking for, just keeping the 

funding for what they've got.  That's all they want.  They have 

an integrated facility, the two towns, and they're brand-new.  

All they're going to ask for . . . But Davidson, I know what 

they're going to ask for.  They've been working on it for years, 

is a new addition to their hospital.  And Outlook, I know what 

they're going to ask for -- they're going to ask for a brand-new 

hospital because their hospital is in bad shape and it's a large 

area. 

 

And my question to you, after the board all sits and discuss 

that, they're all going to say this is what we want.  And then my 

question: will they get their request like you said they would, 

that the people will have their way, or are you just going to say 

that there's no funding for these people?  Just like a comment 

on that, Madam Minister. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite is being very 

simplistic in his approach to the health care reform. 

 

What we want to do with communities is get them together to 

talk in terms of needs assessment and what is required for the 

future and so on.  We will facilitate them with whatever 

information is necessary, and I know the communities will be 

looking at options.  Options will be laid on the table as to what 

could be done with the money that's there.  There are a lot of 

communities who consider options, sometimes think these 

options are better. 

 

So for the member opposite to simply say, the people in my 

community only want to keep the status quo and they want 

new facilities and this one wants a new hospital and this one 

wants a new this and a new this, and so are you going to give 

them your way, is very simplistic. 

Obviously whenever capital construction is undertaken, it has 

to be done in the context of the province's overall budget.  The 

province isn't going to say, if you need a 200 facility here and 

you say you want it, you got it.  It never did say that.  You 

didn't fund Gravelbourg for years. 

 

There's going to be provincial standards and guidelines with 

respect to construction, for example, and the administration of 

other health care services in the province.  But we want 

communities to come together and develop some sort of . . . as 

a district -- not as a community, an island unto themselves -- 

but as a district, some sort of needs assessment that will 

ultimately improve the quality of services that are in the area 

and co-ordinate and integrate services in Saskatchewan as 

hasn't happened in the past. 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Madam Minister, I just wanted to get that on 

the record and get your comment.  It's going to be your 

problem.  And I'm going to be doing everything I can for the 

people of my constituency. 

 

But if you think for one moment, Madam Minister, that you 

can just talk this nicey-nicey stuff and everybody is just going 

to get along so great.  If you think that when they get together, 

Madam Minister, to discuss this situation that Craik's going to 

say, well we'll close our funding down and you have it 

Imperial.  And Davidson going to say, well we'll let our 

hospital go so Outlook can get a new one.  Forget it. 

 

Mr. Chairman, I think I'll just wait until I got the attention of 

the minister.  Madam Minister, I just want to leave this 

comment with you.  I hope it works, this new wellness 

program, for goodness sakes.  Not for your sake, I don't hope it 

works, I hope it works for the sake of the people in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  That's what's most important.  

That's what's really at stake here.  I hope for the sake of the 

people I've represented for 15 years, and I hope to represent for 

another three at least.  And I hope it works for them.  I hope 

you don't create arguments among them and dissension among 

them.  I hope your program works. 

 

But I've been around a long time.  I've been a politician a lot 

longer than you have.  And I could tell you that . . . just what 

you're . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I sure have been a 

politician a lot longer and I've had a lot more experience than 

you've had and I got a lot of experience with people.  And I'm 

afraid of this here program that what you're setting up.  But I 

hope it works. 

 

And I'm just going to close on a few statements that I've been 

asked to put on the record.  And one is from Dr. McCaw from 

Craik, Saskatchewan.  He's been our good doctor that moved in 

there in 1953.  And it's a long time to stay in one community -- 

1953 to 1992.  And we have great respect for this doctor.  And 

the people are his friends around there.  He's been a great 

doctor in the community. 

 

But he spoke at the opening of our integrated facility last fall.  

He had a written speech, Madam Minister.  The member from 

Last Mountain-Touchwood was there and he read this off, and 

this was before you did anything wrong because this is right 

after the election.  And he  



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3277 

warned that this -- right publicly, with 3 or 400 people at a 

meeting -- warned what this new government would do to ruin 

our health care system.  And he said that before you done it. 

 

Now the things you've done, I'm sorry to say, and he wants it 

on the record, that he has now put his resignation in because he 

said he would not work under this NDP government.  And it's 

going to be the same dilemma for many, many doctors in this 

province. 

 

So I'm putting that on the statement from him, and this man has 

worked under the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation), the NDP, the Liberal, and the Conservative 

administration.  And he said this administration that we got 

here now is second to none to ruining the health care system in 

this province. 

 

Madam Minister, I feel sorry for you because what's happened 

here in this last little while, this last few months, you've had 

your marching orders from the . . . not from you.  You're from 

the new school.  The old school in here -- the front benches -- 

have dictated to you exactly what's going to happen in health 

care, and if you think for one minute it isn't just for the 

Minister of Finance to try to balance his budget.  That's what 

this is all about. 

 

Because I always thought that this would happen, and here's a 

little statistics in closing.  In 1978 when I was running for a 

candidate, we couldn't handle the situation out there because 

they didn't trust the PCs with medicare.  But us PCs got elected 

in 1982 and they learned to trust us, that we would save the 

medicare and health system in this province from 1982 . . . The 

member from Canora laughs over this. 

 

But I can tell you that from 1982 to 1991 the people had a trust.  

Because you never heard at all at election time.  Not one of you 

people heard an issue that we can't trust the Tories.  You people 

here want to be here a long time that's up to you.  The House 

Leader asked me how long it was going to be.  I said if there's 

not a murmur from you people, I'll be 10 minutes and if there's 

a bunch of racket we might be here till midnight, because I'm 

leaving this with you. 

 

I'm leaving this statement with you, Madam Minister, that the 

people learned to trust us from 1982 to 1991 pertaining to 

health care.  And you can sit there and laugh all you want, but 

you can go to your own constituency, Madam Minister, and 

they don't trust you today.  There's no way they'd trust you with 

what you're going to do next in health care. 

 

When people are sending back their NDP cards tore up to the 

minister . . . to the Premier of this province, what do . . . you 

think you can sit there and laugh and not take it seriously?  But 

for the sake of the people in the province of Saskatchewan, I 

hope for goodness sakes that you tread on careful ground.  And 

be careful what you're doing because we got a health and 

medicare system at stake here and we don't want you to ruin it. 

 

We want you to save it.  We in opposition want you to save this 

here medicare and this wonderful system we've got for the 

people in the province of Saskatchewan. 

Madam Minister, the CCF, under Tommy Douglas, was the 

father of medicare for this province -- not for all Canada, but he 

was the father.  And I'm putting it on the record that I do 

believe that the new NDP government will be the failure of 

medicare in this province, and between the medicare system 

and agriculture you are going to be finished in four years.  That 

is something that I can see happening. 

 

Eight months ago I said, no way.  But now I can see that she's 

all over if you keep this trend up.  And I hope, for goodness 

sakes, for the sake of the people in the province of 

Saskatchewan, that you leave us in opposition another four 

years, that you do things right for them.  Don't do things right 

for you, so we'll be sitting over there in the next election. 

 

Last words . . . unless something goes wrong here tonight, Mr. 

Chairman, unless something goes wrong, this is the last you'll 

have to hear from me because I've done a lot of talking in this 

session.  You've heard from me a lot.  But after all this is said 

and done, I do want to say this to all colleagues in this 

legislature that we as individuals have nothing against each 

other, and I'm saying to each and everyone in here, have a good 

summer at the beach now till December.  Have yourself an 

enjoyable time.  And I earnestly say, the best fall, until we 

come back here to meet again.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's too cold right now at the beach, 

Gerry. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Obviously there 

are many, many areas that we could delve into at a great depth, 

but I have one other issue that I want to bring up just for 

clarification, Madam Minister, and this deals with the dentistry 

program. 

 

And I'm aware now that the Department of Health and the 

College of Dental Surgeons recently signed a contract 

renewing the children's dental plan for another year.  My 

understanding is that the only difference between the old 

contract and the new contract is the 90-day termination clause.  

Now from my little knowledge of that situation, I'm sure it's not 

the dentists that have asked for that 90-day termination clause.  

And that begs then the question: why was this clause inserted? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The member opposite is aware that we've 

talked about the need for changes to the children's dental 

program.  And in fact we've asked a committee of dentists and 

dental therapists and dental hygienists to review a whole wide 

range of alternatives and to provide us with some 

recommendations. 

 

The 90-day clause simply allows us the flexibility to move into 

a new program, should we be able to do that in the months to 

come, and that's why the clause was put in the agreement. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Madam Minister, 

are you still planning to reintroduce a new dental plan to 

replace the professional program that is currently in place? 



3278 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We are looking at ways of getting 

preventative services to many of our rural communities.  Right 

now residents have to travel to dental services, for example.  

And so we've asked the committee to take a look at a new plan 

in that context, and I have yet to receive their recommendation. 

 

(1900) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, would you just indicate . . . 

Did I understand correctly when you said you were looking at 

preventative services?  Is that the term that you used?  I 

couldn't quite hear you. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We wanted more emphasis on prevention 

and more of a preventative program emphasis with respect to 

the dental plan.  So I've asked the planning team to bring 

forward recommendations which would reflect this.  And I 

really can't comment on it any further until I hear what sort of 

recommendations they bring forward as to how the program 

could be enhanced and strengthened in the preventative area. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well, Madam Minister, it seems to me that the 

dentists that are providing the professional service right now 

certainly would be quite capable also of supplying preventative 

services.  So I'm not quite sure where you're getting at there. 

 

But I think I'll culminate this serious by asking you this 

question: are you considering, then, the de-insuring of the 

children's dental plan as well? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well if we changed the plan, it would 

mean new agreements with dental professionals and maybe 

new relationships.  It isn't a question whether we de-insure and 

there's no plan or not.  That's not the issue.  We want to 

improve on the plan from the point of view of more 

preventative programming.  That may mean new agreements 

when that's done, and it may mean new working relationships 

with dentists and dental therapists. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well certainly I have nothing in objection to 

changing plans from time to time.  But I just want your 

assurance, Madam Minister, that it won't be the parents and the 

folks like that that are going to be picking up the bill directly 

themselves.  Can you give us that assurance, Madam Minister? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am going to wait to hear what the 

recommendations of the committee are before we determine 

what the new dental plan will look like. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 

 

Items 1 to 35 inclusive agreed to. 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1991 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 

Health 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 32 

 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 32 agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- That completes Estimates for the Department of 

Health.  I would ask the minister at this time to thank her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would very 

sincerely like to thank my officials for all the work they have 

been doing in the last few months.  They have done a 

tremendous job.  And they have been meeting with all sorts of 

people across the province as we go through this period of 

reform and change in Saskatchewan, and I thank them very 

much.  They're working very hard, very long hours and I thank 

them from the bottom of my heart. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1915) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I too 

would like to thank the officials from the Department of Health 

as they work very, very hard in difficult circumstances to 

deliver the health system to us. 

 

But further than that, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to thank 

the Minister of Health for sharing with us many, many hours 

here on the Department of Health and explaining her side of it 

and us as the opposition being allowed to express our concerns. 

 

Mr. Chairman, it has become obvious that she has her ideas; we 

have our ideas.  But that's part of the democratic process, and 

as long as we agree to disagree and can still have this 

democratic process unfold before us, I think, ultimately the 

people of Saskatchewan will be the winners. 

 

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motions for Supply 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, there 

are a series of four resolutions that are required to be 

considered by the Assembly and I am pleased to rise and move 

them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Five?  Five resolutions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I move the first resolution: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1993, the sum of 

$3,034,001,300 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3279 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1991, the sum of 

$475,153,500, be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, the third resolution 

as required, I move: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1992, the sum of 

$2,584,816,100, be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Chairman, I move: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1991, the sum of 

$32,300,000, be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The 

final resolution is: 

 

 Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to 

Her Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 

service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1992, the sum of 

$93,855,200, be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage 

Fund. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Chair: -- Before I put the question, I am sure that I speak 

on behalf of the Deputy Chair and thank the members for their 

co-operation and deliberations during the Committee of 

Finance and during Committee of the Whole.  Also want to 

take this opportunity to point out to the members that Mr. 

Charles Robert, who has assisted us during this session, will be 

returning to the Senate of Canada.  We will miss Charles.  He 

has been an industrious, cheerful, and erudite presence for us at 

the table.  I might also mention that Charles is the one who 

came closest to guessing the number of times that a certain 

minister who will remain unnamed used the phrase, "the fact of 

the matter." 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The committee reported progress. 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that the 

resolutions be now read the first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 

time. 

 

APPROPRIATION BILL 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, I move: 

 

 That Bill No. 94, An Act for Granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal Years 

Ending Respectively on March 31, 1991, on March 31, 1992, 

and on March 31, 1993, be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

first time. 

 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 

Assembly, and under the rule 51(2), I move that the Bill be 

now read a second and third time. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 

second and third time and passed under its title. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 7:26 p.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to repeal The Health Research Act 

Bill No. 64 -- An Act respecting Arbitration 

Bill No. 83 -- An Act respecting Pension Benefits 

Bill No. 81 -- An Act respecting the repeal of The Criminal 

Injuries Compensation Act 

Bill No. 82 -- An Act to amend The Victims of Crime Act 

Bill No. 79 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan Act 

Bill No. 93 -- An Act respecting Labour Relations in the 

Construction Industry 

Bill No. 91 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and 

Gas Corporation Act, 1985 

Bill No. 72 -- An Act to amend The Critical Wildlife Habitat 

Protection Act 

Bill No. 57 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm 

Security Act 

Bill No. 54 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 55 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act (No. 3) 

Bill No. 56 -- An Act to amend The Personal Property 

Security Act 

Bill No. 84  -- An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act, 

1984 

Bill No. 85 -- An Act respecting Fire Prevention and Certain 

Consequential Amendments resulting from the 

enactment of this Act 

Bill No. 76 -- An Act to amend The Superannuation 



3280 Saskatchewan Hansard August 28, 1992 

 -- (Supplementary Provisions) Act 

Bill No. 77 -- An Act to amend The Municipal Employees' 

Superannuation Act 

Bill No. 80 -- An Act to amend The Interprovincial Subpoena 

Act 

Bill No. 41 -- An Act to declare a Day of Appreciation for 

Scottish Clans in Canada 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

Bill No. 94 -- An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 

Fiscal Years ending on March 31, 1991, on 

March 31, 1992 and on March 31, 1993 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 

Assembly, accept their benevolence and assent to this Bill. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 7:31 p.m. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Hours of Sitting Rescinded 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, by leave I move, 

seconded by the member from Churchill Downs: 

 

 That at the adjournment of the Assembly today, the order 

made August 6, 1992, fixing the hours of sitting, shall be 

rescinded. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move leave 

adjourning the Assembly, I just want to take a moment to thank 

the staff, including your staff, Mr. Speaker, yourself as Speaker 

of the Assembly, and members of the opposition, and everyone 

who had something to do with making the session work. 

 

I think it's fair to say that there are always times in a session 

when it looks like it isn't going to work, but I have to say that 

in the end there was that spirit of good naturedness and also 

co-operation that brought us around to the conclusion of the 

session. 

 

I also want to join with others in thanking Charles Robert for 

his work at the Table and his patience. 

 

With that, by leave, I would move: 

 

 That when the Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 

day, it shall stand adjourned to a date and time set by Mr. 

Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 

Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 

possible, of such date and time. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member from Regina Hillsdale. 

Leave granted. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's been a long 

session.  I just want to take the opportunity to make a few 

thank you's as as well and join the Government House Leader. 

 

There are many people to thank as a result of the working of 

the Legislative Assembly and the work that's done here. 

 

The Clerks and the pages and indeed our visitors that have 

come to us from the Senate.  I certainly want to appreciate the 

time and the hours they've put in and the advice, under some 

difficult circumstances from time to time. 

 

The Law Clerk and his assistant of course because of some 

difficult issues that they had to face. 

 

A hard-working staff in Hansard who work into the night to 

get the proceedings recorded for the public, which is always 

difficult. 

 

The television crew, Mr. Speaker, who sit in here as long as we 

do, which this session has meant many nights that have gone to 

midnight and later.  And they've certainly shown patience and 

have been very professional. 

 

Our security staff, both the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 

commissionaires, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, yourself and your 

staff and all the staff and administration through to the tour 

staff because they have had the opportunity to show people 

from across the country and indeed from other countries this 

Legislative Assembly as we sat here. 

 

And I particularly want to recognize the Legislative Library 

staff, because I can tell you from our point of view at least, and 

I'm sure the government's as well, without the assistance they 

provide MLAs in research, this place could not operate as a 

fully democratic institution because we wouldn't have the 

information to do our jobs.  And you can imagine when you 

have a small opposition, Mr. Speaker, to have access to the 

research facilities and to the staff, it is very, very helpful. 

 

I want to personally thank our research staff because this has 

been the first real opportunity to have our 10 members in 

opposition go through an entire session.  We're clearly 

outnumbered and we sit some long hours. 

 

But as a result of our very diligent staff, our media and policy 

advisors -- and they're small in number -- we have been well 

informed, and we certainly appreciate the fact that these people 

have worked so very, very hard.  And I think all members 

would recognize -- some of them having been in opposition -- 

the amount of work that a handful of members can do and a 

handful of individuals can do to be prepared all the time on so 

many issues. 

 

I want to thank the media for their co-operation because it's 

been a little enduring at times for them, but we've had 

relatively fair coverage.  And I think that's always 



August 28, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3281 

important.  It certainly is to keep up the morale of all members 

on both sides of the House.  And I'm going to ask the media to 

acknowledge . . . And maybe some day they'll even write about 

the huge work-load that has been accomplished in this session.  

And I know the House Leader talked about that in his 

interview. 

 

When we began, the government said it had 50 or 60 Bills to 

bring forward.  Instead we have had more than 90 Bills, Mr. 

Speaker.  We've dealt with 34 Estimates and processes, major 

rule issues, Public Accounts reviews, Crown corporation 

examinations, municipal law, constitutional law, and many 

other items that were very, very controversial. 

 

And all members had to have the patience and the endurance to 

get through this session with that on our plates.  If you take out 

the six days of the budget debate, seven days of throne speech 

debate, and a day of condolence, we have had 62 working days 

minus a private members' day each week.  I haven't added up 

the private members' day, but normally it would work out to be 

about one in five.  So let's be generous and say there was only 

10 private members' days.  That leaves us with 52 days to do 

government business, and we dealt with over 150 major items.  

So that's three items or almost three Bills a day. 

 

And that was a great deal of effort and I commend all 

members.  While we were arguing and obviously had 

differences of opinion, we found that we could be as productive 

as possible. 

 

I want to say that the members of the staff, particularly on our 

side and I can speak for our side, were extremely helpful in us 

reaching some of these changes that were made.  And I just 

want to briefly say that the record shows that our efforts in this 

session have been enormously productive, and particularly in 

the opposition -- and I think I'm allowed to congratulate the 

opposition, Mr. Speaker, for their homework. 

 

We have convinced the government, with a large majority, to 

change its mind or change the Bills or modify the Bills.  And 

that's important in democracy.  Even though we're small in 

number, only 10, we did that.  We obtained significant 

amendments to proposed environmental laws, to The Crown 

Minerals Act, to The Pension Benefits Act, to the agriculture 

and wildlife Act, to labour, trade union legislation, and several 

others. 

 

And we worked with the people of Saskatchewan, frankly, to 

get the government to change its mind on such items as 

FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment program) and highways and 

pension plans and some with respect to health care. 

 

So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am particularly proud of 

the efforts of our staff and our MLAs and the support of the 

public which really came forward and said, we want you to 

stick up for what you believe in and what they believe in.  And 

I'm not going to give a long-winded speech on GRIP or a 

long-winded speech on some of the things we really fought for.  

And obviously we had some really down-to-earth and 

hard-nosed debates in here.  But as a result, most of the things 

that we asked for were at 

least listened to. 

 

We won on many things.  I'm not so happy to say that we didn't 

win on GRIP, but we made our point.  And I think, Mr. 

Speaker, when the government comes to addressing an item 

like GRIP in 1993-94, that it will have in consideration many 

of the items that we brought forward. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I just say in summary that the session has 

been productive although we haven't agreed on everything.  

We've made many changes, and I think the fact that the public 

is aware of what the new administration is all about will be 

extremely helpful as we look through to legislative changes and 

legislative assemblies in the months and weeks to come. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to all members of the 

Assembly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Before I move that this House do adjourn, I 

ask the indulgence of the Assembly to say a few words.  May 

I? 

 

Just a couple of words.  I do want to thank the pages, who have 

worked so diligently.  And I would be really remiss if I didn't 

thank Charles Robert.  He's been just a tremendous support to 

me in this my first, most difficult session I think, for the 

Speaker.  And I want to thank him very much for that. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There's more to come. 

 

The Speaker: -- I will ignore the comment made by the 

member from Rosthern at this particular time, but there will be 

another session -- I hope. 

 

I do want to thank also all the Legislative Assembly staff. 

 

More particularly I want to thank the people in Hansard, who 

so often we forget about.  And they are working there 

diligently in the wee hours of the morning trying to get ready 

for the next day, and I do want to thank them publicly. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Last but not least, I do want to thank all the 

members in the House.  I hope you have a very long respite 

from this House until the next session and get acquainted with 

your families and members of your families and friends again. 

 

Thank you very much for your co-operation.  And with that, I 

move that this House now stands adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 7:42 p.m. 

 


