




















































Hansard: June 09, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 995 

 June 9, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to introduce to you and through you to other 

members of the Assembly students from St. Goretti School in 

Saskatoon in the constituency of Saskatoon Westmount.  They 

are in the Speaker's gallery, and I will be meeting them at 2:15 

in the members' dining room for drinks.  I'd urge members to 

welcome students from St. Goretti School. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 

and through you to the members of the Assembly, for the 

member from Qu'Appelle-Lumsden, 22 grade 4 students from 

White City School.  They're located in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker, and they have had a tour and will be present in the 

Chamber.  And Ms. Murray or myself will be meeting with 

them for pictures after and hopefully a number of good and 

interesting questions about their tour and the proceedings 

today.  So I ask the members of the Assembly to join with me 

in welcoming the 22 grade 4 students from White City School, 

their teacher, Marjorie Gross, and Joanne Vonau. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and to members of the Assembly 8 cancer 

patients who are here with us today in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker.  It's my understanding that these people are cancer 

patients who are staying at the cancer lodge on Dewdney 

Avenue and taking treatment at the Pasqua Hospital.  I'm sure 

all members will want to join with me in welcoming them here.  

The member for Regina Wascana Plains will be meeting with 

them afterwards in your board room, Mr. Speaker.  So I'm sure 

all members will want to welcome them here today and wish 

them a speedy recovery from a very, I might say, tragic 

situation.  But we all wish you the very best. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- Mr. Speaker, I have two student groups 

visiting the Legislative Assembly this afternoon, and the first 

group is from Fillmore School -- 24 students in grade 7 and 8.  

They are accompanied with their teacher Murray Bruce and bus 

driver Debbie Larose.  I welcome the students to the 

Legislative Assembly.  I will be meeting with the students 

shortly afterwards, and I'd like the Assembly members to join 

with me in welcoming the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Wormsbecker: -- The second student group, Mr. Speaker, 

is from Weyburn and I'd like to introduce the group to you, Mr. 

Speaker, and to the members of the Assembly.  There are 57 

students from Weyburn Junior 

High and they are attending grade 8. And they are accompanied 

by teachers Janice Bernard, Trevor Johnstone, and their 

chaperons Laurie Servetnyk, Mrs. Douglas, and bus drivers 

Gary MacKenzie and Roger Bellèvance.  I will also be meeting 

with these students shortly, and I'd like the members of the 

Assembly to join with me in welcoming the students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, if I might I would like to join the Minister of Social 

Services in welcoming the students of St. Goretti School and as 

well specifically Jim Jelinski, their teacher. 

 

Jim is a constituent of mine.  He's a hard-working teacher.  He 

dedicates himself throughly to his students.  And for the term 

"that a teacher loves his students," I think that reflects the way 

Jim puts his heart into his school work and has all his career.  

So I'd like to welcome you here, Jim, and I know members will 

want to join me again in welcoming you and your students. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I understand that 

11 p.m. last Friday evening that the Speaker of the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan and his wife, Mrs. Rolfes, became 

the proud, proud grandparents of Hanna Lenore Rolfes-Sherry, 

who weighed in at some seven and a half pounds. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Although I don't like losing a bet, I do 

want to congratulate you and inform you that as of 5:46 

yesterday, I too am a grandparent -- and a very proud one at 

that -- of Carson Ramsay, seven and a half pounds as well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want 

to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on becoming a new 

grandparent.  And I also want to congratulate the Leader of the 

Liberal Party, the member from Saskatoon Greystone, on 

becoming a grandparent as well. 

 

The member from Saskatoon Greystone's daughter and spouse 

live in the constituency that I represent.  I'm pleased to have a 

new constituent.  I'm sure that that constituent will be a bright 

and intelligent young woman when she grows up and will 

become a New Democrat. 

 

So congratulations to the member of the Liberal Party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have some good news on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan.  I want to tell the students of 

this province that things are improving over at student loans. 

 

I'd like to congratulate the Minister of Education in reducing 

the length of the student loan application form 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

from 20 pages to 10 pages.  This is good news to students who 

are trying to get student loan applications processed. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, I'm advised that student loan 

applications are now being processed within one week 

compared to an average of four to five weeks last year.  We 

think this is good news for the students in our province.  We're 

pleased to see that the student loan application process has 

been sped up and that students will be getting their student 

loans in a timely fashion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Co-operation and 

co-operatives have played a major role in the development of 

Saskatchewan.  This government recognizes the important role 

co-operatives play in the Saskatchewan economy.  We know 

that co-operatives will contribute to the economic recovery of 

this province. 

 

There is an estimated 15,000 people employed by the 

co-operatives in this province with a payroll of $361 million.  

Co-operative initiatives are an ongoing part of Saskatchewan 

life. 

 

I would like to acknowledge a couple of projects under way 

right now.  Saskatchewan Wheat Pool showed renewed 

confidence in the province's future by announcing plans to 

build major slip-form concrete elevators at Prince Albert and 

Davidson.  Construction will start this week at these locations.  

Eight million dollars will be put into the economy through 

these projects. 

 

I know that many communities are looking at setting up 

co-operatives in their areas.  We can rest assured that this 

government will be receptive to their initiatives.  The 1,400 

co-operatives of this province are involved in the following 

areas, it's quite an extensive list: agriculture and resources; 

retail and wholesale; financial services; community 

development; child care and education; community services, 

which includes health services; and recreational initiatives. 

 

Co-operatives are fine examples . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  Mr. Speaker, Friday of last I had 

an opportunity to attend a constitutional mini-conference at 

Aberdeen at the Aberdeen high school, the Aberdeen 

composite high school, and this mini-conference was 

completely organized by the students of the high school and let 

me tell you they went to great pains to put this on. 

 

The format of the conference was a round-table discussion.  

They broke up into panels and discussed the very important 

proposals that are on the negotiating table right now. 

 

The objective of the conference was of course to sensitize, I 

think, the students to the importance of the current 

constitutional negotiations and also to enlighten themselves on 

what has been going on lately. 

There was representatives, Mr. Speaker, from the federal 

government.  I represented the provincial government.  And 

also the universities were represented at this conference. 

 

I think what really impressed me, Mr. Speaker, was the hard 

work and dedication that these students put into this 

conference, and also I think the amount of knowledge that they 

had on the constitutional affairs and the current negotiations. 

 

So again, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the students of the 

Aberdeen composite high school on putting this conference on 

.  It certainly demonstrates an interest they have in the future of 

our country. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to raise the 

issue of a concern of the constituency of Kindersley, the people 

of Kindersley constituency, and indeed the people of all of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I received a copy of a letter from the town of Kindersley that 

was addressed to the current Finance minister and it's very 

disturbing, Mr. Speaker.  The government of the day has said 

that they will consult on a regular basis with people all over the 

province.  But yet, Mr. Speaker, the town of Kindersley has 

been requesting for a over a month a meeting with the 

department officials and the Minister of Finance with respect to 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, and as yet they have no 

acknowledgement of even their letters or their concern. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is something of a critical nature.  All 

they are asking for is an opportunity to speak with the Finance 

minister about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the 

concerns they have about the elimination of that plan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Lorje: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to focus my 

attention and direct my remarks on the arts in Saskatchewan.  

Because while Saskatchewan may currently have some fiscal 

problems, we certainly are very wealthy in the strength and the 

creativity of its people.  And now more than ever, it seems to 

me we need to nurture out souls and our spirits, and that's what 

the arts does in Saskatchewan. 

 

We've recently seen a new Arts Board appointed.  I know many 

of these people personally.  They are fine, talented, creative 

individuals who are committed to developing Saskatchewan 

excellence in the arts. 

 

The unique thing about the recent round of appointments to the 

Arts Board is that in many cases these people were nominated 

by the arts organizations themselves.  And this is a good 

example of self governance and direct and real, meaningful 

community involvement that this government wants to be 

promoting for various organizations including arts 

organizations. 

 

The appointments and the process of appointments directly 

arises out of a recommendation that was made by 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

the arts strategy task force, appointed by the former 

government. 

 

There are still meetings ongoing regarding implementation of 

many of the recommendations of that arts strategy task force 

and I'm confident that our government will be dealing with 

them in a very forthright and respectful manner. 

 

We've had, Mr. Speaker, an excellent minister dealing with the 

Arts Board, Carol Teichrob, and . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time is up. The 

member's time has run out and the member should also know 

we do not refer to members by their first or surnames in this 

legislature. 

 

(1345) 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to talk today 

about an announcement made last Friday.  The water supply 

situation in the most north-westerly part of my constituency is 

at a crisis situation.  Water levels in lakes running east through 

the Cold Lake and Waterhen River basin is desperate.  

Resource owners on Lac des Iles and Pierce Lake are reporting 

water level drops of up to four feet.  The Waterhen Reserve 

School has had to close several days due to lack of water.  

Compounding this has been the withdrawal of water by Esso 

Resources. 

 

Since last fall water levels have dropped to where Esso has 

been restricted from withdrawing water from Cold Lake.  They 

have applied for and received approval from the Alberta 

government to withdraw water from the Helene aquifer.  Esso 

and the Alberta government argue that this has no substantial 

effect on the surface water.  The users downstream of course 

argue that it does have substantial effect. 

 

We have therefore set up a task force to examine the serious 

situation.  The task force will be made up of the north-west 

Saskatchewan fresh water committee, the mayor of Goodsoil, 

local residents of the area, including Joseph Bighead and 

Waterhen Reserves. 

 

I am confident that the task force will arrive at a satisfactory 

solution and am further very pleased that the department and 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation have taken the interest and 

initiative to involve local people in something that affects them 

so very directly.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Relocation of Piper Aircraft Corporation 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is for the 

Minister of Economic Development. 
 

Yesterday, Mr. Minister, it was discovered that the Ukraine had 

signed a deal with Ottawa to explore nuclear energy research; 

research which in a deal similar to that in Saskatchewan could 

have brought thousands of jobs 

and millions of dollars of investment into this province.  But 

you refused to look at it. 

 

Now we see, Mr. Minister, that the Piper Aircraft deal and its 

potential for 500 new jobs may be slipping out from between 

your fingers while you struggle and dither about what you're 

going to do about it.  Mr. Minister, you said in April that the 

delay in the bid shouldn't affect Saskatchewan's chances.  I'm 

wondering if the delay is indeed affecting Saskatchewan's 

chances. 

 

Mr. Minister, you've been working on the bid for some time.  

Can you update this Assembly on the progress of the new bid?  

And can you tell us when it will finally be unveiled, or indeed 

if you've already submitted it to the court in Florida? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to comment on 

the member's initial comment about the AECL (Atomic Energy 

of Canada Ltd.) agreement and to let him know clearly why we 

didn't go ahead with the proposed agreement that had been 

signed, as if deathbed repentance, by the previous government. 

 

But the main reason was, two main issues.  One, the 

commitment to a CANDU 3 (Canadian deuterium uranium) 

reactor which we believed, as a result of the power 

consumption in Saskatchewan not being in need of an extra 

450 megawatts, that spending 1.3 or $1.5 billion on a CANDU 

3 reactor when you had already left a debt of 15 billion didn't 

make much sense.  That's the first point. 

 

Second point in the memorandum was a commitment to look at 

waste storage, nuclear waste storage in Saskatchewan.  There 

again we didn't think you had done any consulting with the 

public on that, and we didn't think we wanted that in 

Saskatchewan at any rate. 

 

When it comes to Piper, I think the comments of Mr. Hill last 

night on CK TV are appropriate: that they are working 

diligently, the private sector partners, who in fairness have 

consulted with the members of the opposition and I believe the 

Leader of the Liberal Party on ongoing basis as to the status of 

this negotiation; that we are still looking at the deal; that 

Kelowna actively is pursuing the deal and we hope in the end 

to be the recipients of the Piper Aircraft Corporation.  However 

. . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- What the AECL agreement committed this 

province to was research and nothing else, Mr. Speaker.  That's 

what it committed this province to, and it's shameful that this 

government wouldn't look at it, or indeed renegotiate the deal if 

they feel the original deal wasn't acceptable. 

 

Mr. Minister, you announced in January with great fanfare and 

media attention that you'd secured the deal with the Piper 

Aircraft company.  The former administration was acutely 

aware of the need to bring economic development and 

diversification to this province and we applauded the 

announcement at that 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

time.  So the news that Kelowna may have the inside track is 

very disturbing news. 

 

Mr. Minister, regardless of your wait-and-see attitude, that's 

indeed what's happened.  They have submitted a bid and they 

are tomorrow going to be making announcements relative to 

that bid.  Mr. Speaker, will you assure the people of this 

province that your new bid will be as attractive as the Kelowna 

bid which will be announced tomorrow? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Two things, Mr. Speaker.  First of 

all, the member says that there was nothing in the AECL 

memorandum about a nuclear reactor.  If you listen closely to 

what my colleague from Swift Current said yesterday and to 

what the federal minister said, Mr. Epp said, he clearly stated 

that it is the reactor or no deal. 

 

Now we're actively working with the federal government on 

research.  We have invited research to Saskatoon from AECL.  

I want you to listen and understand what we're saying. 

 

We want research and we've invited them to come to 

Saskatoon.  What we have said no to is a CANDU 3 reactor 

because it would cost an extra billion, billion and a half dollars, 

and we don't need the power so it doesn't make much sense to 

build a CANDU 3 reactor.  And we don't want to turn 

Saskatchewan into a waste dump for nuclear waste.  Now that 

seems clear.  As it comes to research we have invited AECL 

into Saskatchewan.  So let's get that point clear. 

 

When it comes to Piper Aircraft, your comment that we should 

bid any amount for the corporation to get it here even if it 

means outbidding Kelowna, is lunacy.  This is how we got to 

$15 billion in debt, and we will not take your advice. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, what is lunacy in this province is a 

minister going around saying that they have the inside track on 

the bid for Piper Aircraft when indeed they don't have the 

inside track on the bid for Piper Aircraft.  As we're seeing, 

Kelowna tomorrow will be announcing some details respective 

of that bid for the Piper Aircraft company.  Mr. Speaker, the 

minister wants to continually talk about AECL.  What indeed 

the memorandum of understanding talked about was research 

and . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  I would like you to put your question. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would ask the 

minister again: can you update this Assembly on the Piper 

Aircraft deal? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Yes I can.  I would like to say to the 

member opposite that the provincial government's 

commitment, as you are well aware, is that we have offered 

$35 million in bridge-financing for our private sector partners 

and the new company to purchase the assets of Piper Aircraft.  

We have also talked about 

operating finances, and that's the deal as we have proposed to 

our private sector partners. 

 

Now as you know, Mr. Hill and the private sector consortium, 

along with the government, are negotiating with Piper Aircraft 

and the creditors at this time. 

 

I also understand that there have been discussions between the 

members of the opposition and the private sector people to 

keep them updated as this has gone along.  So the perception 

that you are trying to create here, that you haven't been kept up 

to date and don't know what the status of the negotiations are, 

is not accurate.  And I'm not sure why you're doing this, in light 

of the fact that we have kept you in touch from the beginning to 

the end. 

 

In fact when the press conference came about a few months 

ago, the Leader of the Opposition was notified as to the detail 

in advance to the press conference.  So for you to say . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, indeed though, there has been no 

detail of what has happened since the original announcement of 

the Piper Aircraft deal.  We have received no updates from you 

or anyone else about the Piper Aircraft deal. 

 

Yesterday the Associate Minister of Finance was unable to tell 

us, this Assembly, what the Premier and himself are doing 

down East with the New York bankers.  The credit rating has 

fallen due to the wrong choices made in the budget and a lack 

of economic vision for this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly if the province has 

any plan for bringing investment and jobs to this province?  

Besides this, the questionable Piper deal, what other projects is 

the government attempting to attract to Saskatchewan? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I find it curious in passing that the 

member is now referring to the Piper deal as a questionable 

deal.  And I am just trying to get clear in my mind . . . On the 

question before, he said we should bid any amount to get it 

here.  And it is very difficult to know where this member is 

heading.  But what is clear is how we got to be $15 billion in 

debt with that kind of a thought process. 

 

What I can tell you clearly, Mr. Member from the opposition, 

is that we are doing a great deal of work with the 

small-business and private sector in getting business in 

Saskatchewan.  We have the firm belief that the idea that the 

only business that is done in this province is done by 

government and taxpayers dumping money in in great gobs is 

not the way to go. 

 

And if you look at the number of private sector expansions in 

this province in the last six months, there 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

are many.  That's why housing starts and sales in Saskatoon -- 

in Saskatoon -- are at record heights today compared to any 

time during your 10-year administration.  The housing sales in 

April in Saskatoon were up by 23 per cent.  That's juxtaposed 

the national average of a reduction of 6 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Government Patronage Appointments 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, my question today is to whoever is 

willing to answer some questions on patronage in light of the 

absence of the Minister of Justice. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member knows that that is 

out of order.  In the absence of the Minister of Justice -- we do 

not refer to people being absent.  He should just direct his 

question to the government. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- In question period they do that all the 

time. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Is the member from Rosthern arguing 

with the Speaker on his decision?  I recognize the member 

from Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, the 

Minister of Justice recently stood in this House this very 

session and fielded questions on patronage appointments by 

your government, and he gave his solemn commitment to this 

House and to the people of this province that there would be no 

more patronage appointments by your government. 

 

Mr. Minister, we now know that you have appointed Mr. 

Blakeney, Kim Thorson, and Nancy Hopkins -- all high-profile 

NDP (New Democratic Party) supporters -- to the board of 

Cameco.  Will you give the commitment to this House and to 

the people of Saskatchewan that you will withdraw these 

appointments, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member opposite:  if we 

were to withdraw that nomination, we would leave everyone 

angry, all of the partners in Cameco. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Let me, Mr. Speaker, just review 

some of the trifling accomplishments of the person we 

appointed:  a person who took over his father's bankrupt 

business as a teenager, put it back on its feet successfully 

before he left to go to London, England, on a Rhodes 

Scholarship; after Rhodes Scholarship returned to 

Saskatchewan; a distinguished career in two different 

governments before serving as premier of this province for 17 

years; didn't just have a long career in the public service but 

spent 25 years in this legislature on centre stage.  That's the 

quality of the person we appoint.  We are very proud of that 

quality of appointment, I can tell you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, to the minister, the Associate 

Minister of Finance:  Mr. Blakeney was the first member of 

this Assembly to retire with the lavish severance package 

of tens of thousands of taxpayers' dollars.  Mr. Blakeney 

collects an extravagant pension from the taxpayers of the old, 

unfunded pension liability.  Mr. Blakeney is collecting all this 

tax money.  Do you think it is fair to the people that while he 

collects a government pension, he also gets another 

government job serving on the board of a uranium company? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- The members opposite decry the 

accomplishments of one of the most distinguished members of 

this Assembly.  I can say to members opposite that I ought to 

read back to you the speeches of some of your colleagues when 

he retired from this legislature.  You would think he was ready 

for canonization.  I'm not sure he would claim that, but that was 

the tenor of the speeches that your members gave. 

 

I say as well, Mr. Speaker, that he has been appointed to the 

board of directors of Cameco with the unanimous support and 

consent of all concerned.  This was not just a Government of 

Saskatchewan appointment.  This is a distinguished . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Canadian. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- A distinguished Canadian.  Right.  

Distinguished himself in business, in politics, in law, and as an 

academic.  He is precisely the kind of person we look for to 

appoint to these boards. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, your Premier promised that this 

thing would never happen.  In fact he told the people that never 

under an NDP government would someone collecting a 

government pension get another government position. 

 

Mr. Minister, Mr. Kim Thorson is a former NDP cabinet 

minister and notorious for his patronage skill.  Will you tell the 

House how much pension money your friend Mr. Thorson is 

collecting from the taxpayer, and how much he will receive in 

his new patronage position at Cameco?  How much are you 

paying him off with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, the member opposite may have 

overlooked the fact that Cameco was privatized by your party 

in the dying days of the election.  This is not a government 

appointment.  This is an appointment to a board of directors. 

 

I want to say as well that Mr. Blakeney is not like Mr. 

Birkbeck, who left and took a government job.  He's not like 

Mr. Andrew, who left, took his pension, took a job in 

Minneapolis.  He's not like Mr. Taylor, who left, took a job in 

Hong Kong.  He's not like Mr. Berntson, left, took a Senate job. 

 

Mr. Blakeney, like other distinguished Canadians such as Mr. 

Lougheed, John Robarts, left, and have played a distinguished 

role in this nation but not at the taxpayers' expense unlike the 

litany of failures which you people put in government jobs 

when they left. 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Minister, these appointments are still your 

appointments, Mr. Minister.  While you were putting nurses on 

the street, you are finding nice cosy jobs for your friends.  

Nancy Hopkins is a long-time NDP financial contributor, and 

now you have announced her reward for the party work she did 

on the Gass Commission.  She is to get a nice little position on 

the Cameco board. 

 

Mr. Minister, is it not true that you made a deal with Nancy 

Hopkins that when she took the Gass assignment, that you 

would make sure she got her reward later? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- All I can say to the member opposite 

is your last accusation was as absurd as all the others you've 

made today. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Future of the Oil and Gas Industry 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I direct my 

question to the Minister of Energy and, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to 

table an article referring to a market study done by Friedberg 

Mercantile Group of Toronto, who have consistently been 

accurate in their predictions of oil prices. 

 

Mr. Minister, given that Russia is expected to increase its 

exports, that Iraq will soon resume its exports, and Kuwait is 

rapidly moving up to pre-war production levels, Saskatchewan 

oil producers can anticipate a dramatic decline in their prices.  

What are you prepared to do for this already hard-hit industry 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would just 

like to correct the hon. member that oil prices are exactly going 

the other way than she is predicting or that her article is 

predicting.  In fact the futures for oil prices in September are up 

considerably over what they are now.  So I don't know where 

the information you have is coming from, but we are doing 

everything we can to maintain the stability in the oil and gas 

industry as well as the mining industry in Saskatchewan.  And 

unfortunately Saskatchewan cannot control world oil prices, 

but all the indications are that they are going up, and we 

anticipate that our activity will go up. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, I would like to suggest to the 

hon. minister that he in fact refer to the Friedberg Mercantile 

Group of Toronto who have been the best predictors of oil 

prices of any group anywhere and have been accurate in every 

prediction they've ever made.  So I suggest you look at the 

article that we have in fact tabled for you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to table an article as well that refers 

to the used oil energy Act passed this past month by the U.S. 

(United States) Congress, and, Mr. Minister, ask you if you're 

aware of this Bill which affects every aspect of energy. 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- We are aware of used oil energy Bills and 

we have in Saskatchewan right now several organizations that 

are recycling used oil, and I understand that there's some 

interest in recycling used oil in Saskatchewan.  Also they're 

interested in clean-ups of oil sites where there have been pump 

jacks and there have been spills and so on.  A lot of this is 

going on.  In fact this winter I visited a site in Kindersley 

where the people are doing exactly that and there's an interest 

in that in Saskatchewan right now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I think you've misunderstood 

that the used oil energy Act really does not refer just to using 

used oil.  In fact what it in fact does is to give American oil 

producers $1 billion in tax breaks, amongst other things, 

including a reduction in the period of time that it will take to 

put together nuclear reactors in the United States.  It's very 

wide ranging. 

 

Mr. Minister, Saskatchewan oil producers waited until your 

budget came down before deciding on drilling plans.  You 

know that only six gas wells have been drilled since you've 

come into power.  Now I understand that you have made public 

your intentions to do a royalty review.  Just what is your review 

going to tell a sector that's facing increasingly stiffer 

competition? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'm curious.  

It's interesting to have the member from Saskatoon Greystone 

suggest that we spend another billion dollars.  With that kind of 

economics she could easily join the members to her right over 

there and would fit in with the economics that existed in this 

province for the last nine and a half years. 

 

I would just like to comment on the activity of the oil and gas 

sector.  We can single out Saskatchewan if you wish and it's 

fair game, but all you have to do is look at Alberta whose oil 

and gas industry traditionally has been five, six, up to ten times 

as big as ours.  There's six wells drilled in Saskatchewan, what, 

25 drilled in Alberta?  It's just not an active industry right now.  

I think you will see that the industry will pick up.  And the fact 

that wells haven't been drilled has absolutely nothing to do with 

our budget because our budget didn't touch the royalties, the 

royalty regime. 

 

My indication to the industry has been that I will ask them to 

submit to me suggestions for royalty changes so that the 

industry can pick up.  It's not something that we're going to 

impose on the industry.  We're going to ask them to submit 

suggestions to us. 

 

Maybe there are some changes that are necessary.  We're not 

sure that the regime that we have in place is the perfect one.  In 

fact when I think of the people who put it in place, I know for a 

fact it's not the perfect one. 

 

So we're simply asking them to bring input to us and we will 

also react to that input and we will also tell them what we want 

from the industry.  So it's going to be a consultative approach, 

contrary to what members opposite think. 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, I 

wish to correct something.  It's a billion dollars in tax breaks.  

If you think that that isn't going to have an impact on what 

happens to the oil industry in North America and particularly in 

Canada, then you're living in a dream world. 

 

You used the future tense, sir, when you talked about:  you are 

going to be asking them to have input.  You have made public 

your intentions to do a royalty review.  You've already stated 

that you're going to do this.  It's done, is what you've stated. 

 

And now you're saying that there's a future tense here, that 

maybe you'll just consult with these people.  Your government 

also says that it's interested in new jobs, jobs for Saskatchewan 

people.  And yet what we have is the highest royalty structure 

in Saskatchewan anywhere in the nation. 

 

And I ask you this:  is your intention to lower the royalties in 

order to stimulate the drilling industry?  Because it's only two 

things that are going to create jobs, and that is through royalties 

and land sales in the oil industry. 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. 

member is quite right that I did say publicly that we would 

have a royalty review.  But that doesn't say that we've already 

done it. 

 

I also would like to tell the hon. member that I plan to go on a 

holiday this October, but that doesn't mean to say it's already 

done.  But the plans are there that I do want to go.  So don't 

give us that kind of nonsense, that just because we made an 

announcement, that it's already been done. 

 

We are going to ask the industry, as I said before, for input into 

this royalty regime that we may change, we may not change.  

Maybe it is the best that we can do at this particular time.  But 

the point is, we will ask them for their input.  Are we going to 

reduce royalties?  I'm not going to commit to that.  Are we 

going to raise royalties?  I'm not going to commit to that.  

We're going to wait and see what the industry has to say. 

 

This province cannot afford to give away any more tax dollars.  

The members opposite, the former government, did that for 

nine and a half years.  We can't afford to do that.  We have to 

make sure that we have enough tax dollars in this province to 

maintain the services that the people of this province want. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  That is precisely, 

Mr. Minister, what I'm talking about.  The province of 

Saskatchewan does need tax resources.  Okay?  We do need to 

be able to have some taxation in order to pay for health care 

and education.  If you continue to make decisions or not make 

the decisions, as the case may be, whether they're 

small-industry people, whether it's Saskoil, these individuals 

are not doing the things in their industry that they can do to 

create jobs and 

wealth in the province of Saskatchewan because you haven't 

given them any indication that they should go ahead and do 

these things. 

 

Now when are you going to come forward, sit down with these 

people in the oil and gas industry and finally come up with 

some plans so people know how to go forward and create jobs 

for the people of Saskatchewan? 

 

Hon. Mr. Penner: -- I invite the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone to attend the IPAC (Independent Petroleum 

Association of Canada) tomorrow at noon.  I'll be speaking at 

the IPAC meeting at noon tomorrow, so maybe you'll come 

there and pay attention and listen to what's happening. 

 

This government has done everything it could under the 

circumstances to provide the industry with confidence to work 

in Saskatchewan.  We have indicated to them that we are not 

going to change the royalty regime because they were used to 

the one, and they were going to continue their activity on the 

basis of the old regime.  We said we were not going to change 

it.  We lived up to that commitment; we did not change the 

royalty regime. 

 

We did do some taxation and it was in consultation with the 

people that were involved in the taxation.  We need tax dollars 

in this province.  I understand that very clearly, that we need 

tax dollars in this province, but we're not going to take tax 

dollars from those people who can least afford to pay.  This 

government believes that taxes should be based on the ability 

to pay and those who make money will pay.  And if the oil 

industry makes money, we will be asking them to pay more as 

they become more prosperous. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Legislative Review of Government Appointments 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  One more question to 

the minister, Associate Minister of Finance.  Coming back to 

this discussion we had earlier about partisan politics, Mr. 

Minister, while you're taking away the pensions of thousands 

of Saskatchewan Pension Plan members, you are giving jobs to 

many NDP politicians who are already collecting taxpayers' 

dollars. 

 

During the election, Mr. Minister, and the question we're 

getting at, your Premier promised such appointments would be 

subject to review.  And in the last session your Premier told the 

Assembly that there would be a process announced in the 

spring for a committee to review patronage appointments. 

 

Mr. Minister, will you keep the Premier's commitment by 

bringing in legislation soon that provides for a legislative 

review of these kind of appointments? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- There is a process for review of these 

appointments.  It is this Assembly.  And the fact that you 

would pick Mr. Blakeney as one of your first targets indicates 

perhaps that all is well.  If this is the most serious abuse of 

patronage you have to raise, I for one am pretty 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

proud of our record. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to Provide a Charter of 

Environmental Rights and Responsibilities 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

Provide a Charter of Environmental Rights and Responsibilities 

be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the minister on her feet? 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- With leave, Mr. Speaker, for the 

introduction of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mrs. Teichrob: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to 

introduce to you and through you to the members of the 

Assembly, Mr. Fred Herron, the executive director of the 

Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation, who is seated in your 

gallery. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Also to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- You may proceed. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to, along with 

the minister, welcome Mr. Herron to the Assembly today.  He 

should have been here last night when we were having 

discussions on education.  He might have found it interesting 

and perhaps he'll be interested in coming back the next time we 

have Committee of Finance dealing with the Education 

Estimates.  I'd like to welcome him here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1415) 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

PRIVATE BILLS 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 01 -- An Act to provide for the incorporation of 

Ukrainian Catholic Parishes within Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Mr. Speaker, before I move the Bill I would 

like to take this opportunity to make a few comments regarding 

the Bill.  I'm very pleased to present this Bill, Mr. Speaker, on 

behalf of the Ukrainian Catholic 

parishes in Saskatchewan.  And I want to mention a little bit 

about how this came about because it gives us a little insight 

into some of Saskatchewan's history. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it would be quite interesting for most people who 

may have at some time perused some immigration records to 

go back to the immigration pattern back in the 1890s and the 

early 1900s, and you'd probably notice that there weren't any 

Ukrainians coming into Saskatchewan at the time.  But you 

probably have noticed also that there were a great number, in 

fact tens of thousands of Ruthenians and Galatians and 

Austrians that immigrated to Saskatchewan.  And if you take a 

look at any statistical analysis now that is done on the basis of 

ethnic origin, you will find that there are very few, if any, 

remaining Ruthenians and Galatians.  And people may be quite 

surprised.  Where did all these people that came to 

Saskatchewan go to? 

 

What has happened, Mr. Speaker, is the people that came from 

that part of eastern Europe which is now known as Ukraine, 

were at that time under foreign occupation.  And just in order 

to accomplish their life dream which was to emigrate from 

impoverishment, they were forced to use names of the 

occupying country or the occupying region.  And now of 

course the times have changed and they're very proud to use the 

historic name from that region, and that is call themselves 

rightly and properly Ukrainians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with that comment then I think it is very fitting 

also that this Bill be presented to this House this year, which is 

the year that people from that part of the country are 

celebrating a 100th anniversary of settlement to Canada from 

Ukraine, and also quite fitting because it is within a year of the 

declaration of the independence of Ukraine.  All of these things 

for which many Ukrainians in Canada, people of Ukrainian 

extraction in Canada, have been working and feel a very great 

affinity to. 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 01, An Act to 

provide for the incorporation of Ukrainian Catholic Parishes 

within Saskatchewan, be now read a second time and referred 

to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Bill No. 02 -- An Act to amend An Act to incorporate The 

Regina Agricultural and Industrial Exhibition Association, 

Limited 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And before I move 

the Bill No. 02, I would also like to inform the members of a 

brief bit of background to the Bill that's coming forward. 

 

As a member of city council, we were looking at the make-up 

and membership of the exhibition association and met with 

them to do some visioning and mission statement and planning, 

and at that time looked at a new make-up of the board.  The old 

board had 36 members and found that it was an unworkable 

number.  They also wanted to have more accountability and be 

more accountable to the community that it serves, and also 

request a member from the minister. 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

So it's been my pleasure to be a part of the workshops and the 

mission-envisioning statement and therefore was asked to 

present this to the members of the Assembly through the 

Private Members' Bill. 

 

And with that, I would move Bill No. 02, An Act to amend An 

Act to incorporate The Regina Agricultural and Industrial 

Exhibition Association, Limited be now read a second time and 

referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Bill No. 03 -- An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services Limited 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Prior to moving the 

Bill, I wish to inform members that this Bill is an amendment 

to a Bill which affects Credit Union Central and its member 

credit unions across Saskatchewan.  Members might recall that 

in the federal parliament last fall, and in December, a piece of 

legislation was passed and approved which affected all 

financial institutions across Canada. 

 

The amendments which we put forward in Bill No. 03 in 

essence harmonize the provincial legislation affecting credit 

unions in Saskatchewan with the federal regulations with 

respect to that legislation.  So I would, Mr. Speaker, in light of 

this, indicate to members that the amendments will, in essence 

and in summary, sustain the status quo for the Credit Union 

Central and its member credit unions with respect to 

harmonizing federal legislation. 

 

I move that Bill No. 03, An Act to amend An Act to amend and 

consolidate An Act respecting Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Credit Society Limited and Saskatchewan Co-operative 

Financial Services, Limited be now read a second time and 

referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to 

the Standing Committee on Private Members' Bills. 

 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 

Review of Saskatchewan Pension Plan Status 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am very pleased to be 

able to move this motion before the House today.  Every 

motion that is placed before the Assembly is important, Mr. 

Speaker, but this one is especially vital.  After all, Mr. Speaker, 

we are talking about the financial security of thousands of 

Saskatchewan people -- or I guess after the NDP budget 

betrayal '92, the lack of financial security for thousands of 

Saskatchewan people. 

 

We are talking about well over 50,000 people, Mr. Speaker -- 

50,000 single mothers, part-time employees, home-makers, and 

farmers who are struggling to be able to secure their future and 

the future of their children -- 

50,000 people that this government has abandoned. 

 

Mr. Speaker, most of the members of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan, in fact 78 per cent of the members of the plan, 

are women, many of whom are single mothers or are women 

working in positions like waitressing where an employer does 

not offer a pension plan. 

 

These women and the farmers and small-business owners, Mr. 

Speaker, came to the former government looking for help.  

They wanted to be able to plan for their futures.  They wanted 

to have some security so when their golden years started 

creeping up, that they wouldn't have to worry about where the 

rent money was going to come from.  Mr. Speaker, all they 

wanted was security.  And, Mr. Speaker, no government 

previous had been able to satisfy their needs in this regard. 

 

I am happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that the former administration 

listened to these people.  In fact the Progressive Conservative 

government did more than just listen.  They cared enough to do 

something about their needs.  The PCs (Progressive 

Conservative) implemented a secure plan that would enable 

these people to set aside a little money each month and rest 

assured that their money was growing.  And the reception was 

great, Mr. Speaker -- 50,000 people became members of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Find me an individual that doesn't think it is worthwhile to 

have such a program, other than of course the members 

opposite.  They, Mr. Speaker, think it is just fine to take away 

the pension plans of mothers and home-makers because they 

never liked the idea in the first place.  I don't imagine they had 

a lot of trouble with the plan itself, Mr. Speaker, but the NDP 

have a hard time complimenting any idea that was not their 

own. 

 

The fact that the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was a Tory idea 

was even worse.  The NDP criticized the Pension Plan right 

from the start, Mr. Speaker.  The member from Regina 

Churchill Downs called the program, socialism for the rich.  

The member called a single mother, scraping together 

sometimes $20 a month to invest in her future, socialism for 

the rich. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to see the member from Regina 

Churchill Downs talk about the thousands of single parents and 

home-makers across this province, many of whom realize just 

how ridiculous that statement was. 

 

And other NDP members complained too, Mr. Speaker.  The 

member from Regina Hillsdale said the Saskatchewan plan 

didn't do enough to eliminate the problem of poverty among 

seniors in our provinces.  She didn't think the plan did enough, 

Mr. Speaker, yet just a couple of years later that same member, 

that same member is supporting cutting the entire program off.  

Obviously the member from Regina Hillsdale is not speaking 

the truth when she said the Saskatchewan Pension Plan didn't 

do enough, because it certainly did more than no plan at all. 

 

It's almost worse, Mr. Speaker, because the members opposite 

claim to be the only ones who care about single mothers, the 

only ones who take care of low income 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

earners.  Well the NDP budget betrayal lays all of that to rest. 

 

The members don't care about people.  They don't care about 

the lives that they are turning upside down by cancelling of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  All the members opposite care 

about is the destruction of any Tory program or any Tory idea, 

no matter who gets hurt in the process.  The NDP are so bent 

on their ways, Mr. Speaker, that they'll allow single mothers to 

take it on the chin so they can settle their political scores. 

 

It's sad, Mr. Speaker, that this government tries to blame 

everyone else for their choices.  They claim the pension plan 

was unfunded, that it had to go because it was costing $12 

million a year.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that sounds like a pretty 

small cost for 50,000 Saskatchewan working people.  Not to 

mention the fact that according to the Gass Commission, there 

were unfunded liabilities that are absolutely huge in 

comparison to the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

The public service annuation plan is unfunded to the tune of 

$776 million, Mr. Speaker.  The teachers' superannuation fund 

like the member from Swift Current belongs to, is about $1.5 

billion in unfunded liability.  Ten million dollars in judges of 

the Provincial Court superannuation fund, and even the MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) superannuation fund is 

underfunded by $90 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who is covered under that pension plan, the old 

MLA pension plan?  Well, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to put it on the 

record just a few of the members who are opposite, currently in 

government, who are members of that pension plan, the 

unfunded MLA pension plan. 

 

The member for Quill Lakes is a member of that unfunded 

pension plan.  The member from Regina Churchill Downs, the 

Associate Minister of Finance is a member of that unfunded 

pension plan, Mr. Speaker 

 

The member from Regina Dewdney, the Finance minister for 

the province of Saskatchewan is a member of that old unfunded 

MLA pension plan, Mr. Speaker.  This, Mr. Speaker, is the 

very same minister that is cutting off the pension plans of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan -- the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  And yet that minister, the Associate Minister of 

Finance and the Minister of Finance are both members of an 

extremely lucrative pension plan that they belong to. 

 

(1430) 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the current Premier of this 

province, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale is also a 

member of the unfunded liability pension of MLAs.  He is also 

a member of that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only that, but we have people like the former 

premier of this province, a former premier, Mr. Allan 

Blakeney. He is a man that is receiving a substantial pension 

plan from the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, it's the same people that now want 

to take away the pension plan from the single parent, mothers 

in Saskatchewan, small-business people, farmers. Those are the 

type of people that they want to take it away from, and yet 

they're sitting on probably one of the most lucrative pension 

plans in all of the Dominion of Canada. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at these types of figures, 

does $12 million sound like it would break the province when 

there's $19 million going to seven members on the government 

side?  Seven members on the government side have an 

unfunded pension of $19 million. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- How many on your side? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- There is one member, the member from Swift 

Current speaks up and says, how many members on our side?  

Well I'll tell the member from Swift Current.  There is one 

member on the opposition side, the member for Arm River. 

 

And not only that, I'll have you know, Mr. Member from Swift 

Current, he in this House stood and said he would give up his 

pension under this old unfunded MLA pension plan if those 

seven members would also do the same.  And I haven't heard a 

word from any one of those seven members, Mr. Speaker, 

about their unfunded pension. 

 

The member on the opposition side will give it up but none of 

those members will, Mr. Speaker.   We haven't heard anything 

from them.  Twelve million dollars, that's what it cost for the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan; $19 million for seven members on 

the government side. 

 

The Minister of Finance could have come up with a better 

excuse, Mr. Speaker, but I'm afraid he's used them all up trying 

to defend the horrendous decisions his government has made.  I 

find it interesting that the Premier found it necessary to cut off 

the financial futures of the home-makers of this province when 

he has over $1 million.  I think that has to be reiterated several 

times.  The Premier himself, $1 million in his pension plan.  I 

think it's shameful, Mr. Speaker.  There was absolutely no 

consultation about this measure, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Earlier in members' statements I pointed out, and I'd like to 

reiterate a little bit about the consultation that they had with 

members of the pension plan and more specifically with people 

in the town of Kindersley, a letter from the mayor of 

Kindersley to the Minister of Finance.  And I'd like to read just 

one short paragraph into the record: 

 

 I am writing you today over the lack of action on our request 

to meet with you over the removal of the (Saskatchewan) 

Pension Plan from our community.  Since the Provincial 

Budget our Town Administrator Jim Toye has contacted your 

personal secretary several times to arrange this meeting and 

has been continually told that he would be notified when this 

meeting could be arranged.  It has now been close to one 

month and we still have not received notification of a 

meeting. 

 

They have contacted the Finance minister's office on May 11, 

May 12, May 19, May 25, May 28, and two times on 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

May 25, and again on this letter on June 5.  A clear example, 

Mr. Speaker, of the kind of consultation that these folks 

opposite are willing to take part in -- absolutely no 

consultation.  That's the type of thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were a number of alternatives that this 

government could have explored with respect to the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  They could have looked at things 

like reducing the government's contribution.  We've heard from 

people all over the province, as I'm sure members of the 

government have heard from Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

members all over the province, that they would have been 

happy if the plan had continued even if the government wanted 

to cut back on the matching contribution or eliminate it 

entirely.  They would have been happy to at least have the plan 

continued. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's alternatives like that that I don't believe the 

government looked at and they very definitely should have 

looked at. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another alternative that they could have looked at 

was turning the pension plan over to a private pension plan 

company to administer it.  They did not do that, Mr. Speaker.  

They did not consult with anyone.  We have had letters and 

phone calls from members of the pension plan all over this 

province, and yet we see absolutely no action from this 

government with respect to the pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I think it's important to note and to 

reiterate there are unfunded pensions in this province today.  

The teachers have an unfunded pension.  The Saskatchewan 

government employees have an unfunded pension.  And most 

importantly, the MLAs -- seven on the government side -- have 

an unfunded pension that they are not willing to give up. 

 

I ask, Mr. Speaker, today, why does the government, the NDP 

administration feel that the home-makers, the business people, 

the farmers of this province should give up their pension plan 

when they will not give up theirs?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move the motion: 

 

 That this Assembly urges the Premier to reverse his decision 

to destroy the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and that the status 

and review of the plan be referred to a committee that 

includes plan members to examine alternatives such as 

private sector involvement and adjustments to the 

government's matching contribution. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to join in this debate regarding the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan which was eliminated by the NDP government 

recently in the province.  I would suggest, eliminated without 

consideration of the alternatives or amendments to keep the 

plan alive.  Many alternatives and many ideas have certainly 

been coming across my way over the past number of days. 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, as I was visiting with a number of people 

at 4-H achievement days on Thursday, I don't exactly 

remember how many people came up to me, but that was one 

of the first areas of conversation was the fact that the pension 

plan was eliminated -- a pension plan, Mr. Speaker, with 

almost 55,000 members involved, members who depended on 

the program for their financial future. 

 

And there's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that there are men and 

women across this province who believe and who are 

beginning to believe, more so every day, that it is imperative 

that we all plan ahead for our future.  Certainly there is a 

paranoia, if you will, or a fear that maybe even the Canada 

Pension Plan will not be solvent by the time some of us reach 

the age of looking at collecting it.  And so it's very realistic . . . 

we must always be realistic in planning for our futures. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the 50-odd thousand people enrolled had no 

access to any kind of private pension plan.  Mr. Speaker, the 

enrolment increased steadily since the plan's inception back in 

1986.  And in fact one constituent the other day didn't realize 

that she would have had the opportunity and could have 

become involved in the plan even though she had just turned 60 

when the plan was introduced, and I had indicated to her that 

she could have been involved.  She could have made 

commitments to the plan over the five-year period till she reach 

65 and certainly would have been able to receive a small but 

modest pension and return from the pension plan. 

 

There were over 2,300 new applicants in 1991 alone, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP government's destructive decision to 

eliminate this important program impacts many more people 

than just those enrolled in the program.  And we have to think 

about the employees in the pension plan offices in Kindersley 

-- employees who had been working in the plan, who had been 

involved in the plan, and in many cases men and women . . . or 

women who had given up other jobs and made application to 

work in the pension plan all of a sudden found out that their 

jobs were eliminated, employees who received their pink slips 

without any warning on budget day. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, just previous to, about three weeks 

previous to the presentation of the budget, the government of 

the day read a throne speech in this Assembly that said that 

they would be consultative, that they would talk to people, that 

they would keep people informed.  And yet we have to ask 

ourselves, did they talk to the employees working in 

Kindersley on the pension plan? 

 

What about the families?  What about the families of the 

employees involved?  There's no doubt that many people 

across, not only in our province, but across this nation -- 

anyone at any time who receives notification of a job closure or 

shut-down, Mr. Speaker, or the elimination of a job and their 

families -- it's disruptive on their lives.  And certainly it 

becomes disruptive and interferes with the lives of their 

children as well.  Think about the negative effect this decision 

will have on the town of Kindersley where this office is 

located.  I believe, Mr. Speaker, the 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

impact is widespread. 

 

If I were to pick a particular group of individuals who were 

affected the most, Mr. Speaker, I would say without hesitation 

that it is Saskatchewan women.  Of the 55,000 people involved 

and enrolled in the plan, Mr. Speaker, more than 80 per cent 

were women across this province.  Women who were involved 

. . . maybe women who chose to remain at home and be 

housewives or housekeepers or care for their children, for their 

families.  Women who were involved in small businesses in 

this province who had no other source or avenue in planning 

for their retirement and through the process of working 

together with their employers and Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

were finally able to put aside funds for that day when they 

could look forward to retiring and have a part in the retirement, 

not only the dreams that they'd been having regarding plans for 

the future with their husbands or with family, but certainly 

being able to be involved in the financial wellness of their 

family as well.  After all, the majority of people enrolled in the 

program are women who had no other retirement options. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we all know that the situation facing farm 

families is very severe in these tough economic times.  Not 

only are we facing the tough economic community and the 

economy, but certainly many farm families across our province 

even this year, Mr. Speaker.  For many of us it may be hard for 

us to comprehend and believe, but there are areas of this 

province where it is very dry as yet.  The stress not only of all 

of a sudden losing the options and the ability of being involved 

in a pension plan certainly compounds the stress that farm 

families face when they look at the fact that the drought 

situation and the lack of resources they have to provide for 

themselves. 

 

I think farm families across this province probably are the last 

individuals around who would go looking to someone else to 

bail them out.  They are very independent and will do anything 

within their power and means to provide for themselves.  And 

so being able to be involved in a pension plan was something 

they took a lot of pride in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I received a letter last week that addressed a 

number of concerns regarding a number of decisions made by 

the government and elimination of programs.  And this was 

from a young farmer who is in the feeding industry, and 

certainly the elimination of the FeedGAP (feed grain 

adjustment program) program affects him.  The ceiling on 

refund on provincial tax on fuel affects him, Mr. Speaker.  But 

the first point he raised was the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan program. 

 

And his comment to me the other day when I was visiting with 

him, Mr. Speaker, and just talking with him at the fair grounds 

was the fact that we've heard so much about the fact that this 

program was set out specifically to address the needs of the 

rich, or that it was only people who were well-to-do who could 

afford to become part of the pension program.  And yet, Mr. 

Speaker, he indicated to me that last year it was bottom line 

when it came to paying his income tax.  After everything was 

said and done on his farm, his bottom line was in the 

neighbourhood of $8,900 for his family and him to survive on 

over the year to pay for all their personal 

needs. 

 

(1445) 

 

Couple the state of the economy with the NDP cuts, 

government's cuts to agriculture, and you can see the dire 

straits that people across this province are in.  The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was designed for those who had no 

access to a private pension plan.  The NDP decision to 

eliminate it is just another slap in the face of Saskatchewan 

people.  And many people, not just people with Conservative 

leanings, not just people with Liberal leanings, but people even 

of NDP persuasion felt that this was a very good, responsible 

program and a responsible way to face the future, and they are 

even disappointed. 

 

The members opposite use financial constraints as a defence to 

their action.  They say it is too expensive to operate.  And yet, 

Mr. Speaker, I find it very difficult to sit in my seat and listen 

to the Minister of Finance use this defence while his very own 

much richer MLA pension plan remains untouched.  And 

certainly that is the debate that is taking place around the 

province and a debate that was brought to my attention the 

other day as well. 

 

And when I took the time to explain the fact of the annuity plan 

that is now in place for MLAs, and I believe the taxpayers' 

association have also brought out that fact, have indicated that 

Saskatchewan has a much better MLA pension plan than any 

other province in Canada. I also mentioned to them that this 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was based on an annuity system as 

well. 

 

It's been suggested through various sources that the MLAs 

under the old pension plan give up their massive pensions 

rather than destroy the plan. 

 

And I quote from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, May 16, 1992: 

 

 Premier . . . who says his government can no longer afford to 

pay homemakers' pensions, will collect at least $73,000 a 

year from a taxpayer-funded pension plan when he retires. 

 

And you say, the Premier collects for 10 years; that's $730,000.  

If it's 20 years, that's one point four and a half million dollars. 

 

How about the Finance minister, the minister responsible for 

the elimination of the pension plan.  In the Star-Phoenix it says 

he: 

 

 . . . stands to pick up a pension of $55,000 a year, even if he's 

defeated in the next election. 

 

And multiply that by 10 and by 20 years. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we could go on and on about unfunded 

pension liabilities.  I know of an individual who's taught, been 

in the education field for some 30 years and has just turned 51 

and was able to retire because of the formula and the way the 

process works.  And he's going to be collecting $36,000. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's my 

pleasure to enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker.  And I would 

like to first of all advise you and members of the Assembly that 

at the conclusion of my remarks I will be moving the following 

amendment: 

 

 That all words after "Assembly" be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

 regrets the necessity of having to cancel the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan because of the previous government's failure to 

provide for its unfunded liability and because its general 

mismanagement of the province's economy made the plan 

impossible to sustain in its present form. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let me begin by saying I find it kind of 

interesting that the two members who have spoken from the 

side of the opposition were not members of the PC government 

when the plan was introduced. 

 

It would be my considered opinion, Mr. Speaker, that when the 

PC government introduced the Saskatchewan Pension Plan in 

1986 in election year, it betrayed and it betrayed miserably 

those people who became members of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan.  It did that, Mr. Speaker, in two ways: number 

one, by failing to plan for the future to ensure the affordability 

of the plan; and secondly, by governing like drunken sailors to 

rid this province of the financial stability that is necessary in 

order to provide the social programs that Saskatchewan people 

want and need, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say that I took no joy, no joy in being on this 

side of the House and being a member of a government which 

was faced with some difficult responsible decisions to make in 

light of the financial circumstances of the province.  And one 

of those decisions being the very difficult, painful decision of 

having to address the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Now let me make it very clear, Mr Speaker, I support, I support 

initiatives which lead to pension income for Saskatchewan 

residents, both those who have been active participants in the 

work-force as well as those who have not.  But I say as well, 

Mr. Speaker, that I recognize that the most desirable form of 

public pension in our country is to have an expanded Canada 

Pension Plan for all the residents of the nation. 

 

And I say that for two reasons, Mr. Speaker, and I know that 

prior to the introduction of this plan in this province there were 

a number of meetings that went on in investigating that very 

objective.  Mr. Speaker, I say it is a more desirable objective 

because: number one, it provides for a portable pension plan 

which is portable wherever you live within the nation.  But 

secondly, and in light of the current circumstances, Mr. 

Speaker, because it also is a pension program that is supported 

by a government much less vulnerable to the economic 

pressures and downturns that we are feeling in Saskatchewan 

today. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was helpful 

to those who could afford to enrol in it because it had two 

features which made it attractive, in many ways 

unique in North America. 

 

Number one, the hon. member from Kindersley referred to the 

matching contribution which cost the provincial government, 

and would have cost this year, Mr. Speaker, as the hon. 

member for Kindersley said, some $12 million in matching 

contributions.  But I note as well, Mr. Speaker, that neither of 

the government speakers who have taken their places in this 

Assembly, have made reference to the other feature, the 

guaranteed minimum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the guaranteed minimum which created an 

unfunded liability that would have been in excess of $43 

million this year, by the end of last year as a matter of fact, an 

unfunded liability, Mr. Speaker, which was projected to rise to 

$80 million by 1995, they conveniently left that information 

out of the debate.  Mr. Speaker, therein lies the problem.  

Therein lies the problem. 

 

Government is no different from any responsible family, Mr. 

Speaker.  If we want to make our own choices in our own 

families, we have to live within our means.  That's what gives 

us the financial freedom.  Well it is just as true, Mr. Speaker, 

that if you want to make your own choices in government, for 

your own reasons, then you also have to live within your own 

means so that you have the financial freedom. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I stand in this Assembly proud to be a 

member of a political party which has introduced some 32 

budgets in this Legislative Assembly over the last 48 years.  

Mr. Speaker, the first deficit budget year introduced by the 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation), the New 

Democratic Party over the last 48 years was on May 7 of this 

year, Mr. Speaker.  This is the party of fiscal prudence in the 

history of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, that is not the pure coincidence.  It 

is because this political party believes that if we are to ensure 

security for social programs for our citizens, then we must 

manage our affairs, live within our means.  That is where the 

security and the stability lie for the future. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we recognized that in the election that has 

just been held.  Members on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, went door to door with the election card that has been 

referred to a number of times in this House, Mr. Speaker, 

saying first things first: common sense, financial management.  

We said, number one, we'll open the books, and that's been 

done; number two, a comprehensive review of PC privatization 

and business deals to determine if they're in the public interest, 

and that's ongoing. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, here we are now -- a balanced budget in our 

first term of office and a 15-year plan to eliminate the 

accumulated Devine deficit.  That's what it said, Mr. Speaker.  

That is the objective of this government.  That is why some 

difficult decisions, Mr. Speaker, have had to be made this year 

to begin to clean up the mess of the members of the PC Party 

who spent like drunken sailors, particularly in elections years, 

and in doing so, Mr. Speaker, destroyed the future security of 

social programs 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we're paying the price in a number of ways 

for 10 years of irresponsible spending.  In 1982, by the the 

words of the PC Finance minister of the day, $139 million 

surplus turned over by the Allan Blakeney government in 1982 

now a total debt in excess of $14 billion.  Some $9 billion of 

that in the Consolidated Fund, Mr. Speaker, with sky-rocketing 

interest -- interest on the public debt being paid for out of the 

Consolidated Fund this year, Mr. Speaker, in excess of $760 

million.  Last year, Mr. Speaker, it was just over $500 million.  

It's sky-rocketing, and if you stand back and watch, you see it 

eating up Health and Social Services and the social programs, 

Mr. Speaker, for the future. 

 

And then last week, last week we got the word, Mr. Speaker, 

from Standard and Poor's, and I have the release of Standard 

and Poor's here, which says that as a result of the spending 

practices of the members opposite, Saskatchewan's credit rating 

has now been reduced to BBB. 

 

What does this mean, Mr. Speaker?  What does this mean?  

What this means, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan is in the 

unenviable position today where it has become the short-term 

objective of the Government of Saskatchewan to increase our 

credit rating to the level of that of Newfoundland. 

 

That's where they put us.  Did we come to this point having left 

government, Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago with the highest credit 

rating and the best managed government and the most secure 

future for the people of Saskatchewan, to today where it 

becomes the short-term objective to some day achieve the 

credit rating of the province of Newfoundland?  That's where 

they put us and that's why, Mr. Speaker, this difficult decision 

has had to be made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- That is exactly why we're here today, Mr. 

Speaker, dealing with this decision.  And I quote from Standard 

and Poor's in their release last week, Mr. Speaker, when they 

said: 

 

 (The) debt that must be serviced by the province now totals 

almost 180% of (the) annual budget revenues.  This burden is 

substantially higher than for other Canadian provinces and is 

a function of large budgetary deficits in recent years as well 

as sizeable provincial investments in several projects 

intended to diversify the economy. 

 

And I rest my case.  They plead guilty on the opposite side, Mr. 

Speaker, and therefore I move: 

 

 That all words after "Assembly" be deleted and the following 

substituted therefor: 

 

 regrets the necessity of having to cancel the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan because of the previous government's failure to 

provide for its unfunded liability and because its general 

mismanagement of the province's economy made 

the plan impossible to sustain in its present form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I'm 

very pleased to rise today to speak in favour of the amendment 

moved by the member from Moose Jaw Palliser, the 

amendment which reads: 

 

 That this Assembly regrets the necessity of having to cancel 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan because of the previous 

government's failure to provide for its unfunded liability and 

because its general mismanagement of the province's 

economy made the plan impossible to sustain in its present 

form. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government, this new government led by our 

Premier the member from Riversdale, upon entering office 

found itself faced with several dilemmas, the least of which 

was not, Mr. Speaker, how to carry on the programs, existing 

programs of the province and yet in some way retain the 

financial integrity of the province. 

 

We found ourselves in a dilemma, Mr. Speaker. How do you 

continue the services that we have been providing in health 

care?  How do you continue the services that we've been 

providing in education?  How do you cope with the fact that 

you have to reduce staff?  How do you cope with the fact that 

you have to reduce funding and at the same time knowing that 

if you don't do so, that you will be forced to do so by the 

lending agencies before too long. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is with that kind of a situation going into 

government that you find that you dig right down to your 

deepest values and you have to make your judgement based on 

what you feel is best.  And the government did exactly the 

same thing as any parent would do. 

 

(1500) 

 

When you're faced in a situation, Mr. Speaker, at home if you 

have some money available only to send your children to 

school or to put away for your own future some time down the 

line, we know what we would all choose to do.  We would 

choose, first of all, to send our children to school and then 

work on our own retirements and our own plans for the future 

and hope for the best under those conditions.  And doing all of 

this, Mr. Speaker, our byword I guess with the government 

ends up to be the byword of fairness. 

 

You ask yourself questions.  Is it fair to subsidize at the 

taxpayers' expense some pensions when at the same time you're 

doing cut-backs to health?  Is it fair to cut back more on 

education or is it fair to ask people to do more taxes . . . pay 

more in taxes while at the same time you're creating a bigger 

and bigger unfunded liability to the province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think it's fair to say that probably every member 

in this House would agree with the concept of pensions.  We all 

agree that it's prudent to put away some money for the future. 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

And it's prudent to set up pension plans.  Indeed, Mr. Speaker, 

one of our New Democratic members, long-standing New 

Democratic members, Stanley Knowles, worked his entire life 

to work towards an old age security and the Canada Pension 

Plan.  And his deeds and his efforts in that respect are well 

noted and well respected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you a little bit about a pension plan 

that I participated in as a teacher and how that whole thing 

worked out.  And it'd be advisable I think for the member 

opposite to listen to a little history of how that evolved. 

 

There was no teachers' pension plan back in the late '40s and 

early '50s, Mr. Speaker.  But it was found at that time that there 

was a need for one and there was a tremendous lobby for one, 

and the government put one in place.  And because there was a 

growing population, particularly a growing teacher population, 

the fund that was guaranteed by the government at the time 

with the agreement of the teachers that you . . . it would be put 

into place and it would be paid for by future generations. 

 

But what happened in the '70s?  We suddenly found that that 

original premise was faulty, that is, that there was no longer . . . 

the growth of the nation's population was not continuing.  So 

we needed to find a different way.  We found that that fund 

which was . . . that liability which was unfunded was becoming 

untenable. 

 

So the Allan Blakeney government of the day, starting in 1978, 

looked for new ways to sustain that plan, and by 1980 had 

developed a new plan for teacher pensions -- a funded plan.  It 

was a responsible thing to do.  And they put into place also 

funded plans for other government employees. 

 

By 1980, pretty well everybody in Saskatchewan knew that 

unfunded pension plans was not the way to go.  Now following 

up to that, there was still the unfunded liability of the old plan, 

and the idea was to slowly build that up and put it into place so 

that it would become a funded plan.  Teachers now have taken 

over the plan themselves and they're working on the basis of 

attempting to make that thing a fully funded plan eventually.  

That principle is very important. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that anybody bringing in a 

new pension plan to Saskatchewan would have followed that 

principle.  This pension plan that the government members of 

1986 brought in did not take into account the unfunded liability 

even after the experience of the governments previous and of 

all pension plans previous.  It was a very irresponsible move, a 

very irresponsible move. 

 

And now the members opposite sanctimoniously say, well 

you're destroying the plan.  Well if they'd have put the proper 

foundation under it in the first place this would never have had 

to happen, would never have had to happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has outlined the problems 

himself; he spent some time outlining the problems of 

unfunded plans.  And he itemized, for 

example, and I will repeat because I think his argument should 

be listened to but from a different point of view than what he 

has done. 

 

He mentioned a government unfunded liability of $776 million.  

That is a real problem.  The teachers' fund still has a $1.5 

billion unfunded liability.  That is a real problem.  The judges, 

$10 million unfunded liability; MLA plan, 19 million unfunded 

liability, and yet the member would add to this another 

unfunded liability of 43 million this year, which is projected to 

grow to an $85 million deficit by 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, somehow the logic of the member opposite 

escapes me.  If an unfunded liability is bad, then adding to it 

surely is not an answer.  The idea here is that we have to get 

into place some system of creating a funded pension plan.  Mr. 

Speaker, our objective, the objective of this government and 

my objective as a member supporting this government, number 

one, is to get our finances in order.  We have to do what we can 

to put the financial picture of the province of Saskatchewan 

into order so that we can have the freedom to put in and to fund 

any pension plan and existing pension plans that we have now 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

And when we look at the spending patterns of the government 

past, I can see why, how their logic follows that this 43 billion 

would be next to nothing as well, because they did several 

things which we have to now repair which make it very 

difficult to run the province on a fiscally responsible basis.  I 

want to just very briefly refer to what they did to the Crown 

Investments Corporation. 

 

We've found, Mr. Speaker, since we've opened the books that 

in addition to the debt, the operating debt of the province which 

in itself runs at about 5.2 billion, in addition there was a great 

Crown debt.  And part of it is because of the way they lost 

money in their Crowns year after year after year. 

 

Let me mention just a couple as an example.  Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan, the taxpayer has to pay up $361 

million in non-recoverable loss due to the government previous 

privatization methods.  SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation), non-recoverable losses from . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I've sat here and listened to the members of the 

legislature debate the resolution and the amended resolution.  I 

too, not unlike other members of the legislature, have heard 

from our constituents regarding our government's decision to 

change the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that our government is facing 

a fiscal crisis that is unprecedented in the history of our 

province.  There is no question, and I'm sure the members 

opposite will agree, that government has to come to terms -- 

regardless of who would have been sitting on this side of the 

House -- government has had to 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

come to terms with the size of our deficit.  Mr. Speaker, $760 

million will be paid out on interest on the debt, and that's just 

the Consolidated Fund debt, this year in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1986 when the Government of Saskatchewan, 

the government of the day, decided to introduce this pension 

plan, the pension plan was applauded by many people in this 

province, including myself.  I applauded the introduction of 

this pension plan because for a long time -- I think if you look 

at the history of this country -- there has been no recognition of 

the kind of work that women who work inside the home have 

done in terms of any kind of government recognition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 1990, 44.6 per cent of the participants in this 

pension plan were home-makers.  There will be those that 

argue that these home-makers, some of these home-makers 

come from larger income families because their spouses are 

earning a good income.  I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that for 

many women working inside their home, that they are only a 

man away from poverty.  I know many women in this province 

who have been faced with the prospect of no husband due to 

divorce and separation.  They came from well-to-do families 

based on the size of the family income, but when the husband 

left, they were left on social assistance or poverty, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I've heard from many constituents that they recognize the plight 

of the provincial government, that being that we have a very 

large provincial deficit.  I've heard from many constituents 

recognizing that this government had tough decisions to make.  

They too have advanced the arguments provided by the 

member from Kindersley that the government could have 

looked to other possibilities in terms of the plan, i.e., the 

provincial government would not make its contributions, they 

would continue to make contributions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am not unsympathetic to that argument.  And, Mr. Speaker, I 

know that there are many people in this province that are not 

unsympathetic to looking at another way of dealing with the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan in such a method that citizens 

could still make their contributions but the Government of 

Saskatchewan would not be bound by this unfunded liability. 

 

Now the member from Kindersley argues that because seven 

members of the government side have a pension plan that is 

unfunded, civil servants have a pension plan that is unfunded, 

teachers have a pension plan that is unfunded, that somehow 

we should continue to fund the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

I'd like to remind the member from Kindersley that before 1980 

I believe when Wes Robbins -- who was the former member 

for Saskatoon Nutana, the seat that I took over in 1986 -- was 

the minister of Finance, that a decision was made that this 

province could no longer afford to have the kind of pension 

plans that led to an increasing unfunded liability.  And a 

decision was made by the government of the day that we would 

have a funded pension plan -- that all civil servants and all 

teachers and all MLAs, anybody who worked for Crown 

corporations, when they started to work after 1978, '79, '80, 

depending on the date of the 

plan, that their pension would be funded. 

 

That's not what the members opposite decided to do in 1986.  

They deliberately introduced a pension plan that, because of 

the guaranteed minimum income, was unfunded.  We had 

decided in the late '70s and early '80s that we weren't going to 

continue to have that type of unfunded pension plan.  But these 

members decided -- for I would say political reasons -- to 

introduce a pension plan that would be unfunded.  So obviously 

our government had to deal with that very question of an 

unfunded pension plan through the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan.  The way we've decided to deal with that is to abolish the 

plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Kindersley makes some good 

points, as do other citizens in this province.  And I am sure that 

because of the nature of our government -- which is a caring, 

compassionate government that isn't afraid to accept some 

logical proposals -- that this kind of proposal that's being 

advanced by citizens who are members of the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan could be looked at by the Minister of Finance and 

the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

But that does not change the fact, Mr. Speaker, that in 1986 the 

Government of Saskatchewan, the Conservative Party, 

introduced a pension plan that was not sustainable financially.  

Given the historic problems of this province for the last nine 

and a half years in terms of a huge $5.2 billion deficit, in terms 

of $760 million per annum being paid out in interest on the 

debt, our government has to make logical, rational choices.  

That does not mean that we won't make mistakes, Mr. Speaker.  

That does not mean that we won't be flexible enough to accept 

reasonable proposals that will deal with the question. 

 

(1515) 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I accept the amendment that we regret having 

to cancel the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, but it was because of 

the failure of the previous government to have a plan that was 

funded and was sustainable. 

 

Those are the points that I'd like to add to this debate in the 

legislature.  I'm sure other colleagues would like to add their 

comments on this issue, Mr. Speaker, so I'll take my chair. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I've listened with 

some interest as we've gone into this debate this afternoon, and 

I guess one of the observations that I'd have to start out with is 

that the member from Moose Jaw Palliser is an eloquent 

speaker.  And I was impressed with his eloquent speech that I 

think will probably allude well to getting him into cabinet 

which I'm sure is what he's attempting to do here more than 

anything else. 

 

But in reality I'm afraid that he will have to change his 

approach if he wants to get into the hearts of the Saskatchewan 

people.  He may get into cabinet, but he certainly won't get into 

the hearts of the Saskatchewan people.  And I think probably 

you'll have to work a little harder at it, sir, and you may be 

successful. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton has trouble 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

figuring things out.  And I couldn't help but wonder if we 

shouldn't take up a collection and buy him a calculator, so he 

can manage to figure this thing out, the fact that people are 

losing one of the best programs that they've ever had in this 

province.  He says things like the Crowns are all losing money. 

And the reality of the facts of the last few days have revealed 

that SaskPower and SaskTel and different Crowns have made 

money in the past year.  And so we have some rather 

misconceptions being strewn about. 

 

I want to mention the member from Saskatoon Broadway's 

comments because I think here we've got something, something 

that's coming together.  She says she liked the plan, and I 

appreciate her honesty.  She probably should be in cabinet right 

now with the views that she's expressing of late because it 

seems to be an approach to honesty and fair play. 

 

I believe that she honestly would have worked to adjust this 

program, by her comments, to work out a plan so that the 

Saskatchewan people that were involved in the plan might have 

had that plan continue.  And I believe that if she works hard at 

it and we work with her that she may achieve that goal in the 

end because I really believe that the people of Saskatchewan 

want the Saskatchewan Pension Plan reintroduced.  And I think 

that it can be reintroduced with some adjustments and some 

program changes that will make it cost-effective and those 

things that are of concern to the folks in government. 

 

I think those things, Mr. Speaker, could have been done 

without throwing the plan away and starting from scratch.  I 

believe that it was wrong to throw the plan out.  You should 

have worked harder to make it work as it was, and you would 

have caused an awful lot of less pain and hurt in our province. 

 

If there's one thing that the NDP government can take credit 

for, it is the destruction of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  No 

one else can take credit for that.  This is the NDP government's 

own doings.  It's their choice and their decision and the people 

of Saskatchewan will have to weigh and measure that against 

performance as time goes by. 

 

The program implemented to meet the needs of people who did 

not have access to a private pension plan, a program initiated 

and implemented at the request of Saskatchewan residents.  

The previous administration was lobbied intensively to come 

up with a retirement savings vehicle for those who did not have 

access to one.  The previous administration listened to the 

people of Saskatchewan -- they listened, and they came up with 

a workable program. 

 

By destroying the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, the NDP 

government is singling out and harming a very distinct group 

of our province, a group of people that need a program and a 

pension plan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, who has been affected by the elimination of the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan?  Home-makers, for one.  Up until 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan was introduced, home-makers 

had no access to a pension plan.  They had nothing. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, so much for progress.  If the NDP 

government doesn't reverse this destructive decision, the 

home-makers once again will have no access to any pension 

plan of any kind in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Who else is affected, Mr. Speaker?  Saskatchewan's 

small-business sector is affected.  The Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan gave employers and employees all the benefits of an 

employer-sponsored pension plan without the costs.  This is 

extremely important in a province that fights so hard for an 

economic base as we've had to do in Saskatchewan over the 

last few years.  Minimum wage employees, employees who 

had no pension plan benefits -- those are the people that 

benefitted from this program. 

 

Another large and important group affected, Mr. Speaker, are 

Saskatchewan's farmers.  What do farmers like about this 

program?  Well aside from the fact that they also had no access 

to a private pension plan, they appreciated the voluntary 

contributions aspect with no annual minimum.  You may know, 

Mr. Speaker, that some years are very lean for farmers.  The 

no-minimum provision was surely appreciated. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP are fond of claiming that they are the 

party for women.  They have also claimed that they would be 

the only party who would adequately support the province's 

low income residents.  Just who did the NDP think this plan 

was for?  These two groups were greatly represented in the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan. 

 

Check the figures.  Let me refresh the members opposite of 

some of the enrolment statistics for this plan -- 78 per cent of 

the individuals enrolled were women.  The members also have 

mentioned opposite those figures, so they can't go around 

saying they don't understand it or didn't know, because they've 

used those figures themselves.  They've admitted that they 

know that the very people that they claim to represent were the 

ones that were benefitting the most from this program -- 78 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

How does the elimination of this program illustrate the NDP's 

commitment to women?  Does destroying their retirement 

vehicle, perhaps their only pension plan, assist women?  I think 

not.  Forty-four per cent of the individuals enrolled were 

home-makers, people who raise our families and keep our 

homes going.  These are the people that were affected when 

this program was taken away. 

 

Almost 50 per cent of the individuals enrolled were between 

the ages of 50 and 65.  A very important group of people in our 

province who may not have had any other pension provision 

now have had their only vehicle of pension stripped from them.  

These people are close to retirement, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 

these individuals were in need of a retirement savings plan.  

What are these individuals to do?  These people were in need 

of some security.  They were taken care of and now the NDP 

have stripped them of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We are asking that the Premier reverse his decision to destroy 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  We would even go so far as to 

beg him to reconsider this.  We ask that this 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

important plan not be arbitrarily eliminated.  Take another 

look. 

 

The NDP government has set up review committees, 

commissions, and boards on almost every matter in this 

province.  We even had a review committee set up for 

shopping hours.  Is a decision regarding the Saskatchewan 

Pension Plan not equally as important as the decision on 

shopping hours?  We on this side of the House certainly think 

so.  The people of Saskatchewan certainly think so from all of 

the calls and letters and correspondence that we've been 

getting. 

 

If the government won't listen to us and won't listen to the 

people, perhaps they will listen to recommendations from a 

committee whose mandate is specific, a mandate that would 

include examining alternatives, alternatives that do not include 

plans of a plain old eliminating of the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan, something that the NDP government did not consider but 

now we think they should. 

 

They could look into choices that include transferring the 

pension plan to the private sector or some other vehicle.  They 

could look into what impact adjustments to the government 

matching contributions would have. 

 

This committee should be made up of pension plan members, 

those people mostly affected, the individuals who will actively 

search out workable alternatives, alternatives that they would 

need for their own personal benefits and needs, individuals 

who have vested interests in keeping the plan afloat rather than 

those who have a vested interest in wanting to destroy it.  It 

should not include bureaucrats from Finance who know 

nothing about running anything except a calculator.  It's got to 

be people who have heart and soul, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

people who have something at stake -- more than just trying to 

balance somebody else's book. 

 

Bureaucrats who are only following directions coming from the 

Finance minister will not do in this matter, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  Directions to specifically single out the previous 

administration's programs is also not an acceptable approach, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker.  We need to know that the people who are 

involved in rethinking this plan . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  The member's time has 

elapsed. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are only a 

few minutes left in this particular debate, but I did want to 

make a couple of comments on it.  I would like to say to the 

members of the government that this afternoon I think we've 

had a good debate on this topic.  It's a topic that rings true with 

so many people.  I have seen positive comments made by both 

sides of the House on this issue.  I appreciated the comments 

from the member from Saskatoon Broadway.  Her comments 

on women in our society and the home are something that we 

simply as a society are going to have to emphasize more and 

more in the future. 

 

I think back to the people that live in my community and the 

contribution made not only as mothers, but as people 

who could at a spur's moment go out and grab the wheel of a 

tractor or a truck or do things in the community that required 

many extra hours that indeed saved that community money, is 

just something that we in this society can't put aside. 

 

The unfunded liability problem has been with this province for 

a long time and I recognize that there have been moves made in 

that direction.  I don't think anyone at the time -- and I 

remember the debate on this Bill -- recognized perhaps the 

potential for the unfunded liability to grow to where it is today.  

But I think you still must recognize that that unfunded liability 

and what it means to a certain sector of our society, in 

comparison to some of the other unfunded liabilities that we 

have, means that if we start making choices on unfunded 

liabilities, that perhaps this one deserved more credit that what 

it got. 

 

And I think it is absolutely incumbent upon the government to 

re-evaluate the situation to allow 44,000 Saskatchewan women 

an opportunity, an opportunity to look after, help look after 

their own future.  That is too large a segment of our society, too 

large a contribution, Mr. Speaker, to our society to say we are 

simply going to dismiss your wants because we have a fiscal 

problem in the province of Saskatchewan that we're trying to 

address. 

 

And I would hope that at nowhere in this thought process did 

the fact that Kindersley was the site of a government 

decentralization have anything to do, anything to do with this 

decision. 

 

And members of the government say no. But I know for a fact 

that every last decentralization move made by the previous 

government was fought tooth and nail in this Assembly and on 

the streets of Saskatchewan.  So why would people, right 

thinking people in our society from rural Saskatchewan . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . And that one was fought too, Mr. 

Member, and you darn well know it.  Why would any right 

thinking person in our society not suspect just a little bit, just a 

little bit that that was the case?  And I hope, I hope that it 

wasn't. 

 

That the members of the government are now prepared to get 

on with the job, get on with the job of reinstituting that plan, 

reinstituting it in Kindersley, Saskatchewan, and that the 

service being provided through the Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

will continue to be available to women particularly in this 

province, whether they be farm wives, the wives of 

small-business people, home-makers, primarily those in rural 

Saskatchewan that don't have the opportunity to access the 

pension plans that are more aptly available in our larger 

centres. 

 

These people, Mr. Speaker, are making an ongoing 

contribution to this province.  They have chosen sometimes; 

sometimes they have no choice as to where to live.  And as the 

member from Saskatoon Broadway said, oftentimes a 

circumstance arises, either through divorce or death or loss of 

business . . . 

 

(1530) 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  The time for the debate, as 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

pursuant to the new rules, has elapsed.  And at this particular 

time we will begin the question and comment period of 10 

minutes.  So I will recognize members. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask a 

number of questions to the member from Saskatoon Broadway.  

The first question is, did the government consider cutting back 

the matching contributions but continuing the program? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Mr. Speaker, in the budgetary process, as the 

member must know, the cabinet goes through a process of 

recommending a budget to caucus members.  Caucus members 

then have an opportunity to have input into the budget.  

Obviously our government considered a number of different 

options when it came to dealing with the horrendous problems 

that we're facing as a province, and that is the issue of $760 

million being paid out in this year alone on interest on the 

provincial government debt -- a debt, I might add, sir, that was 

chalked up in the nine and a half years of a Conservative Party 

administration. 

 

This government had to make choices, very difficult choices, to 

get the fiscal crisis in this province under control or the 

beginnings of getting it under control.  Obviously government 

has to consider all kinds of options, and I can tell you that these 

options were not easy.  The choices were not easy, and many of 

the members here -- I would say all members of the 

government side -- have found this process very difficult. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  When we talk about 

choices, indeed the government did have choices, Mr. Speaker.  

Again to the member from Saskatoon Broadway, does she 

believe that the Premier and the other six members of her 

caucus should be willing to, when they ask the pension plan 

holders of this province -- the home-makers, the housewives, 

small-business people, and farmers of this province -- does she 

believe that they should be willing to give up their pension and 

yet the members, the seven members on that side of the House, 

not give up their pension?  Does she believe that? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much.  In answer to the 

member's question, obviously there are many examples of 

government waste and mismanagement.  It seems to me that 

we've been in government for seven months.  During my 

speech on the budget I asked civil servants and citizens to 

begin the process of identifying to the government and 

members opposite, areas where we could identify waste and 

mismanagement where there could be government cut-backs. 

 

Obviously we have to run a very lean operation in these hard 

times, sir.  It seems to me that we can identify savings, and 

these savings can be used for other government initiatives that 

are important to the people of this province. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question 

would be to the member from Thunder Creek.  I was at Mosaic 

over the weekend and talking with some people who did ask 

the question about the pension plan.  And when I was speaking 

to them and telling them about a program that had been 

designed very poorly and hastily by the members opposite and 

the same members who 

have put this province into a debt that chalks up now interest 

payments of $760 million, purely politically putting this in 

place at a time when they knew that this program was going to 

have a major unfunded liability in the future, and talking to the 

members who would know and recognize in the community 

that they were going to have to pay far more in taxes and look 

at more cut-backs in programs and services if we can't do 

something drastically to reduce the deficit in this province, that 

far more than that, they would not receive a benefit; they would 

be looking at paying out more. 
 

I'm wondering then if the member from Thunder Creek would 

tell us why they would begin a program like this that would be 

a strong politically motivated program and be good for political 

points, but not consider that it is now chalking up $43 million 

in . . . 
 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'll let the member answer the 

question. 
 

Mr. Swenson: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd be happy to reply to the 

member.  I know she wasn't here during the debate on this 

particular issue back in 1986, as were not a lot of the current 

government members.  And at that time there was extensive 

debate on this particular item.  The question of unfunded 

liability was never raised by anyone in the then opposition. 

 

And someone who was as astute as the Hon. Allan Blakeney, 

former premier, Finance minister, and economic whiz I'm told, 

in debate on the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, never once 

questioned the concept or the premises that it was begun under 

-- clearly recognizing, I say to the member, clearly recognizing 

that there were a lot of women particularly in rural 

Saskatchewan, because the average age of farm families in this 

province is now probably approaching 60 years of age; at that 

time there were a lot of rural women in that 55 age group and 

up. 

 

The decision to allow them to go in with a minimum pension 

meant that in the front end years, recognized by all members of 

this Assembly, that there would be some liability incurred at 

the time.  And your leader at the time, Mr. Blakeney, 

recognized that fact also. 

 

But these women had . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- My question is to the member from 

Moose Jaw who moved the amendment.  The member from 

Melfort today presented a new Bill to the House in which she is 

going to consult with the public as to their concerns and their 

ideas on the environment. 

 

Why was your government not willing to consult with the 

public that was involved in the pension plan before you made 

the changes that you have implemented? 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  If I can 

comment first of all just on the comment made by the member 

from Thunder Creek a moment ago who is in the most recent 

minute praising Allan Blakeney but earlier in the day, when it 

was convenient, condemning Allan Blakeney.  So, Mr. 

Speaker, I find it gets curiouser and 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

curiouser, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also think you can't stand and listen without asking the 

question over there, just who was the financial wizard that 

dreamed this thing up.  Who was the financial wizard?  Was it 

Bob Andrew who introduced the flat tax and called his budget 

the most brilliant budget that had ever been introduced . . . or 

most intelligent budget, I guess, that's what it was. 

 

Or was it Gary Lane?  Was it Gary Lane who after having 

misled the people of Saskatchewan by some $800 million in 

the size of the deficit, Mr. Speaker, and then followed that up 

after the election year in 1986 -- the election year in which this 

pension plan was introduced -- when asked how did you make 

a mistake of $800 million, who followed that up by saying, 

what do you expect, we're politicians.  What he should have 

said, Mr. Speaker, is what do you expect, we're Tory 

politicians. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, the question I'd like to direct . . . the 

person I'd like to direct the question to is the member from 

Moose Jaw Palliser.  The member for Saskatoon Broadway 

conveniently wouldn't answer the question with respect to 

whether she believes people in the government benches should 

be giving up their pensions as well.  So I'd like to direct that 

question to the member from Moose Jaw Palliser.  Does he 

believe, for example, that the House Leader for the government 

side should be willing to give up his pension when he's asking 

the home-makers of Saskatchewan to give up theirs.  Simple 

question. 

 

Mr. Hagel: -- Mr. Speaker, it was recognized back in the 

1970s that unfunded liabilities and pension plans was not a 

solid way to go.  And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, there 

were changes made to the pension plans as they relate to 

members of the legislature, to public service employees, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as to teachers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But I would say, Mr. Speaker, that as we are standing here as 

private members and all expressing what I believe to be a bona 

fide interest in the welfare of Saskatchewan people, would it be 

fair to assume that all members of this Assembly -- both sides 

of the House -- would support being progressive and looking to 

the Canada Pension Plan as a vehicle which will provide a 

larger level of portability for people across the country, Mr. 

Speaker, as well as the connection to, Mr. Speaker, a 

government which is not as vulnerable to the economic 

circumstances of the province of Saskatchewan.  That is the 

question that we really must be asking ourselves as we look 

forward with some hope and optimism for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Ms. Stanger: -- Question for the member from Kindersley.  I 

think that if you put in a plan -- which you say the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan was an excellent plan -- don't you 

think to ensure that this excellent plan would stay in force, that 

you would during your time as government make sure that the 

financial situation of the province is in such a good order that 

you can ensure that these plans continue.  So I'm asking the 

member from 

Kindersley, you put in a plan but you didn't take care of the 

finances of the province, so what is your comment on that? 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Well she talks, she talks about the plan being an 

excellent plan.  And indeed it was an excellent plan -- 54,000 

people in this province thought it was an excellent plan.  That's 

what the people of the province of Saskatchewan think, Mr. 

Speaker -- 54,000 think it's an excellent plan. 

 

When we talk about unfunded liabilities . . . and that seems to 

be the only argument that they have against this thing, the 

unfunded liability.  And that member right over there, the 

House Leader's pension plan is $1 million.  That's the type of 

thing that the people of Saskatchewan are arguing against in 

this, Mr. Speaker.  One million dollars in his . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  Order.  The time has elapsed 

for the comment in question period, pursuant to the new rules. 

 

We will now proceed to motion for returns.  Oh, I'm sorry.  

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Leave to introduce some guests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, and fellow members of the 

legislature, it gives me great pleasure on behalf of the Minister 

of Health, Louise Simard, to introduce to you and through you 

12 students from Ottawa who are seated in your gallery, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They're here on an exchange program, Voyageur Canada '92, 

and their host school is Ecole Monseigneur de Laval, Regina.  

Their students vary in grades from grade 10 to university. 

 

Monsieur Le Président, ça me donne plaisir de vous présenter 

du part de la ministre de La Santé, l'Honorable Louise Simard, 

12 étudiants d'Ottawa qui sont ici sur un program de change, 

Voyageur Canada '92. Les éleves, il y a douze en tous et sont 

du niveaux la dixième jusqu' à secondaire, université, et je veux 

demander à tous les députés de les acceuillir chaleureusement 

et vieille une bonne visite à Regina. Je vais les voir plus tard 

pour un café et pour jaser. 

 

(Translation: Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to 

you, on behalf of the Minister of Health, the Hon. Louise 

Simard, 12 students from Ottawa who are here on an exchange 

program, Voyageur Canada '92.  The students, there are 12 of 

them in total, are from the 10th grade to secondary, university, 

and I would like to ask all the members to welcome them 

warmly and wish them a good visit to Regina.  I am going to 

see them later for a coffee and a chat.) 

 

Mr Speaker, I'll be chatting with them later on in the members' 

dining lounge.  Would you all please welcome them.  Thank 

you. 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

also welcome the students to our legislature.  I'm pleased that 

they chose Saskatchewan to visit, and je vous souhaitais bonne 

chance dans votre visite ici. Merci. 

 

(Translation: I would wish you good luck in your visit here. 

Thank you.) 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 9 (continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The motion for return 

debatable is basically a fairly simple one.  We're asking the 

minister, with respect to the Saskatchewan Development Fund 

Corporation, all we're asking for is the employment history and 

some other pertinent details surrounding the people that they've 

hired since November 1, '91 -- only since November 1, '91. I 

want to emphasize that point.  That's the only people we're 

interested in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it's the type of thing, a question that every employer on 

every standard employment contract we see.  That's the type of 

thing.  They want to know about the people that they're hiring 

for their employees.  Myself, as a business person and a farm 

operator, when I take on people in the spring of the year, or 

throughout the year in my place of employment, I always ask 

for that kind of information, about the background of the 

people who are applying for jobs for myself.  And I'm sure 

other employers around the province, that's the standard 

practice, to ask about their employment history. 

 

And it's clear why they do that.  It gives the employer the 

opportunity to check into their background a little bit, to find 

out what kind of person that is applying for the job that they're 

offering, to find out a little bit about their skills in the job that 

they're offering, to find out a little bit about the people's 

educational background, and that sort of thing. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I don't think the request that we are making of 

the minister is unreasonable at all.  I think every responsible 

employer in this province would be asking exactly the same 

question.  So, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly believe that this 

motion is very definitely in order and should be considered by 

the minister.  And so I would ask that the minister give it its 

due consideration and respond to the motion. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as I indicated the other 

day, what we are doing here is allowing for the members 

opposite to receive I think what they really want, and that is the 

staff who are employed in the minister's office, the people who 

have probably some political background, and they may want 

to know where they come from and what they're being paid, 

and I think that's legitimate. 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think what we're seeing here is where they 

want all of the employees that this government hires.  And their 

background and salary is completely out of order with the 

tradition that has been set in the Government of Saskatchewan, 

particularly in the last 10 years where you'll remember, Mr. 

Speaker, that when we asked in Crown Corporations that 

member's desk mate, for example, when he was a minister, for 

the salary of the presidents of the corporations.  Wouldn't give 

it to us, not even the president. 

 

I can remember asking for the salary of Mr. Hill and other 

members asking for the salary of Mr. Hill, and they were not 

forthcoming with the answer as to what his salary was.  And 

then when we get into office, it became very clear. 

 

But for them to ask for every individual that we hire, many of 

them at a level where it is of no concern to the members 

opposite or to the public, one can only assume what they want 

to do with that kind of information. 

 

So what we're saying here, and I intend to make an amendment 

that will clearly outline that we're willing to give, Mr. Speaker, 

is the information they ask for on those that might be perceived 

to be political and have political background because they work 

in the minister's office.  And I don't think any one is surprised 

by that. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move that the motion be amended as 

follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister directly or 

indirectly who were employed on or after November 1, 1991" 

be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 

 

 "in the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I said earlier, I 

think that the employment history of an employer asking for 

the employment history of prospective employees is something 

that is a standard practice in business throughout the province, 

throughout Saskatchewan, probably throughout the world, for 

that matter, asking for that kind of information.  It simply 

points out that where the person, the prospective employee, has 

worked in the past.  I can't understand the government's 

reluctance to answer that question.  We're only asking it of the 

employees that have taken up employment since November 1, 

'91. 

 

When we talk about the past . . . and that's something that these 

folks continually like to talk about is everything that went on in 

the past; they never consider what's going on in the future, only 

the past.  But nevertheless we'll take up his argument a little 

bit.  He suggests that never before has the information been 

given on this type of thing, Mr. Speaker.  But that's not true one 

little bit. 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

In the Public Accounts record for 1989-90, in the minister's 

own department himself of Economic Development and 

Tourism, the department that the minister is currently 

responsible for, it lists page after page after page of the 

employees and their salaries and that sort of thing.  So I can't 

understand why the minister wouldn't be willing to point out 

that kind of information. 

 

For example, in the Economic Development and Tourism 

department, in the Public Accounts record for 1989-90, we see 

that a Mr. Kenneth Adie received $61,752 in salary; he didn't 

have any travel expenses.  We go down the list and we can find 

person after person, and I'll read a few more.  Mr. Bryce Baron, 

he received $83,324.  That is a matter of public record, Mr. 

Speaker, about the type of thing that the minister talks about.  

We move on. We see a gentleman by the name of Kerry Dahl 

that worked in the department at that time.  His salary was 

32,617 and he had travel expenses of $2,958, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member for Souris-Cannington on 

his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 

guests, please. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 

you and through you to the Assembly, the grade 7 class from 

the Estevan Junior High School.  There are 23 students today 

here.  They are sitting in your gallery.  Along with the students, 

Mr. Speaker, are their teachers, Maureen Ulrich, Barb 

Schmuland; chaperons, Glendyne Brown; and bus driver, Bev 

Schmidt. 

 

I will be meeting with the students for pictures and for drinks 

later and for some discussion.  I would ask that the Assembly 

welcome them here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 9 (continued) 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Mr. Speaker, as well the minister suggests earlier 

that that information isn't on public record.  But again we'll go 

back to his department, the very department he's responsible 

for today.  And we see a gentleman by the name of John 

Barron, he received $9,000 in various grants. 

 

And so my colleague just a moment ago, the member for 

Rosthern, pointed out in the Department of Health there are 

nine full pages of very small print of people's names, of the 

various salaries and travel allowances and things of that nature 

that they receive. 
 

So what we're asking for, Mr. Minister, I think is very 

straightforward and the type of thing that every employer 

would ask of his prospective employees.  And so we're not 

doing anything, I don't believe, that would be considered out of 

the ordinary one little bit when we ask for the 

qualifications including employment history. 

 

That seems to be the concern that they have.  They're 

back-filling.  That's what they're doing, Mr. Speaker.  They're 

back-filling with NDP partisans, patronage-type appointments.  

And that's why, that's specifically the reason why they don't 

want to give us the qualifications, including employment 

history because they know very well they are patronage-type 

appointments, and they probably aren't qualified for the job that 

they're receiving. 

 

And no wonder they don't want to include their employment 

history because they're bringing NDP people from all over the 

country.  That's the type of thing that you people are doing.  It's 

no wonder they don't want the people of Saskatchewan to know 

that. 

 

But the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are the 

employers of these people.  These people are employed by the 

people of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  

They're not employed by the gentleman sitting opposite, the 

deputy . . . or I mean the House Leader.  They're not employed 

by him.  They're employed by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan.  

That's who employs them. 

 

And they have the right to know about who these people are 

hiring on their behalf.  They have the right to know about their 

qualifications.  They have the right to know where they worked 

before, including employment history.  They have the right to 

know about their compensation.  They have a right to know 

about their job description.  Those are the type of rights that 

employers have always had in this province.  And the people of 

Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan are the 

employers of these people, and they have the right to know, 

and they should be given that right. 

 

And we should not in Saskatchewan allow the minister to just 

go around hiring people, patronage-type appointments from all 

over this province and all over this country to do his bidding 

for him.  That's the type of thing that's happening in this 

province today, Mr. Speaker.  And I believe that the taxpayers 

of Saskatchewan, the people who pay the bills in this province, 

believe that they have the right to know about the qualifications 

of these people, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise in my place 

this afternoon to speak in support of the amendment of the 

government.  The member from Kindersley just gave us a 

whole tirade about the right to know and about accountability 

and responsibility of governments, the right to know of 

taxpayers. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this is peculiar coming from a member of 

the Conservative Party who was in power in this province the 

last nine years, who undertook to mastermind the most 

secretive government in the history of politics in North 

America, let alone in Saskatchewan.  This government of the 

Conservative Party from 1982 to 1991 were secretive.  They 

were not forthcoming with respect to questions in any areas 

with respect to their 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

hiring.  They redefined patronage to its darkest colour.  They 

made patronage look like in other governments it was a normal, 

pleasant, opportunistic, fine thing to do. 

 

With this government, the Tory government being in power for 

those nine years, they went to new depths -- in my view, depths 

not height, but depths in terms of appointing people without 

any qualifications to high paying jobs.  I refer, Mr. Speaker, to 

the Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation as one 

example.  The previous government, in particular the 

Conservative Party government, in the past hired literally 

hundreds of people in that corporation to management 

positions without qualification, paying them exorbitantly high 

wages. 

 

And we have seen in the Crown Corporations Committee -- the 

committee of this legislature which I chair, Mr. Speaker -- 

during the questioning of the Conservative government in the 

last nine years, absolutely no co-operation when it came to 

gathering information with respect to any function of their 

Crowns. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, during the questioning of 

ministers in the Crown Corporations Committee, who were 

responsible for various Crown corporations, they refused to 

answer general questions for the last two or three years.  We 

asked them questions in writing and verbally, and they said, 

we'll get that answer to you, Mr. Speaker.  They said they'd get 

that answer to us.  It's now been in some cases with respect to 

the Saskatchewan Transportation corporation three years since 

we've had an answer from this former Conservative 

government. 

 

So what I'm trying to get at, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 

Saskatchewan do have a right to know.  They have a right to 

know that their government is an accountable government; they 

have a right to know that their government is responsible. 

 

But they also have to recognize that because people are hired in 

the public service, they are hired to do specific jobs which are 

public knowledge; that they should not have to be subject to 

bandying about their application forms and making public their 

personal resumés to everybody and their dog in this province. 

 

We certainly support the Public Service Commission review 

and process of hiring people in an independent way.  We do not 

as a government believe that out of the 20,000 or so employees 

of the government in the Crown corporations, that each of them 

should have all of their resumés and personal histories bandied 

about in a public way. 

 

Now the people of this province have a right to know whether a 

government is open and accountable and honest.  And we will 

fulfil that right, which the former government which the 

member from Kindersley used to represent, used to be part of, 

they know darn well and full well, Mr. Speaker, that they had 

absolutely no interest in complying with the requirements of 

being an open or accountable or a responsible government. 

 

(1600) 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think what they're trying to do here is they're 

trying to create a great deal of work for the government.  

They're attempting to increase the burden in cost of 

administration when they know full well and the people of this 

province know full well there are very few dollars to pay for 

this kind of research which does not have any particular 

sensitivity to the . . . or interest by the public. 

 

So in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that I would 

ask the Conservative members of the legislature to not be 

paranoid.  I assure them on behalf of this side of the House and 

on behalf of the government that we will not be hiring 

hundreds of people in the Saskatchewan Property Management 

Corporation who are not qualified and we will not be hiring 

them in a secretive way, and we will not be paying them 

exorbitant salaries as they have paid some of their former 

political appointments. 

 

I also want to ask members opposite to temper their paranoia 

because this is a new government; this is a refreshing 

government.  We have a government that has a real interest in 

fulfilling the criteria of an open, accountable, and responsible 

government. 

 

The example I'll use in this House, Mr. Speaker, is again the 

Crown Corporations Committee.  Members opposite, after they 

were defeated, all of a sudden were born again accountability 

people.  They wanted to have the Crown corporations open and 

accountable and responsible to the people of this province.  

This is after nine years of secretive deals and a lack of 

co-operation with respect to providing information.  Yet during 

the Crown Corporations Committee they are saying we want to 

reform the committee. 

 

And you know what reforms we've undertaken, Mr. Speaker?  

Because I believe we have to reform the committee as well, 

and so are the members of the committee.  The most refreshing 

reform that took place in the Crown Corporations Committee, 

Mr. Speaker, was that the ministers answered the questions 

they were asked. 

 

This was absolutely stunning and incredulous to the opposition.  

They thought, oh my gosh, when we were in government our 

minister never answered questions.  Maybe what the New 

Democratic Party government is doing makes sense.  Maybe 

we don't need a wide ranging reform of the committee other 

than to have the minister respond to the questions that were 

asked. 

 

Indeed this was very refreshing, Mr. Speaker.  It was very 

refreshing because the people of this province and the 

committee members had not seen that kind of co-operation in 

the last nine years of the Conservative government. 

 

So I say to the member from Kindersley, temper your paranoia. 

Don't believe for one minute that the New Democratic Party 

government would act in any way like the former Conservative 

government, like your colleagues acted when they were in 

government. 

 

We have the best interests at heart of the province of 

Saskatchewan and the people and the children who live 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

here.  And it's our intention as a government, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that the people of Saskatchewan not only have the right 

to know, but that they are provided with any kind of 

information that they feel they require with respect to 

accountability to a government. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I say that with respect to this 

amendment, I support the government's amendment.  I do not 

support the entire motion that the government's put forward 

because it really does intrude into people's personal lives.  

Thank you very much. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I actually wasn't going to speak to this motion, but 

when I heard my good friend from Kindersley who's a new 

member to this Assembly and he's working very hard on behalf 

of his constituents, then I decided that I would make a few 

comments because I think that he is missing a bit of the history 

of what's happened in this place, particularly under the former 

government. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, he mentioned, that is the member from 

Kindersley mentioned that this government doesn't like to talk 

about the past.  Well, Mr. Speaker, there's no question that that 

side of the House does not like to talk about the past because 

they have devastated this province in the nine and a half years 

they were in.  They have devastated this province to the point 

that it is on the verge of bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I wanted to make the member from Kindersley, the 

new member, aware of a few facts because it's clear that he 

lacks a bit of the awareness of what's happened here. 

 

And here we've seen a situation where he's looking for the 

detail of virtually every staff member in SaskEnergy, and, Mr. 

Speaker, we have to wonder what for.  We've already seen the 

opposition do a character assassination on the Hon. Allan 

Blakeney, who was the premier of this province for many years 

and is a distinguished Canadian.  So they've already done a 

character assassination on him, and I suspect that that's the only 

reason that they want this information, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to reiterate what has been said by 

the minister responsible earlier on the previous motion, and 

that is that that opposition -- and that's why they're sitting in 

opposition now -- they never even provided the salary and 

benefits of the president of the corporation, never even . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- I would like to have leave, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to introduce guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Whitmore: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  To you 

and through you to this Assembly I would like to introduce a 

group of individuals who have been touring western Canada.  

These are people that are members of the International 

Federation of Agricultural Producers. 

This group attended meetings in Quebec City last week and 

have travelled the west to Alberta and Saskatchewan for 

meetings and visits with Pool officials and members the past 

few days. 

 

They have been touring in Saskatchewan yesterday and today.  

They had the opportunity of attending a grain farm and a mixed 

farm yesterday. And today I think they attended a dairy farm 

this morning, and are now touring the sights of Regina today.  

So I would like to introduce them if I could, to you today. 

 

From Iceland, Mr. M. Hallderson and a Ms. B. Bjarnadottir; a  

Mr. J. Helgason, who is the MP (Member of Parliament) from 

the Icelandic Parliament, and a Ms. Thorkelsdottir, a G. 

Karlsson; from Norway an S. Seljegard, a Mr. and Mrs C. 

Kjorven; from South Africa a Mr. and Mrs. P. Swart, and a Mr. 

and Mrs. J. Fourie. 

 

I extend to them, I hope they've had a pleasant trip in Canada.  

It's certainly a welcome opportunity for them to take the time 

and to visit agriculture in western Canada and to have an 

understanding of what's going on.  So I hope the legislature 

would then welcome these people who have come to visit us 

today.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I too would like to join 

with the member from Biggar in extending a welcome to these 

people.  It was a privilege for me to, on behalf of the 

Government of Saskatchewan in previous years, to travel 

together with a number of people who were here from 

Denmark and from Australia and other places to buy registered 

purebred Hereford cattle.  And I travelled around with them 

and I found them not only entertaining but also very much in 

tune with the kinds of agriculture we have here. 

 

And I want to extend to you a special welcome, because 

actually my great grandfather's name was Jensen and it's 

Danish, and it has some significance to the part of the world 

that you come from and . . . not the ones from South Africa of 

course, but I extend to them also a very sincere welcome to this 

Assembly. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Thompson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker.  I would also like to welcome the group here today  

Both my grandparents came from Iceland, so I especially want 

to welcome the members from Iceland.  But I'd like to welcome 

you all here.  Welcome to Canada and welcome to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would 

just like to add my comments of welcome as well, and let these 

folks know that I flew over your country about a week ago.  

And so it's a great privilege. We've all got some connection 

here. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Why is the member on her feet? 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I want to also welcome the guests, and I want 

to talk about the Icelandic parliament and all of the women that 

are in that parliament. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- I also want to welcome our guests, and I also 

want to say a special hello to the people from Iceland.  We had 

the honour of having your Prime Minister visit our legislature.  

We also have had women visitors from Iceland who have spent 

a great deal of time with the New Democratic Party women 

talking about how to get women involved in the political 

process, not only as local political activists but also as 

provincial politicians. 

 

And in the last provincial election, October 21 of this year, we 

elected 11 women to this legislature which is a historic event.  

We elected 10 women to our government caucus, and out of 

those 10 women, 4 women have become cabinet ministers in an 

11-member cabinet. 

 

So you can tell the folks back home that we in Saskatchewan 

are making progress.  We're not quite where Iceland is yet, but 

we certainly look to your lead and your leadership.  Thank you 

and welcome. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN (Debatable) 

 

Return No. 9 (continued) 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

appreciate the opportunity to bring my remarks to a close. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say in closing that I think 

that we have demonstrated as a government that we are very 

concerned about being accountable and being open.  The 

minister has said, and he's demonstrated this in the last six 

months, that we will share any reasonable information, any 

reasonable request that comes from the opposition. 

 

And I would remind them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they 

wouldn't even share basic information with the opposition.  

They wouldn't share basic information with the Provincial 

Auditor who had to write a special report, a special mid-term 

report trying to tell the government that please share 

information and don't break your own laws.  They were 

breaking the laws of the province by not sharing information 

which the members of this Assembly had a right to see. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we will share reasonable information.  We're 

not interested in them being involved in character 

assassinations like they were today.  And I am proud to support 

the amendment by my colleague. And I'll have a few more 

comments to make on their next motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I just 

want to make a few brief remarks in this debate.  I made a few 

last week when the same opportunity arose on motions for 

return. 

 

The member from Saskatoon pointed out a very fundamental 

difference to the Assembly on this particular question.  He said 

that you folks lost the election and we won because we 

promised people that we would be different.  And I think that's 

the fundamental difference here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

This party, this party time after time said, we went out and 

sought the people's vote.  We promise to faithfully do certain 

things if you vote for us.  And now we see them scratching like 

a cat covering up its tracks all of a sudden when we get into 

some of the issues, some of the issues that they talked about at 

great length in this Assembly and around Saskatchewan.  And I 

guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that's what we find so 

disappointing. 

 

They're saying to the opposition now, you have no right to talk 

about that.  You have no right.  Well the right comes, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, because these folks went out and said to the 

average Saskatchewan voter, we are different.  We will never 

hide anything.  And as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in debate 

last week on this topic, if you've got a bunch of New 

Democrats that you're hiring, you should be proud of it.  I mean 

you should want to stand up on a fence post some place and 

crow to the world that you've got all these qualified New 

Democrats. 

 

I mean, what is there about an employment history?  The 

private sector deals with it each and every day in their 

workaday life. And I'm sure they hire New Democrats and 

Tories and Liberals; they hire all sorts of people.  But they've 

got the employment records, they've got the references, they've 

got the past employment, and no one seems to be disturbed 

about it. 

 

(1615) 

 

But the Minister of Economic Development, the House Leader, 

the man charged with managing the political direction of this 

Assembly, is afraid -- is afraid that the average taxpayer and 

voter in this province would take issue, would take issue with 

some of the people that he has hired since November 1.  This 

from a group of people who went to the voters a few short 

months ago and said, we will be different; we will not hide 

anything.  And if we employ our own we'll stand up and tell the 

world about it. 

 

And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the member from Kindersley 

pointed out, the Public Accounts for years has been full of the 

names and the salaries of people that work in the public service 

in Saskatchewan.  I remind the members of this Assembly that 

it was the former government that opened the Public Accounts 

to the public and the media back in 1983.  Before that it was a 

closed-door process so that people could not peruse those very 

things. 
 

And now the members of this new government that is so 

prideful of their changes are offered an opportunity in many 

cases to do what, Mr. Deputy Speaker?  To provide a Public 

Accounts for Crown corporations, something that I have heard 

members of the New Democratic Party say is 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

not a bad idea at all.  In essence you would have a Public 

Accounts of Crown corporations.  And by doing so you would 

have the list for the public to peruse. 

 

And if they are contemplating hiring people that they are 

ashamed of in some way, then don't hire them.  Go to the most 

credible person you can find that you are proud to tell the 

world about.  If that's the problem we have here before us, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and if you aren't proud to hire them and tell 

the world about it, then don't do it.  That's the simple solution -- 

don't do it. 

 

The member from Kindersley has just asked some very 

fundamental questions that I would think a group of people 

who went out and sought the votes, sought the votes of 

Saskatchewan voters a very short time ago on that very issue 

would want to fulfil.  But they don't seem to want to do it, and 

find a million excuses.  And I see member after member 

standing here, members that should know better, covering up 

and making excuses. 

 

And I don't think that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given the rhetoric 

that we heard year after year from the members of that party, is 

acceptable.  And that's why members on this side, after those 

promises were made -- obviously are now going to be broken -- 

why we are calling the government to account.  We are simply 

asking for Public Accounts dealing with Crown corporations. 

 

I'd even say to the minister from Elphinstone, if this 

employment history thing is such a big bugaboo that you in 

some way would be ashamed of advertising to Saskatchewan 

people the history, the employment history of the folks you're 

hiring, then perhaps we would be content at this time to delete 

that and he can fill in the rest of the blanks for us, knowing full 

well that down the road that is the expectation. 

 

And I make that offer to the minister.  And if he doesn't want to 

accept it, I don't know what we can do about it, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But I think the point has to be made -- there is a 

fundamental difference between this side of the House and that.  

And we didn't go out, we didn't go out a short time ago and say 

to Saskatchewan voters, elect us and this is what you'll get.  

And obviously, by what we're seeing in the amendment today 

on motions for return, we are not getting that.  Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that simply isn't good enough. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 

Return No. 10 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Once again it's 

a fairly straightforward motion asking for the names of the 

people who have been hired by the Saskatchewan Energy 

Holdings Limited since November 1, '91, including their details 

of employment, including compensation; job description; 

qualifications, including employment history; the name of his 

or her immediate superior; the authority under which the 

person was hired; and the actual date the person started work. 

 

It's, as I say, a rather straightforward motion and 

something that we believe very definitely that the government 

should answer.  They continue to want to amend these to take 

out certain parts of it, particularly including history and the 

qualifications because I guess they must not be hiring anybody 

with any qualifications.  That's the only conclusion we can 

make from that, that the people that they're hiring have no 

qualifications and therefore wouldn't want to display them to 

people. 

 

The member from Regina North West suggested that it's 

paranoia that the opposition is dealing with here.  Well I would 

suggest to the member from Regina North West that the only 

paranoia being displayed here and exhibited here is by the 

government for not being willing to put forward this type of 

information. 

 

He also talks about patronage.  Well in their seven short 

months that these folks have been the Government of 

Saskatchewan, they have, I'm sure, must have set a record by 

now in the number of patronage employees that they hired. 

 

We saw one in here not only, not less than an hour ago -- Mr. 

Jack Messer.  One can only wonder what kind of new job he's 

lining up for himself today.  One can only wonder that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  Maybe he isn't satisfied with just being the 

head of SaskPower.  Maybe he feels he needs some more 

responsibilities so that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan can pay 

him some more. 

 

You look down the list, and the list is growing day by day by 

day.  Carole Bryant.  First of all Jack Messer, as I said, Jack 

Messer, the former campaign chairman of the New Democratic 

Party -- obviously a very qualified individual for employment 

with this government.  Obviously.  Everybody in Saskatchewan 

knows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about his qualifications.  He ran a 

successful campaign.  That obviously gives him the 

qualifications to be the president of SaskPower.  Everyone 

should be willing to accept that. 

 

Next we see Carole Bryant sitting in the same office as Jack 

Messer.  She is obviously qualified -- a former NDP activist.  

Absolutely, absolutely qualified for the job that she's doing. 

 

Next we see Mr. Don Ching.  Obviously another person who's 

eminently qualified for almost anything that the government of 

the day, the NDP government, would want him to head up.  

He's obviously qualified. 

 

Next we have Garry Beatty.  Well we all know about Mr. 

Beatty's reputation and his ability to manage affairs in this 

province.  He would be happy, I'm sure, as everybody in this 

province would be interested in knowing his qualifications. 

 

That's the type of thing, Mr. Speaker, that the taxpayers of this 

province are interested in.  When they want to hire these 

people, we would like to know what their qualifications are, 

including their employment history -- which should extend, 

incidentally, it should extend beyond working for the NDP 

Party in the past.  But I don't think it does extend much beyond 

that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we also have the members back in the 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

corner over there spouting off about the kinds of things that 

happened in the past.  The fact is, Mr. Speaker, is those folks 

went around the province promising they'd never do it.  They'd 

never, never, never get involved in patronage. 

 

We have a member, the Minister of Justice, stand up in this 

House and tell everybody in the House and all of Saskatchewan 

that they're never going to participate in patronage.  Never 

going to do that.  But yet we have distinguished gentlemen like 

Jack Messer heading up SaskPower.  That's what we have, Mr. 

Speaker, in this province today.  The qualified individuals that 

they've put forward are running the province today.  And they 

suggest that, and he is an example of NDP patronage. 

 

We see former MLAs of that party coming forward on boards 

all over the place.  We see former candidates coming forward.  

We see defeated candidates, not just . . . for example, in certain 

parts of the province, for example, in Kindersley, I can think of 

the NDP candidate in Kindersley getting an appointment to the 

board of STC (Saskatchewan Transportation Company).  

Excellent opportunity for him.  Yes . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Oh, I'm sure. 

 

The member from Biggar seconds his appointment, Mr. 

Speaker, and I'm happy to say that.  The member from Biggar 

points out that the gentleman out at Kindersley, Lorne 

Johnston, is obviously well qualified for STC.  My guess is that 

man has never ridden in a bus in his entire life, Mr. Speaker.  

That's my guess about his qualifications for that job.  The only 

thing that qualified him for this job was that he ran for the NDP 

Party.  That's the only thing that qualified him for this job. 

 

And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, he didn't make a very good job 

of that either.  He was the only person in this province, the only 

NDP candidate in this province that ran third -- and a distant 

third I might point out, Mr. Speaker.  He ran third in 

Kindersley and that obviously qualified . . . the people of 

Kindersley obviously feel he's eminently qualified to be in 

Regina.  That's why they let him come in third -- third in 

Kindersley.  That's his claim to fame, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And we go on, the list goes on and on and on about patronage 

appointments. 

 

But we see again today my colleague, the member from 

Moosomin, asking questions about the eminent gentleman, Mr. 

Blakeney.  But no, no, no, they get up and sanctimoniously say, 

this is not a patronage appointment. 

 

Well what is it, if it isn't a patronage appointment?  There isn't 

a person in Saskatchewan other than 55 of these folks that 

believe he isn't a patronage appointment.  One only has to 

wonder about his qualifications for being on the uranium . . . 

for uranium company board member. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, not only that, the member from Swift 

Current says that this shouldn't be seen as an example of 

support for the industry.  That's the most laughable thing I've 

heard in several weeks, Mr. Speaker, coming from these folks 

opposite. 

They are gearing up to do some things in uranium.  Hopefully, 

they're gearing up to renew the agreement with AECL.  That's 

what we're hoping on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker.  And 

the people of this province are also hoping that's the case. 

 

In spite of what all of these people, these anti-nuclear people 

on the other side of the House are saying today, Mr. Speaker, 

that's exactly what they're doing.  And if it isn't a clear signal to 

you by putting Mr. Blakeney on that board that they're going to 

re-enter agreements with AECL, well it sure should be, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's the type of thing, Mr. Speaker, that's 

happening in this province today. 

 

They're ashamed, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  They're ashamed of the 

people they're employing.  They're ashamed of them.  They 

won't put forward their employment history because they know 

beyond a shadow of a doubt that the people in the province will 

judge them for what they are -- hiring of patronage employees.  

They will be judged for that by the people of this province, 

particularly, Mr. Speaker, if the people of this province are 

allowed to have a look at their qualifications and employment 

background.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Before I recognize the next member, I 

should point out to members that we're debating a motion, and 

that the motion has particular wording so that in your speeches 

or in your comments to the motion you should try every now 

and then to relate what it is that you're saying to the motion, 

either in making your comments in moving the motion or 

otherwise speaking to the motion. 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Well I'm very pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that you've 

highlighted what the member from Kindersley refused to do, 

and that is to keep to the topic.  In all of his remarks, he never 

once referred to the . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order.  Order, order.  Order.  The 

member for Regina North West should know, given his years 

of experience, that you need not reflect on any comments by 

the Chair. 

 

(1630) 

 

Mr. Solomon: -- Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  The 

member from Kindersley is obviously feeling, or should feel, 

personally devastatingly embarrassed with respect to his 

comments with regard to this motion. And I say that for a 

couple of reasons, because if he had been in consultation with 

his desk mate who is the member from Morse, who's a member 

of the Crown Corporations Committee, the member from 

Morse would have told him, I'm sure quite co-operatively, that 

the questions he's raised here were raised just the other month 

or two in the Crown Corporations Committee. 

 

As a matter of fact, the member might recall that Mr. Bill 

Baker was reported to have been making $180,000 plus other 

perks and benefits, and he's the president of Sask Energy 

Holdings. 

 

He might also want to consult with his partner, his desk 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

mate, the member from Morse who's a member of the Crown 

Corporations Committee and reinforce his personal 

embarrassment by being informed by the member for Morse 

that this Thursday coming up, which is June 11, the Crown 

Corporations Committee will be once again making 

SaskEnergy accountable by having the officials and the 

minister responsible before our committee to ask questions 

with respect to SaskEnergy. 

 

So I ask the member from Kindersley before he gets off on a 

tirade about everything under the sun, most of which was 

incorrect and misguided and all of which was never related to 

this subject, that he consult with some of his caucus colleagues 

and I'm sure he'd be informed quite clearly about the business 

of the Crown Corporations Committee through which we raise 

these questions on the Crowns. 

 

And I can't understand for the life of me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

why when we're referring to the Sask Energy Holdings Ltd. in 

this Assembly, he is not aware that on June 11 if he comes to 

Crown Corporations Committee he can be chitted in by one of 

his colleagues.  He can ask these questions of the minister and 

his officials, and Mr. Baker, and anybody else he wishes to 

during the committee meeting. 

 

And I'm sure, I'm sure that he'll be provided with some 

information with respect to salaries.  Like I mentioned, Mr. 

Baker makes $180,000 plus, and it's some kind of a long-term 

contract.  But I'm sure he could raise those questions with Mr. 

Baker . . . personally be happy to provide the answers to you.  

So, Mr. Member from Kindersley, I just wanted to remind you 

that you should perhaps take some advice from your colleague, 

the member from Morse. 

 

But if you were aware of what's going on with respect to any of 

these Crown corporations that you're asking information on, 

you would know that this information is readily available from 

the Crown Corporations Committee during the review of these 

Crown corporations. 

 

And I don't even see why it makes much sense for us to be 

debating this issue in this House because many of these 

motions for returns (debatable), Mr. Deputy Speaker, including 

this one on Sask Energy, can all be brought to the Crown 

Corporations Committee and he can be provided with 

information the moment he asks it, or it can be subsequently 

provided in writing if it's not readily available. 

 

So I think that he's wasting our time in this House by bringing 

these motions forward.  He's wasting even more of our time by 

standing up and talking about incredulous hypotheses and 

unsubstantiated facts that don't pertain to these motions in the 

first place. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you very much.  I want to add 

a few comments.  At the end of my remarks I'm going to move 

a motion which would delete the words "by or accountable to 

the minister, directly or indirectly, excluding only members of 

the energy/chemical workers who were employed prior to 

November 1, '91."  Exclude that and insert "in the minister's 

office." 

We are more than prepared to provide the members opposite 

with any information that they want.  This is not an attempt to 

keep information from them.  We have not, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, practised the evasion and the outright denials of 

information which members opposite practised when they were 

on this side of the House. 

 

The chairman of the Crown Corporations quite correctly 

pointed out that when the Crown Investments Corporation was 

before the Crown Corporations Committee, all questions were 

answered fully, and nothing was held back.  The member from 

Morse was there and might be able to confirm that.  There was 

no information we didn't . . . no questions that weren't fully 

answered. 

 

I invite the member from Morse to reread the Hansard from 

years gone by.  When we could get the Crown Corporations to 

meet, which was a rarity in itself, the behaviour of the ministers 

who came before Crown Corporations was an exercise in 

evasion, an attempt to provide as little information as possible 

whether or not it was in their political interest to do so.  It just 

seemed to have become a deeply ingrained habit. 

 

As the chairman of Crown Corporations Committee pointed 

out, all of these Crown corporations to which you refer will be 

before Crown Corporations.  You have the opportunity to ask 

whatever questions you want.  And so far as one can do, the 

answers will be given. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to refer in a specific way to the 

particular request that was made.  It reads: 

 

 Regarding the Minister responsible for Saskatchewan Energy 

Holdings (this is the phrase I want to draw members' 

attention to) . . . the names of all persons currently employed 

by or accountable to the Minister directly or indirectly . . . 

 

That really includes everybody in Saskatchewan Energy 

Corporation in the sense that Crown corporations are 

accountable to the ministers, and all the employees in there are 

indirectly accountable to the ministers.  There is no . . . given 

that phraseology, there is no way of limiting the question. 

 

If the members had some particular concern, we would have 

been happy to answer it.  But to ask for everybody who directly 

or indirectly reports to the minister is a request for the names of 

everybody who works at the corporation, and that would 

scarcely be useful. 

 

Let me guess that members wanted information, wanted to 

know whether or not there was anybody paid for by the 

Saskatchewan Energy Corporation but who reported directly to 

the minister.  Members opposite will recall that this was a 

common practice under the former administration, the special 

report of the auditor listed a number of instances of that and 

had become apparently fairly widespread in the former 

administration. 

 

If that's what you wanted to know, it would have been easy to 

ask that.  I suggest one wording to you: anyone 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

paid for by Saskatchewan Energy Corporation, but who reports 

directly to the minister.  I think that would . . . first of all, it 

would elicit a nil answer which you may want to get that in 

writing.  You may want to get that yourself in writing.  I invite 

you ask it. 

 

There still is a lengthy time left in this session; you still have 

the opportunity to ask more questions.  If you have some 

specific concern, please word it in a fashion which can be 

answered. 

 

But I say to members opposite, the way you worded this 

question cannot be answered.  There is no way of limiting, 

there is no real way of limiting, the answer.  We could imagine 

what you want.  I can speculate that you want to know the 

names of anyone who reports to the minister but is paid for by 

the corporation, but that really is speculation.  I may be wrong.  

It may be some other evil that you are trying to rout out -- 

trying to root out.  So I say to members opposite, the way you 

worded the question it could not be answered literally. 

 

We have given you our assurance in . . . I give you assurance 

on this occasion.  It has been done on past occasions.  It was 

the subject of a lengthy discussion during the Estimates of the 

Public Service Commission.  We do not . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Nobody believes that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well I shall return to the comment of 

the member from Kindersley that nobody believes it.  We said 

during the Estimates of the Public Service Commission that 

there was no such practice.  The Premier has made it crystal 

clear that that practice is to halt.  People who report to the 

ministers must work in their offices and be accounted for 

through Estimates of the public . . . the Estimates of Executive 

Council.  People are not to be squirrelled away in departments.  

The Premier has made that clear. 

 

And the member from Kindersley says nobody believes that.  

The members of the opposition don't believe it because they 

persist in imagining that everybody runs the government like 

you people did.  I say to the members opposite, nobody ran a 

government like you people ran a government.  Nobody had 

done it in the past and nobody will do it again. 

 

You people will stand alone as having been in charge of the 

sloppiest management, the worst system in terms of 

accountability, the most patronage-ridden administration in 

Saskatchewan's history.  Nobody runs a government the way 

you people did. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You're going downhill with the wind on 

a slippery slope, Ned. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Well the member from Morse, who is 

so chatty from his seat . . . I hope the member from Morse rises 

in his comments, rises in this House, and compares the 

approach of the Crown corporations this year with the approach 

of the Crown corporations in previous years. 

 

I hope the member is candid enough with himself and this 

House to discuss that.  The Crown corporations . . . I will sit 

down in time for the member from Kindersley -- he's already 

commented -- I'll sit down in plenty of time for the member 

from Morse to make his comments. 

 

I want to point out to members opposite that we have been 

forthcoming with you.  We have given you all the information 

you wanted.  That was true in Estimates, that was true in the 

Crown Corporations Committee, and it will be true here.  If 

you have a specific concern about the hiring practices of any 

Crown corporation, rephrase your question in a fashion in 

which it can be answered. 

 

I want to make specific mention of the second amendment.  

The second amendment is that we will be . . . At the conclusion 

of my remarks, I will be deleting the words "including 

employment history". 

 

My initial reaction to this request was that it was reasonable.  

Indeed in my own, in my Estimates for the Public Service 

Commission, we gave this information.  I've since been 

persuaded that where one is dealing with an employee whose 

employment history you don't know, this may not be wise. 

 

I was asked in the Estimates for SPMC (Saskatchewan 

Property Management Corporation) actually, for the 

employment history of certain people.  I knew the people, I 

frankly knew their employment history, and I gave it.  I have 

since been persuaded this may not be wise. 

 

I refer members to the freedom of information Act which you 

passed before being unceremoniously escorted out of office.  

You excluded from the list of information which needs to be 

answered -- there was a following exclusion included: Section 

24 (1) stated that personal information need not be divulged.  

Then subsection (2) of section 24, defined personal information 

to include information that relates to the education or criminal 

or employment history of the individual.  And then the section 

goes on, but those . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- . . . all a bunch of criminals? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- No, I'm not suggesting everybody's a 

criminal.  I am suggesting that people who have been criminals 

(a) have a right to employment, (b) have a right to have that not 

disclosed to anyone without a good reason to know it.  There 

may well be . . . there are are occasions when that information 

should be excluded.  Sorry, there are occasions when that 

information should be divulged.  For instance, when one 

applies to be a member of a police force, obviously any 

employment history should be provided.  That's something that 

that employer has a real interest in knowing because of the 

enormous trust placed in officers who wear uniforms. 

 

But I remind members opposite that once this information is 

given here it becomes public information, anyone is entitled to 

it.  Employment history may disclose a lengthy period of 

unemployment.  It may . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am, 

I'm dealing directly with the amendment, unlike the members 

opposite who talked about every conceivable Crown 

corporation but SaskEnergy.  I have been dealing with 

SaskEnergy.  The members opposite may not find the 

comments to their 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard June 9, 1992 

liking.  They may not agree with them, but my comments have 

never strayed one syllable from SaskEnergy.  I've simply been 

trying to explain to members opposite why the information 

they requested is not appropriate. 

 

(1645) 

 

Employment history may well disclose things that a person is 

not proud of, and I remind members that this is public 

information.  Once it is disclosed, everyone has a right to it.  

There may be a lengthy period of unemployment.  There may 

be lengthy gaps which might indeed be a period of 

incarceration.  People have a right not to have that disclosed.  

You . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that may be the 

member . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Listen, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, to what the members opposite are asking us to do. 

 

Without any authority from this legislature, they're asking us to 

go through the information and cull those names that we think, 

in our judgement, is not appropriate to disclose.  Is that really 

the process you want? 

 

I say to members opposite, if you don't understand the process 

then let me explain to you what we're doing here.  Once this 

Assembly orders a return we have to provide it, and we don't 

have any discretion left.  If this order were to pass without 

amendment we would have to disclose the employment history 

of everyone, including people who have been incarcerated. 

 

We do not have the discretion to act upon informal comments 

made by members from their seats.  We are thus, Mr. Speaker, 

going to be excluding the employment history of the people.  

And if members have some particular concerns that aren't being 

answered by the fashion in which we ask the question, please 

feel free to put another order for return back on the order paper. 

 

One of the things that has changed, Mr. Speaker, is that these 

questions are being answered early in a timely way in the 

session, unlike the former government which answered them 

all at the end of the session so there was no chance to retrieve 

and ask follow-up questions.  These questions are being asked 

early.  If there is specific information which the members want, 

they can, Mr. Speaker, ask for additional information. 

 

I will move, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 

Eastview, I move the motion be amended as follows: 

 

 That the words "by or accountable to the minister, directly or 

indirectly, excluding only members of the Energy and 

Chemical Workers Union who were so employed prior to 

November 1, '91" be deleted and the following substituted 

therefor: 

 

 "In the minister's office." 

 

 And that the words "including employment history" be 

deleted. 

 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: -- Order, order. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to make a few comments 

regarding the long liturgy that has been presented by the 

Associate Minister of Finance. 

 

I found it very interesting, first of all, to have the member from 

Regina North West stand in the House and talk about how 

co-operative the ministers had been in Crown Corporations and 

the fact that information such as this would be available in 

Crown Corporations, and we will say we appreciated the 

forthrightness by the ministers, and we expect that in 

proceeding Crown Corporations Committee ministers will be 

as forthright and be coming with the information to members 

of the committee. 

 

At the same time the minister talked about being open and 

sharing information, being so willing to divulge information -- 

any information that was pertinent and certainly informative 

and available to the public.  Then the minister turns around and 

indicates to this House that he's going to be somewhat 

restrictive in the information that he is willing to put forward. 

 

And that is the problem that we have on this side of the House, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the fact that it seems the information 

that is being released to the members, and in response to the 

questions that are being presented by this side of the House, is 

being limited to information that the government members feel 

lead or are willing to release to the opposition members. 

 

The minister also acknowledged or indicated that the 

government would be consultive.  And a number of our 

motions will be talking about a consultive process, not just 

looking for information on employment practices and former 

employment and hiring practices, but the consultation process 

that would have taken place, or we're assuming took place.  At 

least the indications are there that that has taken place. 

 

The minister also said that he would give his word and make a 

commitment to members of the Assembly, to opposition 

members, to abide by his promises.  And I want to remind the 

minister, the Associate Minister of Finance, that members on 

this side of the House, in light of recent developments, 

certainly have some concerns regarding to commitments by 

ministers as the minister in recent debate on Public Service 

Commission made a commitment to the member from Arm 

River to supply him with the files that are in his office, by last 

Friday, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

remind the minister of the fact that the member from Arm 

River is still waiting for that information that the minister 

promised to deliver to his office by Friday. 

 

In light of that fact, it begs the question, one wonders how far 

we can go in trusting the minister to indeed live up to his word 

and his commitments and promises -- not just this minister, but 

all ministers on the government side of the House. 

 

So the question before the Assembly regarding the motion that 

has been brought forward by my colleague from Kindersley is 

the fact that the information, as we've already heard, is 

available through the 



June 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

Public Accounts.  The minister has said it would be available 

through the Crown Corporations Committee.  If this 

information is available, I don't see where we then have a 

problem in releasing the same information to the House in 

response to the questions that have been placed by the 

members at this time. 

 

As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister raised the question 

of the process and the fact, well, maybe the former government 

didn't do this.  Or we can go back to the '70s when we say 

maybe at that time the former government didn't meet these 

requirements. 

 

The facts are that a commitment was made to Saskatchewan 

taxpayers that this government would be different, that this 

government would be more open, that this government would 

be consultative.  And so if this government is going to be more 

open, if this government is going to be free and willing to 

release the information and answer the questions, then, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, we ask . . . the question is posed, why then 

would the ministers or members of the front benches on the 

government side continually amend the motions as they are 

being placed before the Assembly today? 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just wanted to take a moment to 

bring those concerns, on behalf of the opposition, forward to 

the House to remind the minister of his commitment to this 

Assembly and to the members on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Pringle: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I 

would like to just make a few comments myself on this motion. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was a bit surprised to hear our friend 

from Moosomin get up and speak in the way that he did.  Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, our friend from Moosomin was one of the 

members of the former government, Mr. Speaker, that I think 

has a national reputation -- had a national reputation -- for 

being unaccountable, for their secrecy and their closed 

government.  They had a national reputation for withholding 

information, and patronage. 

 

In fact a book or two or three were written on this government . 

. . the previous government's level of patronage, written on 

their level of patronage.  And they were national books.  You 

were recognized nationally as a government that took 

patronage to new heights.  So don't talk, you know, don't talk 

about what some other government may do. 

 

You know if you'd be honest with yourself as you look at the 

legislation that was passed in the previous session near 

Christmas time, that in fact there were Bills passed so that 

never again can a government withhold information and not 

table documents in the way that you people did.  That was done 

by convention and tradition in the past.  But you people ran the 

government in such a way that we had to bring in laws because 

you didn't respect the basic tenets of openness and honesty and 

sharing information with this Legislative Assembly. 

 

So I wanted to rise for a few minutes and support the 

amendment of the Associate Minister of Finance.  And I also 

support what the member from Regina North West said, who is 

the chairman of the Crown Corporations 

Committee, that you have your opportunity in just two days to 

ask all the detailed questions you want about SaskEnergy.  And 

I encourage you to come and to do that. 

 

And you'll be there and that's great.  Because when you were in 

government you will recall that you refused to call the Crown 

Corporations Committee to meet.  Now the new members may 

not know this, because you probably didn't tell them.  And you 

refused to call Public Accounts as well.  So you're not used to 

the idea that Crown Corporations meetings are going to 

actually be held.  But they're held on Thursday and you'll be 

welcome to attend. 

 

Now you want a list of all employees potentially of 

SaskEnergy.  Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that just simply isn't 

reasonable for the reasons that were outlined by the Associate 

Minister of Finance.  I remind the member from Kindersley 

that you people would not even share basic information about 

the salary and benefits of the president -- of the president. 

 

Now think about that.  You're wanting a list of all the 

employees of SaskEnergy.  You wouldn't even share, you 

wouldn't even share the salary and the benefits of the president.  

And we know why, because we found out that there was almost 

a half a million dollars a year.  In fact you negotiated a 

settlement with the chairman of the Potash Corporation, the 

president, that was $740,000 a year.  So that's the kind of 

information that you didn't share either until that was leaked to 

us. 

 

So this is why that you people are over there now.  I mean all 

of a sudden you've got this sanctimonious attitude, you've got 

this sanctimonious attitude about sharing information and 

openness.  You're over there because you wouldn't do that. 

 

Now the critic for Finance says, took a lot of pride in saying, 

that we opened up; he says we opened up the Public Accounts 

process to the public and to media.  What he failed to say is 

that they never called a committee together.  Now we tried on 

many occasions to embarrass the premier into calling Crown 

Corporations Committee together.  He wouldn't do it. 

 

We tried many times to involve the Speaker to ensure that 

Public Accounts meetings were held and we weren't successful.  

The auditor wasn't successful in getting the information that 

you now are so anxious to have.  Well I would just like to say 

that we have shared more information already.  We have tabled 

annual reports and financial statements on time.  We will 

continue to do that in the future. 

 

And I think the public is quite satisfied that this government is 

starting out in a very accountable and open manner.  We've 

complied with the Gass Commission recommendations, and the 

Provincial Auditor was part of that process, and we'll continue 

to do so. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, given the time, I would like to at this 

point adjourn the debate on this motion. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


