




















































Hansard: August 24, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2893 

 August 24, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- Before orders of the day, I want to ask 

leave of the Assembly for me to introduce a couple of guests. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Hon. Mr. Rolfes: -- I had the pleasure last night of meeting a 

couple of young people from the province of Quebec.  They are 

seated in the Speaker's gallery.  They are two brothers from the 

Eastern Townships in Quebec who are on a cross-Canada trek 

from Victoria to their home at North Hatley, Quebec.  Scott 

Stevenson, if Scott would rise, please . . . Scott Stevenson is the 

co-publisher of the Aylmer Bulletin and The West Quebec Post, 

two English newspapers in the Ottawa area.  The other person 

that I would like to introduce to you is his brother, Greg.  And 

Greg has just returned from Barcelona.  He was one of the . . . 

He represented Canada on the rowing team in Barcelona and 

he's just on his way back also from Victoria to the province of 

Quebec.  I ask all members to give a very hearty welcome to 

the Stevenson brothers who are accompanied this morning by 

my son Brian.  Give them a warm welcome to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain 

Farm Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I move the Bill now be read a third 

time and passed under its title. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a few minutes to reinforce 

the arguments that have been made over the last few months, 

why indeed this side of the House and farmers and people 

across the province of Saskatchewan would not move third 

reading of this Bill for all kinds of reasons.  But the most 

significant reason, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that it has 

overlooked the rights and freedoms that are guaranteed to 

individual Canadians and to Saskatchewan people under our 

constitution and in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I'm going to be making a motion and 

introducing a motion in this third reading which would at least 

allow the Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, the House 

Leader, and others to come clean with the Saskatchewan 

public.  This motion will say to the Saskatchewan public and to 

the Canadian legal community that indeed there is enough 

courage on the 

side of the government -- the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government in the province of Saskatchewan -- to refer this 

awful piece of legislation to the Court of Appeal and to the 

Supreme Court so that in fact the public and those all over 

Canada will know immediately, right away, that this is illegal. 

 

When I raised this with the Minister of Agriculture, he said 

everybody agreed with him, all the legal opinions said that this 

bill is fine, the Attorney General didn't have to worry about it, 

the staff said it was okay, law firms said it was okay.  And I 

kept pointing out that his own Premier said that he was worried 

about rights.  He said it would be referred to the courts.  The 

Attorney General said it would be referred to the courts.  The 

Minister of Agriculture, in the Legislative Assembly, said it 

would be referred to the courts.  And legal opinion outside, in 

the city of Saskatoon an NDP lawyer said this shall be referred 

to the courts.  It's unconstitutional, violates the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms.  And then we find the office of the 

Legislative Counsel and the Law Clerk in the Saskatchewan 

Legislative Assembly also says that this should be referred to 

the courts. 

 

I don't recall this ever happening, Mr. Speaker.  I'm sure that 

the members opposite don't know where it has happened across 

Canada, unprecedented.  This spring and summer in the 

Saskatchewan legislature has been absolutely unprecedented in 

its illegality, its abuse of the system, its disregard for human 

rights and charter of rights, disregard for the rules that will 

allow people to speak.  This is the last time we'll even have the 

opportunity to speak on something as significant as changing 

people's contracts and violating their rights under the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms. 

 

And as we speak today, Mr. Speaker, hundreds and indeed 

thousands of people are gathering in Melfort to say this is the 

worst piece of legislation that they've ever seen. 

 

I want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to read the letter 

addressed to the Leader of the Opposition from the office of the 

Legislative Counsel and the Law Clerk.  Robert Cosman, the 

Legislative Counsel and Law Clerk of the Legislative 

Assembly, couldn't do anything but lay out his opinion with 

respect to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I know members opposite, Mr. Speaker, don't want to hear 

this and they're not all that interested, but their counsel and the 

legal system in the province of Saskatchewan in this 

Legislative Assembly says that what we are doing here indeed 

violates the Canadian Constitution and the Charter of Rights 

and Freedoms.  That's our Legislative Assembly here, Mr. 

Speaker. And all of the NDPers are now going to know that 

this is the kind of thing that they do.  This is what they're paid 

to do; this is what they're elected to do. 

 

From the Law Clerk of this Assembly, the letter goes like this: 

 

 Dear Mr. Devine: I have carefully reviewed the provisions of 

Bill 87 with respect to the 



2894 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

extinguishment of causes of action and the institution or 

continuation of such actions before the courts, and, in my 

opinion, these provisions -- specifically clauses 8 (enacting 

new sections 10.1 and 10.2 of The Agricultural Safety Net 

Act) and 18 (enacting new sections 13.1 and 13.2 of The 

Crop Insurance Act) -- are contrary to the guaranteed legal 

rights which Canadians are "not to be deprived thereof except 

in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice" (s. 

7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms) unless 

such rights are limited "by law as can be demonstrably 

justified in a free and democratic society" (s. 1 of the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms). 

 

The Law Clerk, Mr. Speaker, says: 

 

 Mine is but a single opinion.  Others could be of the opinion 

that access to the courts is not specifically guaranteed by 

section 7 of the Charter (although there is case law to the 

contrary -- Pearlman v. Manitoba Law Society Judicial 

Committee (1991), 84 D.L.R. (4th) 105; (1991) 6 W.W.R. 

289 (Supreme Court of Canada).  Still others would argue 

that, although a legal right has been "limited", it is 

demonstrably justified by the Preamble to the Bill ('Whereas' 

Clauses), and therefore is allowed by section 1 of the Charter. 

 

 All of these positions are reasonable.  Which one is the right 

one is subject to interpretation.  I submit that the final 

authority in making such an interpretation is the Supreme 

Court of Canada.  Access to the Supreme Court is costly and 

time consuming (1-2 years, optimistically -- and then not "as 

of right") when taken on appeal from actions which are not 

yet before the courts, or are currently at the trial (vs. appeal) 

level.  There exists in Saskatchewan a "Constitutional 

Questions Act" . . . which may be utilized by the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council to speedily take the issue "on reference" 

to the Court of Appeal of Saskatchewan, which, in turn, 

establishes direct access to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

 As an element of doubt may exist in the legal community at 

large (although none exists in my mind) (says the Law 

Clerk), and as this is a matter begging early resolution -- 

being a matter of concern to a significant number of crop 

insurance contractors as well as the Government of 

Saskatchewan -- I should think that this issue would be a 

proper one for such a reference. 

 

 Respectfully submitted, Robert D. Cosman. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this individual is the Legislative Counsel to our 

Assembly.  The Legislative Counsel to our Assembly says the 

NDP law is illegal and unconstitutional and should, at a very 

minimum, be referred to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal 

and to the Supreme Court. 

 

And the hon. members of this Legislative Assembly know the 

consequences of this affect thousands and tens of thousands of 

individuals.  They know that there are 

thousands of people gathering today in the middle of 

Saskatchewan, in Melfort, Saskatchewan, to say that they need 

help, they've suffered drought, they've suffered from frost, 

they're looking at hundreds of millions of dollars in damage 

because their contracts were broken, their rights violated, their 

parliamentary principles in the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly have been violated, and individuals across this 

province and across Canada today say, well even the 

Legislative Counsel in the province of Saskatchewan says, the 

NDP government has broken the law.  And on top of that it 

says you can't speak out about it.  We'll muzzle you, time 

allocation, restrictions on the ability to speak, and we'll pass it 

anyway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over and over and over again people in 

Saskatchewan have said there is a rural crisis.  Farmers need 

help.  They don't need to go to court.  Farmers need principled 

individuals representing them so that they will stick up for 

families in rural communities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

And the member from Quill Lakes now arrived in the 

legislature, Mr. Speaker, finally woke up, speaking out because 

he is not sticking up for farmers, never did stick up for farmers.  

Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Everything was fine 

until the member from Quill Lakes interrupted.  Order.  Just let 

the Leader of the Opposition speak.  Everything was fine until 

he was being interrupted . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well if 

you hadn't interrupted he wouldn't have said it either . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Well you shouldn't have interrupted.  

The Leader of the Opposition . . . if the member from Quill 

Lakes doesn't like it, maybe he should go for a cup of coffee . . 

. (inaudible interjection) . . . What's your point of order? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, my point of order is 

that rulings have been made in this House over and over again 

about referring to members' absence or presence, coming and 

going in the House.  And I just want to make the point to 

remind Mr. Speaker that the Leader of the Opposition, while 

speaking, referred to the member just arriving.  And I want to 

make it very clear that at 9 o'clock when I came into the 

Assembly, the member from Quill Lakes was in fact in his 

desk. 

 

First of all, referring to it is not in order.  Secondly he . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Again I want to remind all 

members that certainly the Leader of the Opposition should not 

have referred to the member, but having said that, he was 

provoked by the member from Quill Lakes.  It's also a rule in 

this House, a very long, traditional rule, that you do not 

interrupt a member when he is speaking, and he was clearly 

interrupted by the member from Quill Lakes. 

 

(0915) 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Well thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I know members 

opposite are very interested in finding out that they are being 

blasted and lambasted by the Legislative Law Clerk for passing 

or trying to pass a Bill that is unconstitutional and violates the 

Charter of Rights and Freedoms of individuals, not only in 

Saskatchewan, but would any place in Canada.  And that this 

Bill will be . . . it 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2895 

will be referred to the Supreme Court of Canada. 

 

And it will be found that the NDP administration, who said that 

they were going to campaign on behalf of farmers from Quill 

Lakes to Meadow Lake to Estevan to Nipawin, have done 

everything in their power to hurt rural communities.  

Absolutely everything.  It's rural revenge.  Pick on the farmers, 

pick on their communities, close their hospitals, rip up their 

roads, cut their contracts.  Make sure that rural people suffer 

because they voted something other than NDP. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we find in here that the Legislative Law 

Clerk, NDP lawyers, outside lawyers, the NDP Premier 

himself, the Minister of Agriculture, and the Attorney General 

all say they're concerned about rights, say this is going to be 

referred to the courts.  And now the chief advisor, the legal 

advisor of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, says this 

should be referred right away.  Because this Legislative 

Assembly, of all assemblies, is going to violate the Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms and the Canadian Constitution. 

 

So the next question becomes, Mr. Speaker, who's next?  If this 

is the kind of Bill that can be passed here, then anybody's rights 

under contract, anybody's rights before the courts can be 

violated.  This is a brand-new day for socialism in the country.  

A brand-new day for socialism.  The new socialist agenda. 

 

The young Rhodes Scholars that are visiting here, Mr. Speaker, 

should look at this Bill.  They should take this to Oxford, they 

should take it to Great Britain, they should take it to France, 

they should take it all over.  This Bill, as it's being talked about 

in third reading, this Legislative Assembly's Law Clerk says, 

refer it to the Supreme Court because it violates the rights and 

freedoms of Canadians. 

 

Great tradition.  Great socialist tradition.  Take away the rights 

of individuals for a higher cause.  That was the minister's 

argument and the Premier's argument -- this is for a higher 

cause.  What's the higher cause than the Canadian Charter of 

Rights and Freedoms and our rights under the Canadian 

constitution? 

 

We spent years and years and years trying to build a 

constitution that allows all the provinces and all the people, all 

native people, all Indian people, all French-speaking and 

English-speaking Canadians and people from all walks of life 

from all over the world to have rights and freedoms in a 

beautiful country. 

 

And while we're doing that, ironically while we're doing that, 

this Legislative Assembly takes away the rights and freedoms 

of individual farmers and their families and is condemned 

across the province of Saskatchewan, condemned by the legal 

community, condemned by the Law Clerk in our own 

Legislative Assembly.  And the NDP are standing there: well 

there's a higher cause.  It must be the socialist cause. 

 

What is it?  What is this great socialist cause that lets you take 

away the rights and freedoms of individuals?  Over and over 

and over again individuals have condemned the NDP agenda, 

condemned you for not following your promises, 

condemned you for breaking your promises, and now condemn 

you legally and actively and constitutionally under the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms to say you have broken the law. 

 

And then under this cowardly Act, saying that you cannot be 

sued.  You're afraid that you broke the law.  You cannot be 

sued.  You can't let people get at you to defend their rights and 

freedoms.  So in fact what do you do?  You pass a provision in 

this Bill that says you can't sue the government. 

 

The new NDP government can break your contract, can fire 

people, can take away your crop insurance, take away your hail 

insurance, take away your SGI (Saskatchewan Government 

Insurance) insurance, break your teachers' contract, break the 

union contract, break the nurses' contract, and you can't do 

anything about it.  This is socialism at its best.  This is why 

people join the socialist party so that in fact you can take away 

the rights of individuals -- contractual rights and rights before 

the courts -- and violate your constitutional rights. 

 

And on top of that they've broken every rule and every 

principle that was in this Legislative Assembly just to do that, 

just to get away with that so we couldn't talk and limit it today 

to the discussion.  They've broken all the rules, unilaterally 

changed the Rules Committee just in fact so that they can do 

this.  Mr. Speaker, this is a dark, dark, dark day for 

Saskatchewan when the Legislative Assembly will have to pass 

or try to pass this Bill on top of all the cowardly acts, the 

pathetic acts that the NDP administration have implemented to 

get it here. 

 

All we're asking for is help for farmers in rural communities 

who are going to lose hundreds of millions of dollars as we 

speak -- lose hundreds of millions of dollars.  And all we're 

here for is help for them in a crop insurance contract that is 

national.  It's national; it isn't just here.  It's everywhere in 

Canada.  And only here have they been denied the right to 

protection -- unbelievable. 

 

We have half the farm land in Canada.  Agriculture means 

more to us than any other jurisdiction.  And the NDP said, I 

will not help our farmers because the federal government is 

Conservative and the opposition is Conservative and they 

designed this program to help farmers.  We won't do it. 

 

And even in the last offer that come out, it cost something like 

$23 million, and we won't do it.  They can take SaskTel and 

spend 7 or 8 or $9 million just to buy some cable company, but 

they don't have $7 million in insurance contract for the farmers.  

There's all kinds of money they're spending.  It isn't the $23 

million.  They don't care about farmers.  They're looking at it, 

saying there won't be enough votes out there to matter.  Come 

the next election towns and villages will lose population.  

People will leave.  We'll get enough support from the cities.  

We can break their contracts on the farm.  We'll tell people we 

have to do it.  We have a higher socialist cause, some higher 

socialist cause. 

 

Well all we're after, Mr. Speaker, is to help farmers.  These are 

farm families, young men and women.  Heaven's sakes at least 

half the members here must have grown up on the farm, grown 

up in Hudson Bay or grown up in Meadow Lake 



2896 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

or grown up some place in rural Saskatchewan.  This is for 

farm families so people can have some insurance. 

 

What happens if you get froze out?  What happens if you get 

dried out?  Where's your income?  We want protection for 

people.  That's why we designed crop insurance several 

decades ago, Mr. Speaker.  That's what it's for. 

 

And you can't run off and say, well there's some magic third 

line of defence so that in fact the federal government comes in 

every time there's a drought and a frost.  Crop Insurance is a 

separate corporation.  It's a large, multibillion corporation.  It's 

like SaskTel or SGI or SaskPower.  It's large, it's independent, 

it has a rate structure.  It builds in 20-year cycles.  It's got 

nothing to do with balancing this year's budget, nothing at all. 

 

And these people have gone to these lengths.  This terrible 

legacy, this socialist legacy of taking away people's rights, 

violating the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, removing all 

protection so people who have dried out and have lost their 

crop as a result of weather conditions like frost . . . And now 

they've got their own Premier, the NDP Premier said, I'm 

worried about rights.  That's where the PC (Progressive 

Conservative) argument is valid.  You have him saying it'll 

probably be settled in the courts.  The Attorney General for the 

NDP says it'll go to court.  The Ag minister says it'll go to 

court.  The Legislative Law Clerk says it should be in court 

right now; refer it to the courts. 

 

What do we find out?  When we ask them to either pull the part 

of the Bill that allows the farmers to get access to them or refer 

it, they do neither one.  What's that show, Mr. Speaker?  It 

shows they're dead wrong and they know it.  They have built 

enough whereas's into this clause to make it look suspect.  It 

looks like a constitutional piece of legislation.  At the same 

time they have voided the contract and told you, well you 

really didn't exist last March.  And then the real nub of it is that 

they say, and we're so confident that we're right in this Bill that 

we'll put in a clause that says that you can't sue us.  We can't 

get at the government. 

 

Well everybody sees through it.  The Law Clerk sees through 

it.  The public sees through it.  Lawyers see through it.  And for 

what?  For $20 million?  So farmers can be out hundreds of 

millions of dollars? 

 

They're worried, Mr. Speaker.  Farm families are in a crisis.  

They've been in a crisis for several years because of drought, 

$2 wheat.  And the NDP get elected on this political 

boondoggle where they say they're going to get the cost of 

production for farmers.  Where were they going to get the cost 

of production?  Where were they going to get it? 

 

They were going to get more money from the feds. They didn't 

get more money from the feds.  They campaigned on the fact 

that there was a $14 billion debt provincially, so they knew that 

they wouldn't get it locally.  And this is what they've given -- 

this ugly piece of legislation taking away their rights, violated 

every constitutional right that farmers have and people have.  

And now we have individuals here who know, Mr. Speaker, 

that the case, the legal case is valid against the NDP.  They're 

being 

sued by farmers and others. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I read into the record the fact that the 

Legislative Law Clerk has condemned this Act by the new 

NDP government.  It's been condemned legally, morally, 

democratically, and historically.  NDP have unprincipledly 

changed the way the Legislative Assembly works and brought 

in a Bill that is ugly and is being condemned. 

 

And the members opposite and the rural members opposite 

have to look at themselves in the mirror and say yes, we really 

help farmers.  We really help farmers.  We were there to 

protect them.  We built them roads.  We built them hospitals.  

We helped them build parks. 

 

They didn't build anything. They tore them down.  They 

stopped the rural gas program.  They charge you more for 

power, they charge you more for electricity, they charge you 

more for hooking up their phones, they take away their 

insurance contracts, they rip up their roads, they close their 

hospitals, they close their nursing homes. 

 

The NDP administration has nothing going on in economic 

development in rural Saskatchewan and then it charges them 

more.  It charges them a lot more for health care.  They used to 

pay $125 deductible for prescription drugs.  It's $380.  On top 

of the fact that there's a rural crisis and these people are broke. 

Then they take away their insurance contracts.  How can you 

even look at anybody in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

Senior citizens are worried.  Senior citizens write us.  

Thousands of people have signed petitions.  Thousands and 

tens of thousands of people have said you've broken your 

promises.  You charge us for insulin, you charge us for health 

care, you charge us for agriculture -- you charge every fee, 

every utility.  And on top of that, you've raised taxes.  You've 

raised sales tax, provincial sales tax.  The PST (provincial sales 

tax) is up for everybody.  You reneged on every single, solitary 

thing that you said that you were going to do. 

 

And you say your solution is, we're going to unionize 

everybody.  Everybody will join the union and that will really 

work.  That's the plan.  Well, Bob Rae tried to plan and he's 

running so far behind he's not only third, he's third-plus in 

Ontario. 

 

No economic development, no diversification, broken every 

promise, running way behind, and it's only nine months after 

these people were elected and they broke every promise that 

they initiated.  Broke AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) 

agreements, broke contracts, won't build upgraders.  Can you 

imagine if upgraders and paper mills and fertilizer plants and 

all the jobs that created and kept the union halls empty would 

ever be created by that bunch over there?  Not a hope. 

 

Even when they had some money they didn't do it.  No new ag 

college, no new diversification -- what did they do?  The great 

socialists borrowed money from New York and nationalized 

what was here.  Really intelligent, really sharp.  Some of the 

highest, best prices in the world and there was no money saved.  

For Heaven's sakes, they had money coming in all across 

western Canada, and they 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2897 

borrowed a bunch and bought back mines.  Created zero jobs, 

nothing.  Paid way too much.  The old book value so far out of 

whack you'd never get it. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  It's very interesting, but I want 

to remind the Leader of the Opposition we're on third reading 

of GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- It certainly is interesting. 

 

The Speaker: -- It is interesting.  But I'd ask the Leader of the 

Opposition to get back in third reading of GRIP. 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Mr. Speaker, this is a legacy of broken 

promises.  This GRIP Bill is illegal and it's typical.  It's an 

illustration of all that's gone on, and that's why people are so 

upset.  They promised them they'd help them in health.  It's 

been the opposite.  Cut and slash and charge -- that's the 

principle, Mr. Speaker.  It's exactly what's been going on.  And 

if they couldn't do it, they'd pass a Bill, unconstitutional or not.  

This is what we're going to do because we have a higher cause. 

 

What's this higher socialist cause?  What is it they think that 

they're . . . some God-given right to govern.  Just because it's 

them, they can do no wrong.  This is wrong.  It's wrong legally 

and morally and unconstitutionally.  Constitutionally it's 

wrong.  And the NDP have broken every single solitary 

promise, and not just rural people but urban people now are 

watching. 

 

(0930) 

 

And they say well, we've seen it across Canada.  We've seen 

them talk about this high and mighty principle, values.  Well 

it's not there.  It's not there.  And you can't find a rural person 

that admits that they voted NDP.  You've got NDP campaign 

managers that said, I don't know what the heck they're doing.  

They're off on a tangent.  It's unbelievable.  People writing us 

and phoning us and said, it's unbelievable. 

 

And the only positive things that they're doing anywhere are 

those that were initiated by the previous administration that had 

some sense of economic development.  Let's do bonds.  

Economic development, let's see if the people will invest in 

bonds.  Well I guess we did billions in bonds.  And the 

Minister of Finance has done half a billion dollars and his 

claim to fame is, boy, did it ever work.  It must be confidence.  

Well if it was economic development and keeping money here 

and diversifying the economy, that's confidence. 

 

Do you think this Bill is confidence, Mr. Speaker?  This Bill is 

the laughing-stock, is the joke in the legal community.  It's an 

absolute joke.  And for folks across Canada, and particularly in 

rural Saskatchewan, we're going to find out what people really 

think of this. 

 

There're going to be 5,000 people sitting in Melfort.  I'll tell 

you there's going to be lots of people around the Legislative 

Assembly before the NDP try to redeem themselves, with all 

the ugly and cowardly things that they have done to the people 

of Saskatchewan in recent times, and today is the worst.  This 

is the darkest day in 

Saskatchewan's Legislative Assembly. 

 

You even have people saying . . . people talking in the streets, 

people talking on the streets, saying maybe they won't sign the 

Bill.  Maybe they won't sign the Bill.  What does that mean?  

That means they are so ashamed of it, that it won't get passed.  

If you had the complete free will, your conscious free will to 

vote on this Bill, I know, Mr. Speaker, this Bill wouldn't pass.  

If individual members could take their place in a non-partisan 

way, they wouldn't vote for this.  If each individual member of 

this Legislative Assembly could stand in their place knowing 

that they were absolutely free, absolutely free from partisan 

connection, they would say no, I can't vote for this; it's wrong. 

 

It's wrong because it hurts farmers.  It's wrong because it 

violates their contracts.  It's wrong because farmers really need 

help during a crisis and it doesn't provide it.  And it's wrong 

because we have violated their rights, the constitutional rights.  

It's wrong because we have violated the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms.  And it's wrong because the way we did it was 

wrong.  We look bad.  The NDP know that they look bad. 

 

They unilaterally used their large majority to change the rules 

of the House, to pass this Bill, and they said they would never, 

ever, ever be caught doing that.  And if they could redeem 

themselves, if you could have a snapshot, if you could have a 

static snapshot where they could actually vote and redeem 

themselves, they'd say please forgive me, I know that I was 

wrong; I want to do this right.  And they'd ask for forgiveness 

from the people, from the history, from the legacy of Tommy 

Douglas if nothing else. 

 

This is the great socialist CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth 

Federation) Party that said that they're going to help rural 

people.  After the '30s, Tommy Douglas come in and said I'll 

help you; I'll be there.  I don't have a lot of money; I'll be there.  

I'll give you electricity.  I'll stick up for you.  I'll protect you.  

We'll help set up institutions to protect you. 

 

What do these guys do?  They're run by a handful of 

bureaucrats, and a handful of people in the front row said no, 

none of that's on, there's a deficit; we can't help anybody.  We 

can nationalize a few more.  We can let the Crown corporations 

take over a cable company -- spend $10 million doing that, and 

no productivity. 

 

How many jobs were there?  Can any of the members stand up 

and tell me how many new jobs were there when SaskTel 

bought a cable company for 7, 8, 9, $10 million?  Same old 

stuff.  Then you can use it for propaganda; use it for telling 

people all your gobbledegook as you pass Bills like this. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly should be 

ashamed of itself because of this piece of legislation.  We have 

fought this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, because we 

absolutely and sincerely think it is the worst piece of legislation 

that we have seen in the history of Saskatchewan for all of the 

reasons that we've mentioned.  Whether it was the potash Bill 

or the medicare Bill, always people were allowed to speak. 



2898 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Even in SaskEnergy they were always allowed to speak.  But 

not the NDP.  They even cut off our right to speak. 

 

We said, show us the Bill.  And they hid the Bill.  Can you 

imagine hiding this Bill?  We said if you're so proud of this 

Bill, show it to us.  Show us this Bill.  You've showed us the 

environmental Bill.  You show us other Bills.  You see drafts 

of Bills; show us a draft of this Bill.  No, they hid from it.  

They kept it under lock and key because they were so ashamed 

of this piece of legislation.  They kept it under lock and key 

because they knew that it violated rights and freedoms and 

broke contracts and that it would be challenged.  Well then it 

has been, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So they've been cowards right from the start.  Break the 

contracts, violate your campaign promises, forget about the 

people.  And if the Legislative Assembly doesn't work, forget 

about it; we'll figure out a way to do it.  We'll unilaterally 

change the rules, and then we'll bring in something as ugly as 

this.  This is the great socialist tradition. 

 

Well I'll tell you, it's the bottom of the barrel.  This is as low as 

we've seen it.  In the potash debate, the medicare debate, 

SaskEnergy debate, this didn't go on.  This didn't go on, Mr. 

Speaker.  We allowed this Assembly to speak and argue and 

bring forth their arguments.  Imagine how long we could speak 

with this piece of information that says that the Bill is 

unconstitutional.  We've known it's been unconstitutional.  

Imagine how long.  And the NDP hide this.  They hide 

opinions and they hide information, and they hid the Bill. 

 

And then when they brought it in, they changed the rules so we 

can't speak out.  Well I'll tell you, we're going to speak out, Mr. 

Speaker.  We're going to speak out all over Saskatchewan and 

indeed all over Canada.  People are going to know about this 

Bill.  They're going to know about it in Vancouver.  They're 

going to know about it in Toronto, and they're going to know 

about it in Halifax.  They're going to know about it in the 

United States.  They're going to know about it in Great Britain.  

They're going to know about it anywhere where people care 

about rights and freedoms and just what a brand-new socialist 

government is all about: the great New Democrats, sticking up 

for rights and farmers, rural people, rural women. 

 

How about the pension legislation?  Why don't we cancel that 

too?  Oh yes, well they did that.  There's another contract, 

another contract, Mr. Speaker, people signed a contract.  I'll put 

my money up.  People will match it, and we'll invest it 

together, so when you retire you don't have to go on welfare.  

They broke that contract. 

 

Imagine the principles.  The NDP even voted for that, Mr. 

Speaker.  They voted for the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

because it takes people off welfare when they retire if they 

don't have enough money.  You accumulate some money, then 

you'll have an independent retirement and it's less costly to the 

Legislative Assembly, less costly to the taxpayer.  And the 

NDP supported it and voted for it.  But not when they get into 

power.  When they get into power, it's exactly the opposite. 

 

Well the legacy is built, Mr. Speaker.  I'm just going to say 

in closing before I move a motion, that I have never been so 

disappointed in an administration whether I've been in 

government or outside of government, as the one that's before 

me. 

 

I got into public life because I was concerned about the last 

NDP administration because they were nationalizing.  Didn't 

have a sense of economic development or diversification and 

didn't care about rural people. 

 

And I campaigned, Mr. Speaker, to stick up for rural people.  

And I mean that.  But I have never, ever, ever seen the like of 

what's in this Legislative Assembly.  I don't know where their 

sense of balance is.  They have no plan.  And this pathetic 

excuse for policy that takes away people's rights and contracts 

-- pensions, health care, insurance contracts, crop insurance, 

roads, over and over and over -- and then taxes them and taxes 

them and taxes them. 

 

People in the United States are saying, I wonder if Democrats 

really will tax you.  What a joke.  I'll tell you, people in the 

United States might be interested in what Democrats do, what 

Democrats do to rural people, what Democrats do to taxes, 

what Democrats do to economic development. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the only thing that they can do in economic 

development is the things that we initiated.  And if they do, I 

give them a bouquet.  Maybe it'll encourage them to move 

somewhere towards the middle. 

 

Well we know what Democrats do.  They tax and they take 

away your rights for some great, new socialist reason, higher 

purpose, whatever that may be.  And, Mr. Speaker, the truth is 

their higher purpose is so they can practice patronage; they can 

fill SaskPower with their friends and their families.  One of the 

biggest reasons that you want to privatize corporations in 

government is to get rid of patronage.  Get rid of patronage. 

 

That's what they do.  They get elected so they can fill their 

Crown corporations with their people.  And they'll say anything 

to get elected.  They'll break the rules, break their promises to 

get elected so that they can get government jobs for their 

families and their friends. 

 

Why do you think they defend government corporations so 

much?  Is it they're superior in performance to anything else in 

the world?  No, because if they win, they get to run them.  

They're not running Saskoil.  They're not running Cameco.  

They're not running the Saskatchewan Potash Corporation.  

They're not running Weyerhaeuser and the paper mill. 

 

And for good reason, Mr. Speaker.  Because if they were 

running it, the place would be crawling with their friends and 

crawling with the NDP supporters.  And the productivity would 

go down, and the waste would go up.  That's their overall 

purpose.  That's the real purpose of the NDP socialist agenda.  

Let's have it.  It's just the like the Department of Northern 

Affairs.  The justice says the whole darn department was run 

amok. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is typical of what they do 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2899 

when they get into power.  They have no regard for rights.  

They'll go in and they'll take Crown corporations and run them 

the way they do with their friends.  And it doesn't matter.  

They'll raise utility rates 30 per cent for their friends. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we don't need government departments and 

government Crown corporations for patronage.  That's not what 

democracy is about.  That's not what it's about.  And these 

people, the NDP socialists believe in patronage.  That's all 

they've got.  They didn't make it in the private sector so they 

have to make it in the government somewhere.  That's all they 

have. 

 

And this side of the House says no, privatize it.  Put it into the 

private sector.  Let people invest in it.  Let people all over 

Canada and all over the world invest in it.  Open it up.  

Remove it from patronage, and you'll see it do well.  Not the 

NDP.  What do they believe in?  We should run it out of 

government, and then we can control it and have our friends in 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll tell you, the performance, whether it's in 

the old Soviet Union where they did that, or any place else, is 

absolutely a failure.  Cuba is a failure, the Soviet Union is a 

failure, and any place else where they practise this awful stuff 

is a failure. 

 

And what's so interesting about this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is that 

this Bill tells you all about their heart and soul.  And their heart 

and soul is saying, I know it's illegal, I know it's 

unconstitutional, I know it breaks contracts.  And I know it 

violates the principles of democracy here, violates the rules of 

the House, but we'll do it anyway because we have to control 

the people. 

 

They don't trust people to run their own.  They don't trust 

people to have rights and freedoms.  They'll do whatever it 

takes, Mr. Speaker, whatever it takes to win so that they can 

practise patronage and run the government with their friends.  

Because when they lose they have nothing else to do.  They 

never did make it in the private sector.  They didn't make it 

practising law.  They didn't make it any place else, so this is it.  

This is as high as they're ever going to be.  This bunch is as 

successful as they're ever going to be right now.  Because they 

have pulled the wool over the public's eyes.  They campaigned 

on a falsehood, and they know it. 

 

And now they can be in their places and sit and have in history 

recorded this ugly piece of legislation which says, I don't care 

whether I violated your rights and freedoms.  I can go to the 

constitutional meetings and stick up for all these highbrow 

things, but it doesn't matter a tinker's darn because we really 

don't care.  Because when it comes to people all politics are 

local, my friends.  When it comes to people, real people, you 

don't care.  In fact you just backhand them like this and say, 

despite the Legislative Law Clerk, despite your own 

admissions that this should be before the courts, you're going to 

do it anyway. 

 

(0945) 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a dark, dark day, not only for the 

NDP and their high-minded undemocratic morals, but it's a 

dark day for the people of Saskatchewan to have this 

on our record.  This is Saskatchewan's record now.  This is our 

great political record -- break contracts, break them at will.  

And then, even when people are suffering, millions and 

literally billions of dollars of suffering, what do you see?  They 

pull the pin on them and they won't protect them. 

 

It's a sad day.  I couldn't imagine this happening in our 

Legislative Assembly.  And I know members opposite, and 

some of them I've known for maybe 14 years, politically.  I 

didn't think they'd do this.  I don't know how this got away on 

them, but I didn't think they'd do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won't be supporting this piece of legislation.  As 

the vast majority of Saskatchewan people, our own surveys, 

our own polling, and I'm sure the NDP polling are saying, the 

public does not support you on this Bill.  And this Bill, if it's 

indicative of your heart and soul and what you're all about, it 

doesn't support you.  It doesn't support you. 

 

This is no way to get the economy going and this no way to 

balance your budget -- this kind of stuff.  It's illegal; it's 

immoral; it's unprincipled, and it isn't going to balance your 

budget anyway.  It's a mistake -- serious, serious mistake -- by 

the NDP administration, of any administration.  You got caught 

with it; you hurt yourself; it isn't going to save you any money, 

and you look like fools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'm not going to vote for this piece of legislation 

and I'm going to move an amendment, moved by myself and 

seconded by the member from Moosomin: 

 

 That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after 

"That" and substituting the following therefor: 

 

 Bill No. 87, not be now read a third time so that the subject 

matter of the Bill may be referred to the Court of Appeal 

pursuant to The Constitutional Questions Act for a ruling on 

its constitutionality. 

 

I so move. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I rise in 

great pleasure this morning to speak in third reading regarding 

the GRIP Bill that's before us.  And certainly the fact, as the 

amendment reads, Mr. Speaker, that as an opposition we feel 

very strongly that this Bill that the government has introduced 

in the legislature which is receiving third and, it would appear, 

final reading this morning should indeed be taken by the 

government to the courts as the government, while in 

opposition, asked the former government when we look back 

three years, Mr. Speaker, to the Bill addressing the boundaries 

in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we've gone over and through debate on this 

GRIP Bill for some two months, almost three months now, Mr. 

Speaker.  The reason for that . . . and when we look back at it, 

Mr. Speaker, and as we even look at the circumstances and the 

situations that we're facing today and that farmers across this 

province, and not just the farmers, Mr. Speaker, but rural 

communities across this province are facing, when we look at 

the 



2900 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

weather conditions this weekend have even affected many 

people across the province --  and I noticed even in the 

Assembly this morning many people kind of rubbing their 

hands -- it's certainly the coolness at this time of the year, 

something that most people haven't or don't really expect. 

 

And we're very well aware of the fact that a farm rally has been 

planned for Melfort later this day.  And that farm rally, Mr. 

Speaker, is taking on added significance with the fact that an 

area around the Melfort area and areas along the northern part 

of the grain belt certainly have faced tremendous frost and in 

some cases, Mr. Speaker, we're informed that a number of 

farmers are looking at their crop situation and they may be 

facing the fact that they weren't dried out.  If they weren't dried 

out or if they weren't hailed out, maybe they've been frozen 

out. 

 

So I think it's very significant that we are debating this GRIP 

Bill, even if it is for third and final reading.  We're debating this 

morning, Mr. Speaker, because of the fact that we believe in 

the rights of individuals, the rights of individuals as established 

under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms -- a charter, Mr. 

Speaker, which was worked upon very diligently and very 

sincerely by the Premier of this province back in the days when 

he was the attorney general of the province under the 

premiership of the Rt. Hon. Allan Blakeney when they worked 

together with the federal government to repatriate a 

constitution, a constitution which was repatriated at that time 

without the total consent of provinces and premiers and 

governments across this province. 

 

But none the less, the constitution was repatriated.  And that 

constitution also established a Charter of Rights and Freedoms 

that affects each and every one of us across this land -- at least 

we believe it does.  We believe, Mr. Speaker, it gives every 

individual the right . . . and let me read the legal rights that we 

all have under the charter of rights established in the 

constitutional agreement, 1980-82: 

 

 Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the 

person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in 

accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, last Friday my colleague, the member from 

Morse, raised a number of questions, and at the end of his 

questioning, the major question that was coming forward, Mr. 

Speaker, is: where is the justice regarding Bill No. 87?  Where 

are the legal rights of the individuals? 

 

And we can talk about the legal rights of the farm community.  

We can talk about the legal rights of the rural community, 

rural-based community, or even the urban sector, Mr. Speaker.  

Mr. Speaker, there isn't an individual born today that doesn't 

have rights, and we all believe that very sincerely.  We believe 

that anyone in this nation is innocent until proven guilty. 

 

Now the Minister of Agriculture has continually told us that the 

legislation he has introduced in this Assembly would stand 

before the courts.  Mr. Speaker, if the Minister of Agriculture 

sincerely believes that this legislation, that number one, says a 

contract is null and void, in fact it says 

a contract never existed -- first of all just takes away a contract 

and says that it never existed, that that is indeed right -- if that 

is a right of the government to go and declare a contract never 

existed, then, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Minister of 

Agriculture felt that it was his ability and his right to write that 

into a Bill to take away that constitutional right of individuals. 

 

And if he believes it's right then why will the Minister of 

Agriculture and the Premier of this province not refer this Bill 

to the courts to make a decision before they ask the Lieutenant 

Governor to come into this Assembly and give approval -- 

Royal Assent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe very sincerely, that even though there 

are disagreements as to whether '92 is better than '91, or 

whether '91 should have been the route that was followed, I 

believe very sincerely, Mr. Speaker, that there are many 

individuals across this province who sincerely believe that they 

signed a contract. 

 

And they believed that, Mr. Speaker, that in that contract there 

would be minor changes being made to the GRIP program as it 

was refined, and as it was built around and built upon, to make 

it a sound, long-standing and long-term insurance program, 

giving agriculture producers an opportunity, not only in the 

province of Saskatchewan but across this nation, Mr. Speaker, 

to carry -- if they felt need -- an insurance program that would 

at least guarantee or give them a bottom line, so that they could 

make sound business decisions and establish their farming 

patterns. 

 

There's no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that changes were needed.  And 

we've talked about that all along, on numerous occasions, Mr. 

Speaker.  The government has indicated or felt or led people to 

believe that the opposition never threw out any alternatives.  

But I think, Mr. Speaker, if we all sat back, if we all just looked 

back, and if we all took a moment to review Hansard, we will 

find that over the period of this debate many alternatives were 

thrown out, many options were given to the government. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture, the Premier of this province, the 

Justice minister, were all given the ability -- the cabinet in 

general -- were given the ability to save face by allowing 

producers, if they wanted to carry the '92 program, by allowing 

producers the ability to choose either '91 or '92. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if this Bill -- Bill No. 87 -- is  everything 

that the government, the Minister of Agriculture, and the 

Premier of the province indicate it is, then I believe many 

people across this province, if not better than 50 per cent, 

would have chosen the '92 program. 

 

The unfortunate part, Mr. Speaker, I believe many people have 

chosen '92, not on the basis of looking at the long term, but on 

the fact that we did have moisture conditions in the substantial 

portion of the province that were going to guarantee a fairly 

decent crop this year.  And providing we don't see a major frost 

in the next day or so or in the next two weeks, Mr. Speaker, 

there are many producers across this province who are going to 

harvest a substantial 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2901 

crop. 

 

And many of those producers were looking at the '92 program 

and said to themselves, well boy, '92 is definitely better than 

'91.  Yes, it doesn't guarantee me . . . the bottom line, if I have a 

crop loss, is not there.  But it looks like I'm going to put a crop 

in the bin.  It looks like I'm going to have a substantial crop to 

put on the market and get whatever the market price is.  And on 

top of that, I'm going to be guaranteed because I'm in such a 

large area -- the area base that I'm protected by -- I'm going to 

be guaranteed a revenue pay-out at the end of the day of 15 . . . 

it could be 15, could be 20, could be $25 an acre. 

 

So what producer wouldn't decide that that wouldn't be the 

better option?  But I suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that the way we 

should have been viewing the program?  Should we be viewing 

it on the basis of what . . . just because my neighbour was 

hailed out or was droughted out, that I should be taking 

advantage of that individual?  No, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the original '91 program was built on the basis of 

working around individual farming practices and individual 

coverage, Mr. Speaker.  The reason for that is that you wouldn't 

be taking the poor crops of a neighbour or the poor basis of 

what happened down the road and taking advantage of it.  If 

you were droughted out, if you were frozen out under '91, Mr. 

Speaker, you then had . . . you carried protection and you 

received compensation for that protection.  If you had a crop in 

the bin, then you didn't get any protection.  You didn't need it 

because you had the crop there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So even though there were differences, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe that individual rights, individual privileges, and 

individual responsibility should be met.  And, Mr. Speaker, we 

believe that, because of the fact that one of the strong 

advocates of the rights, of these privileges has been the Premier 

over the years.  And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to refer to some 

of the comments made earlier on, when we first got into the 

debate on the GRIP legislation. 

 

The fact is, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of this province back in 

June of this year made this comment.  He said, and this is from 

the Star-Phoenix: "I worry about contracts and all of that.  I 

mean, one has certain rights." 

 

Now what are these rights, Mr. Speaker?  The rights that I just 

quoted are that we have a right to life, liberty, and security of 

the person.  One has certain rights.  As the Premier was saying, 

just certain rights, that we don't have all total rights: "That's 

where the merit of the PC walkout is." 

 

And then he also indicates: 

 

 The substance of what we did is right.  And if it's the 

substance which is at issue in terms of our fiscal picture and 

the like, process becomes . . . (of little importance). 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the argument we have been presenting all 

along -- and we can go back to other instances that have taken 

place in this Assembly -- the argument is not just taking 

whether it's the fiscal picture 

or substance . . . does the government then have the ability to 

overlook the rights of individuals?  And that's what we've been 

saying. 

 

Also in that same article in the Star-Phoenix of June 23, the 

Premier went on: 

 

 While he said he can see the Tories' point, the premier said 

the government won't withdraw its legislation. 

 

(1000) 

 

Therefore we have been led up to where we are today.  The 

government won't withdraw its legislation.  Even though the 

Premier of the province fundamentally believes that the rights 

that he had worked so hard to enshrine in the constitution may 

be being violated, the Premier of the province also indicated we 

will not change or withdraw our legislation. 

 

And as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, there's no reason why the 

government couldn't have looked at some of the options we 

gave.  There's no reason.  I think, Mr. Speaker, if they would 

have looked at the option of allowing producers the '91 or the 

'92 program, giving them the option, there's no doubt in my 

mind -- and I'm guessing -- but possibly 70 per cent of the 

producers across this province may have chosen the '92 

program; 30 per cent would have stayed with the '91. 

 

And when you look at that in the overall, broad picture, Mr. 

Speaker, if the government would have even taken that step, 

we would not be where we are at today because they would 

then have said to producers, okay in light of our fiscal situation, 

in light of our agreement with the federal government, in light 

of the demand for changes -- unfortunately we cannot meet all 

the demands, and we'll be working out a further agreement with 

the federal government -- we'll give you this option.  The 

government still could have saved substantial dollars in their 

fiscal budget by just offering the alternative. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, there's no doubt in my mind that possibly 

the rally taking place this afternoon would not have even come 

about because we wouldn't be here today.  We wouldn't be 

discussing GRIP today.  GRIP would have kind of died on the 

order paper.  The government would have saved face, and the 

government would have been viewed by people across 

Saskatchewan, not just the farm community but the rural 

business community, people in rural Saskatchewan, the 

government would have been viewed as a government that was 

reasonable, not a dictatorial government as they have shown 

over the past number of days, the type of government they 

really are. 

 

And just look at what has happened.  How have we arrived at 

this debate today?  First of all, we had a bell-ringing.  And 

certainly the 18 days, Mr. Speaker, in the spring stalled debate 

on the Bill.  And then the government has introduced, invoked 

closure on two occasions.  They've invoked time allocation.  

Mr. Speaker, I don't believe that shows the reasonableness of a 

government when they decide that time allocation and closure 

are necessary to rush or push forward their 



2902 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

legislation, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, it would appear to me it 

is totally contradictory to the charter that the Premier of this 

province worked so hard to deliver. 

 

I believe the government realized that the sooner they got the 

GRIP Bill through this Legislative Assembly, be it right or 

wrong, that the people would begin to forget about it, that the 

opposition would be stymied and we really wouldn't have the 

ability to continue to raise the issue.  Certainly we can continue 

to talk about it, but the significance disappears. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, I believe the government felt we're 

being pressed by the challenge to the rights of individuals.  

And I think the fact also is borne out in recent statements and 

recent appearances by the Premier. 

 

And I go to the Star-Phoenix of July 31, 1992, when the debate 

was taking place on second reading, and this is what it says: 

 

 On the eve of a political showdown, Premier Roy Romanow 

swept into North Battleford Thursday to spread the gospel of 

good GRIP. 

 

 But just a few kilometres away, farmers remained oblivious 

to the message. 

 

 "You don't have to have a sharp pencil to see the program 

isn't as good," said Stewart Mitchell, the owner of a mixed 

farm just south-west of the Battlefords. 

 

And I would suggest that Mr. Mitchell will be one of the 

individuals in Melfort attending the rally today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the reason farmers will be attending the rally -- 

and I think it even goes beyond the farm community and the 

farmers themselves, it will go to rural businesses -- the reason 

farmers and rural business people and rural people will be 

attending the rally today is because they feel threatened by this 

government that has shown that it is unwilling to really 

consider the rights and the privileges of individuals. 

 

And we can go through a number of quotes over the last 

number of months regarding the actions taken by the 

government.  And, Mr. Speaker, we have given a number of 

these, where people have indicated: I don't think the 

government should be able to easily change something they set 

up like that.  I think the farmers have a pretty good deal going, 

and then the Premier turns around and tries to wreck it.  And 

yes I do support the walkout.  The main reason is, I believe last 

year when they, the government, initiated the program, they 

guaranteed us they would not change the program unless they 

gave us due time. 

 

So many comments by individuals, not just farmers but 

business men and women across this province who indicated 

that they felt the Conservative opposition had a right and had a 

responsibility to raise the issue of rights, to raise the issue of 

privilege, and to suggest that the government should reconsider 

its ways. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, as we have seen, the government has 

been unwilling to do that, and certainly has invoked 

every rule they can in the book to force their program, not only 

on this legislature, but on the province of Saskatchewan.  And 

has certainly put farmers across this province at risk in 

comparison to their counterparts in Alberta and Manitoba and 

in Ontario and other parts of this great country of ours. 

 

As one farmer, Boyd Charles said: farmers do business on a 

handshake, on a word of mouth.  Your word better be your 

bond, and this action the government is taking now to make a 

lie a law is against everything that a farmer believes in. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I won't go through all of the quotes I have here 

because they've been brought forward in this House.  But I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, it is very imperative that we take this 

time this morning, that we take the time to ask the minister to 

ask the Premier to ask the government of Saskatchewan to 

reconsider, to not ask the Lieutenant Governor to come into 

this Assembly and give Royal Assent to a Bill; that legal 

opinions right across this province and even across this nation 

would indicate that the decisions that were made in this Bill, 

the decision to declare that there was never a contract -- a 

contract never existed by declaring it void; the decision to 

hinder and interfere with anyone's ability to go to court for a 

class action suit against the government or against the Crop 

Insurance Corporation, the fact that this Bill would limit that; 

and the fact that even as we were going through 

clause-by-clause study when the government continually 

argued about the fact that it was an agreement not a contract 

and then in a couple of the clauses, Mr. Speaker, they asked for 

a change and changed the word "agreement" to "contract". 

 

And I found that very interesting, Mr. Speaker, as we 

continually heard the Minister of Agriculture suggest that 

farmers only had an agreement in principle, never really had a 

contract, and the Bill referred to these agreements, but when it 

came right down to it, to line up and to try and be as 

constitutional as they can or to line up with the original Act 

brought forward, the government decided that they better put 

the word "contract" in for it to read properly.  

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I believe, as the Legislative Law Clerk has 

indicated, as a lawyer in Saskatoon has indicated, and as other 

opinion has come in -- not only from across our province but 

from across this great nation -- that this is certainly a piece of 

legislation that has every right and ability to be challenged in 

the courts. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, as well when we talk about the ability to be 

challenged and the fact that it should be challenged, we think 

back to question period some two weeks ago when the question 

was raised about the legality of the Bill and the Minister of 

Agriculture stood in this place and the Premier of this province 

stood in their places and indicated -- and I believe the Justice 

minister also indicated -- that this Bill, this GRIP Bill, would 

have its day in court.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, the Bill in front of 

us would suggest that it would take away the right of 

individuals to go to court. 

 

Now if the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier of the 

province sincerely believe that this Bill can and should be 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2903 

challenged in the courts then, Mr. Speaker, as we've indicated 

by the amendment we've brought forward, we're asking and 

we'll continue to ask for the Minister of Agriculture prior to the 

third and final reading, to sit down -- and hopefully over the 

weekend he has reassessed what he has done, reassessed what 

the Bill is going to do to the rights of individuals -- and decide 

that indeed if he sincerely believes that the Bill can be 

challenged, will stand up in court, then, Mr. Minister, Mr. 

Premier, allow the Bill . . . in fact take the Bill, give it direct . . 

. send it directly to the Appeal court of this province and allow 

the Appeal court, the highest court in our province, to assess 

the Bill, to review the Bill, to peruse the Bill and make a 

decision. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if indeed the Bill has the ability to stand up 

in court, the government will be vindicated.  But the fact that 

the Minister of Agriculture and the Premier continually refuse 

to do that and the Minister of Justice, indicates to me, Mr. 

Speaker, that the government would prefer that this Bill never 

ever see the light of day in court. 

 

And the reason I suggest that and the reason I think that is the 

fact that we can go back to the proceedings back in June of this 

year.  And we look at the decision brought down by Judge 

Darla Hunter where the judge indicated and said: 

 

 It would appear that (Saskatchewan Crop Insurance) has put 

the cart before the horse. 

 

 If the Crown and agents of the Crown undertake costly 

system changes before effecting the necessary . . . changes, 

they cannot defeat the rights of individuals affected by their 

conduct on the basis of costs which the Crown, or its agents, 

have voluntarily incurred. 

 

 The issue is compounded by the fact that the government 

intends to use its (GRIP) legislation as a defence in court.  It 

will argue it did not break its contract, because the Bill says it 

didn't.  In effect the government is changing the facts in the 

case. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, at that time the judge threw the appeal out 

of court because the judge felt that the Crown had not acted 

properly.  And if the judge back in June felt that way, then I 

would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the judiciary system, any 

judge today, any court would have to also stand up and stand 

up for the rights and privileges of individuals. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, in closing I would suggest this.  That the 

fact that the Premier has fought for the rights of individuals, the 

fact that the Premier has spent the last two or three weeks 

negotiating a constitutional agreement with other leaders across 

this province, with other premiers and the federal government, 

the fact that there has been negotiations and give and take on 

all sides, why will the Government of Saskatchewan not 

reconsider and at least before giving Royal Assent allow this 

Bill to go directly to the courts for a decision, a decision that 

would either vindicate the government or a decision that would 

indicate that the rights of people across this province have been 

challenged and have been interfered with, and that indeed, Mr. 

Speaker, this Bill itself is unconstitutional. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, before I sit down I must say we stand 

on the basis of the fact that we have no problem with changes 

as long as they were made under due care and deliberation and 

as long, Mr. Speaker, as the rights of individuals haven't been 

challenged.  And we don't see that in this Bill. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we ask the Minister of Agriculture to 

reconsider, and even as he stands in Melfort this afternoon, to 

indicate that the Government of Saskatchewan will take the 

time to send this Bill to the Appeal court for a ruling.  Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Muirhead: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This morning I 

counted up the hours that I have been speaking on this Bill, Bill 

87, or maybe motions leading up to it or closure motions.  And 

I spoke 13 hours, Mr. Speaker, in this House, pertaining some 

way or another to this here GRIP scenario Bill that we're in. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I knew when we started that more than 

likely we would lose.  You get outvoted by the government.  

But I thought there'd be some small hope that the people of 

Saskatchewan, that their voice would be heard because this 

always has happened in the history of this great province of 

Saskatchewan.  It's always been, and I thought always would 

be, that when the people speak that the government will change 

their mind. 

 

Why, Mr. Speaker, did this government pull the energy Bill in 

1989?  Because the people of Saskatchewan spoke.  There was 

Bills back in 1982, several Bills that the now Premier had 

pulled.  There's been Bills pulled from becoming law after 

they've been proclaimed.  They've had Royal Assent and never 

become law because . . . Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn't 

get proclaimed because the government felt that it wasn't the 

right thing to do.  And all governments in history has done that. 

 

(1015) 

 

But I thought that some way or other, down to the last hours, 

and we're on the last minutes now speaking on this Bill . . . 

we're on our last minutes.  And I just want to leave it on the 

record that there's one more step to take.  And that step is 

approximately three years from now when we go to the polls in 

Saskatchewan.  The people have the last vote.  The people will 

have their say on GRIP no. 87.  They'll have their say on this 

Bill. 

 

They can't have their say in here because this government, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, didn't allow them to.  They weren't allowed to 

have their voice because goodness knows the front benches and 

also I'd have to say the back benches because most of them 

come from rural Saskatchewan, must have been told as we are 

told by people that this is wrong, wrong, wrong. 

 

And I'm not talking this morning . . . not going to get into very 

little . . . I'm not going to speak very long, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

I'm just going to cover a few highlights, just a little bit on the 

'91-92 GRIP where it is wrong.  But that's not the main issue 

out there now.  The main issue is town 



2904 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

after town and family after family are finding out, finding out 

how this Bill is happening and what it means, that it should go 

to the court. 

 

It was the biggest thing that's ever happened out there in the 

last month over this Bill when it hit the news, when this letter 

to the Leader of the Opposition, talking about the rights of the 

people and what should happen to this Bill, that it should go to 

the Supreme Court of Saskatchewan, the Supreme Court of 

Canada, and they should tell us before it becomes law. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I go throughout Saskatchewan, I have 

never, on any issue ever, ever seen people as upset as they are.  

It doesn't have to be a farmer, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  I can 

challenge anyone.  As I spoke here days ago, I challenged all 

the members to find someone to write me a letter, phone me, 

saying they are in agreement. 

 

And I did. I got one letter from the city of Regina saying that I 

was wrong, that my statements the other night were wrong.  I 

got one letter.  But all he was saying, all he could condemn 

about what I was saying is wrong, that the '91 GRIP was going 

to cost us taxpayers too much money.  That's all he could find 

wrong.  He never said a word, he never commented at all on 

whether I was right or wrong on the constitutionality of the 

Bill, of whether this here Bill should go, after it's passed, 

should go directly past go and go directly to the Supreme Court 

of Canada. 

 

It was only a short little letter because I imagine some MLA 

(Member of the Legislative Assembly) has said, for goodness' 

sakes, write that member from Arm River a letter and shut him 

up.  Actually he didn't shut me up because it was kind of a nice 

letter.  He put it not too bad.  He just said the taxpayers can't 

stand it.  That's all he could say. 

 

So that's all you people could come up with.  And I've 

challenged you and challenged you -- if you are right, find me 

someone that will phone and tell me that we're wrong.  But you 

can't do it.  You can't do it.  Not one of you has been able to do 

it. 

 

All you're hearing out there . . . and it doesn't have to be rural 

Saskatchewan. I hear it in the apartment where I live during the 

week in Regina.  I hear it in downtown Regina.  The people 

that my wife meets on the streets -- it's unreal.  They're talking 

about, what is this government doing?  They're taking our 

rights away. 

 

It isn't just the GRIP Bill.  As the member from Estevan said 

this morning, they have broke contract after contract.  They 

don't seem to worry about contracts.  They have one thing in 

mind.  They have one election promise that they don't want to 

break.  They're going to try and keep one, and that's balance the 

budget at any cost. 

 

Now everybody would like to see a budget balanced, but I 

think the people that they're going to walk over to do that 

would like to have their budgets kind of balanced.  You've got 

to have a little balance in your thinking while you're balancing 

a budget. 
 

Certainly it got out of hand in the latter years because as I said 

many times before, that I've had a admission from the 

Minister of Finance that we did take over almost a $4 billion 

deficit.  They don't want to admit that.  And you take a $4 

billion deficit in 1982 and use the multiplier effect to 1992 and 

I tell you we took over a mess that this people in the province, 

this government has misled and told people differently that we 

left a clean budget in 1982. 

 

And so they're saying now, seeing the Tories left us in such a 

mess, that we have to change the GRIP Bill from '91 to '92 so it 

costs less money.  Then we get a Minister of Agriculture 

standing up here and won't admit that.  It's been said in the 

House.  The Premier said that.  The Deputy Premier has said 

that.  But the Minister of Agriculture says no, '92 GRIP is the 

best for you. 

 

Well I want to inform this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that the '92 

GRIP Bill could bankrupt Saskatchewan.  It could bankrupt -- 

and I do think it will -- because there was a lot of 

good-thinking heads went into putting the 1991 Bill together.  

It had to have minor improvements -- we know that -- but the 

concept of a guarantee for a farmer to exist had to be out there. 

 

What's going to happen if this crop doesn't come off?  The 

member from Humboldt, he should have been . . . I was in his 

riding yesterday at Watrous, and if he could only hear -- and 

the Watrous, Manitou Beach -- if he could only hear the 

comments coming from the farmers in his constituency that 

north of Humboldt where their canola is black and froze out. 

 

Well you know, I never really thought until this weekend that . 

. . made any difference to me whether I had '91 or '92 GRIP.  

Well now we got frozen, I've been looking it over, thinking it 

over, I'm in a disaster.  I'm in a disaster.  It could finish me. 

 

And I can tell you, whether they had voted for the member 

from Humboldt or not, I don't know, I never got into that, but I 

think I was talking to some that did -- I believe I did -- but 

never will again.  There is no way.  And I said, oh well, people 

. . . He said to me, this one gentleman, that people will never 

forget what this NDP government has done with all their 

broken promises right through to the Saskatchewan Pension 

Plan to Department of Health through Agriculture.  They had 

promised everything for farmers. 

 

They had promised at election time that we're going to bring in 

a GRIP program that's going to please the farmers.  The 

farmers trusted them.  They trusted them, Mr. Speaker, that the 

GRIP program was going to put more security in their pockets, 

and they believed them.  And they find out that they didn't 

think that this government was going to take it away from them 

and come up with a guarantee, and you just play the markets.  

That's all it is, is a guarantee on the markets. 

 

If the price of wheat goes over X amount of dollars and cents, 

there'll be a payment . . . if it stays under that, they get 

payment, if goes over it, there'll be zero.  That's all they come 

in with is a program . . . you're gambling the markets.  The 

same thing is to go into Vegas and you pull out your money 

and you're going to gamble you're going to win.  And that's all 

it is. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2905 

And the end of April, I guess the date is, April 30, a farmer has 

to decide.  Well I do believe that that price of wheat is going to 

stay low.  I can't see the way the market looks that there's going 

to be increase in the price of wheat.  It's going to be low, so I'd 

better put the GRIP on.  Then the next farmer may say well, I 

don't know; I kind of think maybe the price of grain is going 

up, so he don't. 

 

So what a mess to leave the farmers in.  You have left them in 

a disaster out there, of a mess, and what they're going to do 

with their own finances.  '91 Bill, '91 GRIP, was you knew 

what you were signing.  And if the farmers on the government 

benches, if they believed for one moment that the farmers 

didn't like '91 GRIP, then tell me why there was such a large 

sign-up.  And then after harvest there was an element of people 

out there that '91 GRIP bothered them because they had a 

bumper crop and had to pay a premium.  And that sure 

bothered them. 

 

And so they could say to you on the streets at election time you 

know, that '91 GRIP wasn't so good.  And I would say to them: 

you don't collect if the house doesn't burn down.  Like the 

member from Thunder Creek.  He said that he's got some 

stubble ground that's only covered for 13 bushels an acre and 

he got 40 bushels an acre last year, and he expected to pay a 

premium. 

 

For goodness sakes, you guys.  When you . . . you listen to 

these people out there that had 40 and 50 bushels an acre -- we 

had one of the best crops ever known in the province.  And 

then you had people come to you: well I didn't get any money 

out of the '91 GRIP; where's my money? 

 

Well gee, you had a big crop.  They got the dollars and cents.  

You'd have to get one tremendous crop in my area, you'd have 

to be over the 45 bushels an acre in my area, not to collect.  

And not very often that happens.  Not very often. 

 

So they listened to that element.  And I had people saying to 

me, I don't like the '91 GRIP because I didn't get much on it.  I 

got half of my premium back and then the next guy, he was 

maybe a better farmer.  You talk about moral hazards.  It's the 

good farmer over the last 10 years that had this big figure in 

GRIP.  It's the guy that could prove to Crop Insurance that I 

had a 10-year average right up here high.  I was getting the 

30,40 bushels an acre.  They're the ones with the big coverage, 

and you just kick them right in the head.  Talk about moral 

hazards.  You've said to that farmer, you're back in with the 

area.  So I mean your whole concept, looking at the whole 

thing, was wrong -- absolutely wrong. 

 

This breaking of contracts, I say, is going to bankrupt this 

province because what this province had to have for stability is 

the farmers to know in the next four years exactly how much 

income they were going to have.  And that shortfall to the 

farmers in Saskatchewan could bankrupt, as I say, this whole 

province because if the farmer hasn't got money . . . go talk to 

the business men in Regina here and just see what they think 

about the farmers not spending money. 

 

It's going to have a factor to it that's going to be serious.  It's 

going to be one of the most serious cut-backs and 

especially from a government that said we are going to do 

things better for farmers; we're going to do it better.  And 

you've cut away everything they've had.  You've increased all 

their costs.  You'd done it.  It's unreal. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, there's no sense keeping on at this group 

because, as I said, I spoke 13 hours.  But I want to leave a few 

points on the record.  We had closure brought into this 

Assembly, closure on the most important Bill that affects the 

future of this province.  There should never have been closure.  

We should have had a chance to go on and on and on until the 

people finally caught on to what's going out there.  They're just 

starting to realize now when the closing day of this GRIP that 

we're losing it.  The farmers are just starting to panic in rural 

Saskatchewan the last few days.  Hey, is this all over?  Are we 

losing it?  That's what's happened. 

 

And in the energy Bill you went on.  And the potash Bill you 

had days and days -- actually you had months -- 120 days on 

the one Bill.  And so the people of Saskatchewan spoke to you, 

and then we as a government, we listened.  We pulled the 

energy Bill.  But you're not pulling this Bill.  And this is far 

more serious.  The energy Bill didn't have any retroactive 

legislation in it. 

 

You keep talking about . . . the Minister of Agriculture gets up 

and says,  oh this government has had 70 Bills that had 

retroactivity in it.  Well certainly there's Bills that have 

retroactive dates in it.  You can table a Bill in this House, and it 

may be months before it's passed.  It may be months before it 

can get through the legislature, many times.  So you have it 

proclaimed back maybe to the first of January that year, if that's 

what, Mr. Speaker, if that's what people want. 

 

But that isn't what they want here.  They want their right in 

court.  They want their right to be heard. 

 

And I'm so disappointed, Mr. Speaker, so disappointed in 18 

hours of debate with the Minister of Agriculture.  And talk 

about a filibuster on a filibuster.  I've never seen anything like 

it.  He would not answer questions. 

 

But I can assure you that that part isn't over because I 

understand today that the Premier is coming in with the 

Estimates for Executive Council.  And unless you do closure 

today on the Estimates, on the Premier's Estimates and the 

Deputy Premier's Estimates and the Minister of Agriculture's 

Estimates, we are going to get some answers. 

 

I am still going to take all the questions that I asked the 

Minister of Agriculture that we got half-hour speeches on, and 

I'm going to expect the Premier to answer the questions.  The 

Premier is a professional politician.  He's the Premier of this 

province, and I as an individual have been brought up to 

respect authority.  I was brought up as a child to respect my 

teachers and my parents and the law, and I respect the Premier.  

He's the Premier of this province, so I expect him to come in 

here and answer the questions that his colleagues would not, 

because he is responsible for everybody.  He is responsible for 

every action of this government. 

 

When the Minister of Agriculture . . . I feel sorry for him 



2906 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

because I say he was only a sacrificial lamb.  They knew that 

they had to find a sucker out there that would be the person that 

has to take this terrible Bill through the legislature.  They'll get 

rid of him and name a new person and say that all the problem 

was his. 

 

But it's not his fault, Mr. Speaker.  It was not the Minister of 

Agriculture's fault.  I do believe that he was told not to answer 

questions, get this Bill through.  But I'm saying and I want it on 

the record for the people of the province of Saskatchewan that 

the orders came from the Minister of Finance, the Minister of 

Justice, and the Premier of this province.  This is what you 

have to have. 

 

(1030) 

 

And so when their Estimates come up, the Minister of Justice 

will have to be . . . I guess we're through with his Estimates, 

but he'll be talking in this House over the next three years. 

We'll get answers from him.  But the Premier, if he thinks for 

one minute that he's going to get out of this session, that this 

session will ever close without answers from that Premier, 

we're going to be here a long, long time because if we think 

we're getting out of here in this next week or two, forget it.  

The Premier is going to answer questions. 

 

I just have a couple of very important questions that I'm going 

to put on the record that I asked four times in a row to the 

Minister of Agriculture and I didn't get an answer, nothing but . 

. . one time was a 32- or 33-minute answer and never touched 

the question. 

 

And the question was: Mr. Minister, did you make a mistake 

when you neglected to inform in writing by March 15, 1992, to 

all farmers holding a 1991 GRIP contract that there would be a 

major change in their contract?  And why couldn't he stand up 

and say yes or no?  But he didn't.  It went on with political 

rhetoric for a long . . . Well I believe it was the Leader of the 

Opposition, the member from Estevan, that asked a question 

about the same matter and then he had to leave to go to Moose 

Jaw, and I know that the member from Estevan was in Moose 

Jaw before the Minister of Agriculture sat down.  And never 

even come close to answer that question. 

 

If that question that I just said, Mr. Speaker, that I just put on 

the record, if the answer had've been yes, if the answer had've 

been yes, is that why we would have had section 5.4 of the 

Bill?  If it was no, we didn't need the Bill at all.  So we needed 

to have a yes or a no on that question. Then we would have 

known, the people of Saskatchewan would know, that it was 

his blunder that caused the Bill.  And if it wasn't his blunder, he 

didn't make the mistake, then we didn't need the Bill.  There 

was no way we needed the Bill if the minister had answered, I 

didn't make a mistake; it was done right and proper.  Well then 

you could have just forgot about it.  It didn't have to be in the 

Bill. 

 

Then there was the two other questions we kept asking.  We 

wanted public hearings.  We didn't get public hearings on this.  

And we want the people to have . . . go out to public hearings 

in Saskatchewan and say, do you, the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, do you want to have the right of court for all 

such items that deems on 

the rights of individuals?  Do you want their right to be heard 

in court?  And you would have got yes all over. 

 

But they wouldn't do that.  They needed to have done that. 

 

There was another example.  I asked him several questions 

pertaining to examples of how the '92, '91 GRIP worked, 

because he said before, I can tell you exactly how many dollars 

and cents you'll get on '92 GRIP.  And when I give him the 

examples, right off into space, never even heard me.  So that 

means he's been misleading, he's been misleading the House by 

saying I can tell you. 

 

He said in question period to me, I can tell you right to the 

dollar.  Give me your example.  I give him the exact example 

of the farmer that had a 30 bushels an acre coverage -- I won't 

get into it -- and I got right down to his coverage of $124.50, 

and under their own examples, he would have got about $100 

an acre under the 1992 GRIP.  And he got up to explain to me 

how that could happen -- not a word, not one word.  Not one 

word, would he say, Mr. Speaker.  Not a word. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these questions that we didn't get answered by all 

10 of us sitting here, we never got an answer and I've been 

sitting in this House for 15 sessions and I have never seen such 

arrogance ever in my life that we couldn't get some answers.  I 

can remember those ministers in the front row from 1980 . . . 

1978.  One is the member from Churchill Downs.  I had trouble 

with him the first part of this year, but then we got an 

understanding and we got answers.  We got answers. 

 

I can remember the now Premier when he was minister of 

Justice that we could get answers from him.  I can remember 

the Minister of Finance when he was minister of Finance, we 

could get answers from him. 

 

But something has happened.  Like the member from Estevan 

has said, something has happened with this socialist agenda.  

It's something that I think you're so powerful; you won such a 

sweep that you never won before, I do believe you think you're 

on a roll, an agenda, and we can do what we want. 

 

I have heard some of the members say, oh we don't really care 

what happens over the next year.  We don't care.  We just 

assume the polls would go down and give us 32 per cent 

because all we got to do is come back with some goodies in the 

last year or two, and we'll be back in power again.  We only 

have to come up to 45 per cent and we'll win another election. 

 

Well I can tell you, as this individual in Humboldt told me 

yesterday, or in Watrous -- Humboldt constituency -- when I 

said to him, it's too bad that you people that are so angry, it's 

too bad that you're so angry now because in three years you'll 

forget, he said, Mr. Muirhead, no sir, we're never going to 

forget.  We're never going to forget because this is going to be 

a one-term government.  And I do believe that's what's 

happened. 

 

So in closing, what I'm saying is how I started out, that maybe 

the people in the legislature have won today, but when it comes 

to the last vote, it will be three years from 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2907 

now when the people tell you you were wrong on Bill 87, and 

the people of Saskatchewan then will be the winners.  For now 

we're all the losers, but when they speak again, we will be the 

winners. 

 

And my last word is that you NDP people think, you think that 

you're the highest court in the land.  Well I'll tell you, there's a 

higher court, there's a higher court than this NDP government; 

there's a higher court than Ottawa. It's the moral court.  And 

God is the head of all the universe and he will speak last. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to say a few words on this Bill.  I am also, like my 

colleagues, Mr. Speaker, absolutely stunned at the arrogance of 

this Bill and the arrogance of the members who put this Bill 

forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have before me a symbol of justice, the Law 

Society of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and in this the judge, 

symbolic judge, is blindfolded.  Mr. Speaker, that indicates to 

me that the judge in this case does not want to be influenced by 

what he can see -- he or she -- but by the facts, so that they can 

impartially judge.  Mr. Speaker, it indicates to me that the other 

side of law is justice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don't believe we have seen justice here in this 

Bill.  No one can be their own judge in law.  That's a standard.  

That is why we have an individual who is impartial.  That is 

why the symbol that I'm looking at, Mr. Speaker, has a 

blindfolded judge, so that they can impartially judge the facts.  

We have asked these people to put the facts before an impartial 

judge.  They will not do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this Bill bothers me, not only as a legislator and a 

member of the legislature, it bothers me because of my life as a 

small-business man.  Where I had contracts with people -- 

sometimes a handshake; sometimes it was a written, signed, 

sealed document -- and if contracts are not sacred in this 

House, then how much validity do they have out among the 

common people? 

 

We in this House, Mr. Speaker, are judged quite severely today 

because of some of the actions that have been taken here.  Mr. 

Speaker, I suggest to you and I suggest to those members 

opposite, what we're doing with this Bill will not bring our 

credibility up.  As a matter of fact, it will bring the credibility 

of legislators down. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the minister talked that . . . in questions about the 

Bill, he said things like: I'm not sure there was a contract; I'm 

not sure there was a contract with them 60,000 farmers.  Mr. 

Speaker, that bothers me.  Surely, surely, Mr. Speaker, if there 

was no contract, then the premiums paid by the farmer should 

be reimbursed to them.  Or, Mr. Speaker, there should be no 

penalty to get out of the '91 GRIP. 

 

How, how in all fairness, could you have a penalty to get out of 

something that isn't there?  Now either we have a contract or 

we don't have a contract.  In the old contract 

the farmers were in for three years.  If they didn't like it, they 

bought their way out.  Mr. Speaker, in the '92 GRIP, which the 

minister suggests to us was not a contract, they still have to pay 

a penalty to get out -- to get out of what?  What are they getting 

out of?  There's no contract; it's been null and void. 

 

Section -- Mr. Speaker, bear with me a second -- I have a 

section of that Bill nullifies . . . section 5.4 wipes out the 

contract, according to the minister.  Well if the contract's wiped 

out, then why do they have to pay a penalty?  There is no 

contract.  It does not make sense.  There's no logic there.  And 

there certainly is no justice to the farmer. 

 

In section 10.1 it says you can't sue the government.  Mr. 

Speaker, this bothers me.  Section 5.4 wipes out the contract.  

There is a penalty.  Section 10.1 says you pay the penalty and 

you can't sue for justice.  How can you on one hand say, you 

must pay me a penalty to get out of a contract; and on the other 

hand you say, you can't sue me to get your money back because 

there is no contract? 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I ask, where's the justice?  Where is the 

justice to the farmer? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have here a part of the Pearlman . . . Manitoba 

Law Society Judicial Committee report on the Pearlman case 

which was mentioned, I believe, in the letter of opinion that we 

got from the Law Clerk.  And, Mr. Speaker, in that Pearlman 

decision, the province of Saskatchewan was an intervener, was 

an intervener in that.  And I want to read what it says here.  

And I quote: 

 

 More specifically, it is well accepted that included in these 

fundamental principles is the concept of a procedurally fair 

hearing before an impartial decision-maker.  Indeed, Wilson 

J. said in Singh v. Minister of Employment & Immigration 

(that's what he said) . . . 

 

  . . . at a minimum the concept of "fundamental justice" as 

it appears in s. 7 of the Charter includes the notion 

of procedural fairness articulated by Fauteux (I 

don't know if I pronounce the name properly) . . . 

 

And I want to go on to read, Mr. Speaker: 

 

   "Under section 2(e) of the Bill of Rights no law of 

Canada shall be construed or applied so as to 

deprive him of 'a fair hearing in accordance with 

the principles of fundamental justice'.  Without 

attempting to formulate any final definition of 

these words, I would take them to mean, 

generally, that the tribunal which adjudicates 

upon his rights must act fairly, in good faith, 

without bias and in a judicial temper, and must 

give to him the opportunity to adequately state his 

case." 

 

That's in the Pearlman case, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it goes 

on to say: 

 

 Thus, in the administrative law context, principles of 

fundamental justice include natural justice . . . 



2908 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

Natural justice, Mr. Speaker, goes back to what I said about 

the symbol of law.  The judge is blindfolded.  That is natural 

justice.  He only hears, sir, the facts -- no perception of 

whether it's a beggar or a king before him. 

 

(1045) 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . rules which in turn require that the members of the 

tribunal be impartial and disinterested . . . 

 

And it suggests that you see the 4th edition of S.A. de Smith's 

Judicial Review of Administrative Action.  I go on to read: 

 

 Impartiality of the decision-making body is a critical feature 

of natural justice and is captured by the latin maxim (and I 

won't attempt to read the latin interpretation) -- no one should 

be the judge in his own cause. 

 

No one, Mr. Speaker, should be the judge of his own cause.  

Here's what happened.  They unilaterally changed the law, and 

they are now judging their own case.  Mr. Speaker, it is very 

disturbing. 

 

And as I spoke on this once before, I mentioned to the 

members opposite, Hansard never forgets.  This law, passed as 

it is, will not be forgotten.  And I add my words to the member 

before me from Arm River to the minister.  Reconsider -- 

reconsider before it's too late.  No one should be the judge in 

his own cause.  That, Mr. Speaker, is justice, and justice is all 

we're asking for in this case. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is much more I can say, but I'm going to 

close off by once more saying to the members opposite:  

consider what you are doing.  You will be judged by what 

you're doing with this Bill.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in the 

very short time that is left to the opposition in this debate this 

morning, I want to say a few last words. 

 

I think it was very appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that the 

amendment as brought forward by the Leader of the Opposition 

in third reading, a move that is very seldom done in our 

legislature, be done this morning on this particular Bill, on Bill 

87, the GRIP Bill.  And I'd like to read it again, Mr. Speaker:  

That this Bill . . . 

 

 . . . not now be read a third time so that the subject matter of 

the Bill may be referred to the Court of Appeal pursuant to 

the Constitutional Questions Act for a ruling on its 

constitutionality. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what more appropriate amendment to a piece of 

legislation that this very day will strip from people not only the 

ability to probably financially manage their lives over the next 

12 months, but strips from people the right to take a 

government to court. 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture today 

when he mounts the podium in Melfort should think about the 

words that he said behind the closed doors of his advisory 

committee on GRIP; the words that were relayed to the 

members of the media by people who were in those committee 

meetings and didn't want their name used.  And I quote the 

Minister of Agriculture again.  This is from the Leader-Post, 

June 17, '92: 

 

 Agriculture Minister Berny Wiens was repeatedly asked 

whether changes to the 1991 GRIP contracts after the March 

15 deadline would create legal problems, say members of the 

crop insurance advisory committee. 

 

 But Wiens told committee members: "We can get around it 

somehow." 

 

And I quote again: 

 

 "Essentially, he (Wiens) didn't seem concerned," said the 

committee member who asked not to be identified.  "He 

thought we could get around that (legal question) . . . He said 

we would get around it somehow." 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, the getting around, the getting around the 

legal question is Bill 87. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we have had many people speak to this Bill 

on both moral, legal, and financial grounds.  Just this weekend 

the Legislative Law Clerk of this Assembly gave an opinion.  

It's his own, personal opinion.  But when previous Law Clerks 

of this Assembly have given opinions, I can remember the 

NDP standing, to a person, in this legislature and saying that 

members of this Assembly should listen to the Legislative Law 

Clerk.  And I remember all sorts of machinations going on 

when the government of the time was ignoring the Legislative 

Law Clerk. 

 

But unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, we see the same hypocrisy 

exhibited by the NDP government on this question as we have 

seen on every other one in the 10 months that they've been 

government.  The same hypocrisy that went with every last one 

of their election promises.  The same hypocrisy that went with 

every one of their speeches on bell-ringing.  The same 

hypocrisy we've seen on every speech on closure applied in 

summation through this Bill 87. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've got a minister of the Crown, a 

minister of the Executive Council, a minister who has sworn an 

oath to Her Majesty saying that never mind the legal questions, 

we will get around them somehow. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want you to take it one step further.  What 

if the Premier of our province, who just has gone through the 

constitutional negotiations, again had the same opinion as the 

Minister of Agriculture when they were dealing with some 

fundamental point of justice in our constitution?  What if he 

said, well don't worry about it fellow premiers, we'll get around 

it somehow.  We won't worry about these legal problems.  

We'll get around it somehow.  We'll all bring forward Bills to 

get around it somehow. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2909 

Well I don't believe that's the case, Mr. Speaker.  I don't believe 

those negotiations that have been going on had that type of 

temper.  I don't believe that the men and women who are 

charged with being the fathers of our Confederation in 1992 

would have that attitude. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to this government, how 

can you have a member of an Executive Council who tells 

people, don't worry about the legal consequences; we'll get 

around it somehow -- and then allow that member to continue 

on and bring before this Legislative Assembly a Bill that says 

don't worry about it; we'll get around it somehow. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will demonstrably justify in this Bill why we 

should take away the rights of individuals to take this 

government to court because they have broken their contracts 

with people.  We will demonstrably justify why the people 

gathered in Melfort this afternoon, who have been droughted 

out and now froze out, should not have a legally binding 

contract with their government.  We will demonstrably justify 

why the Court of Queen's Bench cannot sit in judgement of the 

Minister of Agriculture and his government.  And we will 

demonstrably justify, Mr. Speaker, why individuals in our 

society should not be able to take this to the highest court in 

our land. 

 

That's what we have in Bill 87, Mr. Speaker; we have the 

getting around here.  The getting around that is the thin edge of 

the wedge.  And it comes from people who stood in this 

legislature and talked for hours and days about this very type of 

legislation.  These new-found democrats -- in the words of the 

member from Riversdale -- these new-found democrats who 

are demonstrably justifying the getting around, the getting 

around, which is done three times in Bill 87, from these 

new-found democrats. 

 

It's funny, Mr. Speaker, how one's own words come back time 

after time.  I read with interest the words of the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway on the weekend in the paper who was 

quoted as saying, I don't like to hear my own words come back 

at me.  I don't like to hear that the things that I have stood and 

fought for have come back at me. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, by the number of empty seats that 

we have seen through the latter parts of this GRIP debate, have 

not meant that other members of the New Democratic Party 

who've sat in this legislature and have been noticeable by their 

absence, why the votes have all been less than 30, means that 

there are New Democrats who don't like this piece of 

legislation.  And by their absence are indicating that they don't 

like their own words read back to them.  They don't believe that 

it demonstrably justifies taking away the rights of people in this 

Assembly, taking away the rights of people in this province, 

and taking away the rights of people to go before the courts of 

our land.  They don't believe it is demonstrably justified for the 

member from Rosetown-Elrose to break his contract with 

hundreds of people, with thousands of people in this province. 

 

And I wonder how he's going to stand on that platform today 

and say, men and women of Saskatchewan don't worry about it, 

we'll get around it somehow, we'll get 

around your rights now that you're droughted out and you're 

froze out. We'll get around your rights to hold my government 

accountable.  Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if he will have the 

courage to stand on that platform in Melfort today and repeat 

those words to the people gathered in that assembly today.  

Will he say it?  No he will not.  He will hide and he will blame 

others.  And he will say, they made me do it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that doesn't demonstrably justify to me . . . 

it doesn't demonstrably justify to me why that member should 

continue to be the member of Agriculture, Minister of 

Agriculture, nor these people have the right to govern when 

they would strip those fundamental rights away from people in 

this province. 

 

And that's why, Mr. Speaker, that's why the amendment 

brought forward by the member from Estevan and seconded by 

the member from Moosomin is absolutely justifiable in third 

reading of this Bill this morning, to give this government one 

last opportunity, one last opportunity to demonstrate to 

Saskatchewan people that they have a heart, that they have a 

soul, that they actually believe the words that they speak in this 

Legislative Assembly, and that they, before they go before the 

people in Melfort today, are saying that we will take a second 

look, a third look, a fourth look.  We will do whatever we have 

to do in order to live up to our obligations. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is why we should give this government 

and all the members of the New Democratic Party the 

opportunity to back this amendment so that we don't transgress 

on the rights of our citizens in this province this morning.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 11 a.m. until 11:10 a.m. 

 

Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Muirhead Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Britton D'Autremont 

-- 6 

Nays 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Cline 

Koskie Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Kowalsky Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

Penner Knezacek 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

-- 30 



2910 Saskatchewan Hansard August 24, 1992 

The division bells rang from 11:13 a.m. until 11:43 a.m. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 

 

Yeas 

Van Mulligen Lautermilch 

Thompson Calvert 

Wiens Johnson 

Tchorzewski Trew 

Lingenfelter Whitmore 

Teichrob Sonntag 

Shillington Cline 

Koskie Scott 

Goulet McPherson 

Solomon Wormsbecker 

Mitchell Crofford 

Penner Knezacek 

Bradley Carlson 

Lorje Langford 

Pringle Jess 

-- 30 

Nays 

Muirhead Toth 

Swenson Goohsen 

Britton D'Autremont 

-- 6 

The Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Mr. Speaker, pursuant to section 42, I 

ask leave to present the following motion, seconded by the 

member from Maple Creek: 

 

 That a humble address be presented to Her Honour, the 

Lieutenant Governor: 

 

 May it please Your Honour, we Your Majesty's dutiful and 

loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in 

session assembled, invoke our ancient right of addressing 

Your Honour in a just cause to prevent wrongful acts against 

your subjects from being committed by Your Honour's 

government, humbly pray Your Honour deny Royal Assent 

to any Bill which separates your subjects from their historic 

and undoubted rights under the common law and the 

protection of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms to equal 

treatment under the law, which prevents your Executive 

Council from setting itself above the law and particularly 

pray that Your Honour deny Royal Assent to any Bill which 

would retroactively change evidence before the court for the 

sole purpose of removing the rights of Your Honour 

embodied on behalf of all your subjects. 

 

Leave not granted. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT 

 

At 11:47 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 

Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 

to the following Bills: 

Bill No. 45 -- An Act to amend The Business Corporations 

Act 

Bill No. 67 -- An Act to amend The Queen's Bench Act, 

repeal The Surrogate Court Act and make 

Consequential Amendments to Certain Other 

Acts resulting from the Amalgamation of the 

Surrogate Court and the Court of Queen's 

Bench 

Bill No. 63 -- An Act to amend The Ombudsman Act 

Bill No. 74 -- An Act to amend The Land Titles Act (No. 2) 

Bill No. 75 -- An Act to repeal The Bulk Sales Act 

Bill No. 36 -- An Act to amend The Parks Act 

Bill No. 73 -- An Act respecting Certain Services with respect 

to Co-operatives, Credit Unions and Names of 

Homes 

Bill No. 27 -- An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, 

1989 

Bill No. 3 -- An Act to amend The Environmental 

Management and Protection Act 

Bill No. 53 -- An Act to amend The Farm Financial Stability 

Act 

Bill No. 59 -- An Act to amend The Agri-Food Act 

Bill No. 30 -- An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax 

Act 

Bill No. 46 -- An Act to amend The Income Tax Act 

Bill No. 68 -- An Act to amend The Education Act 

Bill No. 29 -- An Act to amend The Education and Health 

Tax Act 

Bill No. 51 -- An Act to repeal The Heritage Fund 

(Saskatchewan) Act, to provide for the 

Winding-up of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund 

and the Farm Purchase Program Fund and to 

enact Consequential Amendments to Certain 

Acts and Regulations resulting from the repeal 

of that Act and the Winding-up of those Funds. 

Bill No. 62 -- An Act to amend The Fuel Tax Act, 1987 

Bill No. 88 -- An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 

Bill No. 60 -- An Act to amend The Community Bonds Act 

Bill No. 66 -- An Act to amend The Industrial Development 

Act 

Bill No. 78 -- An Act to amend The Labour-sponsored 

Venture Capital Corporations Act 

Bill No. 21 -- An Act to continue SaskEnergy Incorporated, to 

make certain consequential amendments to 

certain Acts resulting from that continuance and 

to validate certain transactions involving 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Bill No. 40 -- An Act to amend The Highway Traffic Act 

Bill No. 87 -- An Act respecting amendments to Certain Farm 

Income Insurance Legislation 

 

Her Honour: -- In Her Majesty's name, I assent to these Bills. 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:51 p.m. 



August 24, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2911 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Executive Council 

Vote 10 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Premier at this point to introduce 

the officials who are here with him. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 

and members of the Assembly.  I'd like to introduce to the 

members the officials who are with me.  First of all, to my 

immediate left is the deputy minister to the Premier and the 

clerk of the Executive Council, Mr. Ron Clark. To my 

immediate right is the chief of staff to myself, Mr Garry 

Aldridge.  In no particular order hereafter, but moving to the 

next immediate left is Mr. Brij Mathur who's the associate 

deputy minister of policy and planning.  And to his left is Mr. 

Paul Osborne the acting associate deputy minister of 

intergovernmental affairs.  Behind me, I am advised, 

immediately behind Mr. Clark is the senior policy advisor, 

policy and planning unit, Ms. Louise Greenberg.  And directly 

behind me is the director of administration, Mr. Don 

Wincherauk. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, I'd like 

to begin by welcoming the officials.  And I'm not sure maybe I 

could use the term welcome back, Mr. Premier, or could we 

say it's good to see your presence here in our midst today to 

answer our questions and a number of the concerns that we 

may have.  I'm not exactly sure that after we're through the 

debate the Premier will feel the welcome is as laudable as he 

would like to see it. 

 

But certainly, Mr. Premier, and to the Assembly and to the 

chairman what we just witnessed in this Assembly was the 

Royal Assent to a number of Bills in which we've raised a 

number -- as an opposition -- we've raised a number of 

questions over the past number of months.  But there isn't any 

of those Bills that has really challenged the very existence of 

this Legislative Assembly and the rights that each and every 

one of us as elected representatives stand for here today as Bill 

No. 87, a Bill that has changed very dramatically the GRIP 

contract or the insurance program for the farming community 

of this province. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, as we have indicated to the Assembly, we 

certainly have raised on numerous occasions with the minister, 

and we've trusted that the minister would indeed take the time 

to talk to the Premier.  We brought out the fact that the Bill that 

was introduced in this Assembly and that was passed and given 

Royal Assent certainly went against all the rights and 

responsibilities and privileges that we as individuals enjoy, that 

have been laid out in the constitution -- a constitutional 

agreement that this Premier, that the Premier of the province a 

number of years ago, as attorney general, had had the pleasure 

and the privilege of being involved with the repatriation of the 

constitution, and at that time stood very dramatically and stood 

up very strongly for rights of individuals. 

 

And, Mr. Premier, to say at the least, we're very appalled at the 

very fact that your government, your Executive Council, and 

your minister would override those very fundamental rights, 

that we believe you -- at the time, back in 1982 -- represented 

very strongly regarding debate on the constitution. 

 

And on that basis we have argued for the past number of days 

the . . . and asked the government and asked the minister and 

certainly the question was posed again this morning, we've 

suggested that under the constitution, under the charter, under 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and privileges, and if the 

Premier really believes that the Bill that was presented by his 

government would stand a challenge in the courts, we would 

certainly ask the Premier today to allow that process to 

proceed.  And in fact, Mr. Chairman, we would go so far as we 

asked earlier on today to ask the Premier to indeed speed up the 

process, as we've suggested to the Minister of Agriculture as he 

travels to Melfort and as he speaks with people at the farm 

meeting that is taking place.  And who knows how many 

people may show up.  The indications are there could be a 

substantial crowd at that meeting. 

 

And why are they gathering today, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 

Premier?  Why are they taking the time to gather in Melfort 

today? 

 

Mr. Premier, they're gathering there because they have felt that 

the insurance program that they originally signed for, whether 

or not they totally agreed with it, has taken a . . . certainly has 

left them with a sound feeling of insecurity.  The GRIP '91 

program, Mr. Chairman, may not have been approved and 

agreed to by all individuals across this province or across this 

great dominion, but what it did was gave the farming a sense of 

security, a sense of being able to sit down and assess the 

business decisions that they must make in order to continue to 

farm and strengthen their farms. 

 

And, Mr. Chairman, we've heard a lot of accolades by the 

Premier, by the government, about all the things that they were 

going to do for the people of Saskatchewan.  The Premier 

talked about the fact that if people would just vote for the NDP, 

it would be a brighter day, that they would strengthen the 

agricultural base.  And, Mr. Chairman, this province is made 

up of agriculture.  It is the most important sector in our 

province. 

 

The Chair: -- Order.  It being 12 o'clock, the committee will 

rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 

 

 


