




















































Hansard: May 19, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 467 

 May 19, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Van Mulligen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

should like to introduce to you and through you to the other 

members of the Assembly a group of grade 7 and 8 students 

from St. Andrew School in the constituency of Regina Victoria.  

They're here today for a tour.  I hope to meet with them after 

the question period for pictures and drinks.  I ask all members 

to make them feel welcome here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is with 

pleasure that I introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you 

to members of the House, 60 students from the St. Mark School 

in Saskatoon.  They're present in your gallery, Mr. Speaker.  

They are accompanied by their teachers Arley Olson, Dave 

Schurman and Ed Hudy.  Their chaperons are Mrs. Hermanson 

and Mrs. Fay, and the bus driver is Les Bittner.  I'd be obliged 

if members of the House could make the students welcome 

here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to 

introduce two very important people today, the mother and 

father of Dale Eisler, a very well-known Saskatchewan 

journalist -- Bob and Mary Eisler, who are sitting in your 

gallery, Mr. Speaker.  They are also accompanied by their 

daughter, Marilyn Paller from B.C. (British Columbia) who's 

visiting.  And I'd ask the members to join me in welcoming 

them. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Health Care Funding 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It's good 

to see so many smiling and refreshed-looking faces after the 

long weekend and I have great anticipation in actually getting 

some of my questions answered this afternoon. 

 

And I would like to direct my first series of questions to the 

Minister of Health.  And I would tell you, Madam Minister, 

that you had choices and the effects of your choices, your 

party's choices, are being felt in Saskatchewan today. 

 

You chose to publicly fund abortions in this province, to 

continue to use taxpayers' money even though 63 per cent of 

the people of Saskatchewan voted against this choice.  You 

chose to reduce health care funding this year and also next 

year.  Now, because of your misplaced priorities, Madam 

Minister, the president of the Royal University Hospital in 

Saskatoon announced today he has to close a pediatric ward.  

The president of the hospital 

is closing down pediatric beds because you have chosen to 

underfund hospitals, Madam Minister, something that you have 

always said you would never do. 

 

Would you admit, Madam Minister, today that you have 

misplaced priorities, that you have made the choice to fund 

abortions rather than to care for the sick people and the sick 

children in this province? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the funding 

of abortions, I want to say once again, and the members know 

this full well, that the legal opinions that we have received -- 

and I know that they were aware of this before the election -- 

the legal opinions that we have received say that it's 

unconstitutional and illegal to de-insure abortions, not to fund 

abortions. And the members opposite know that, Mr. Speaker.  

The fact of the matter is, is we have to fund abortions that are 

performed in hospitals. 

 

Now with respect to closures at the Royal University Hospital, 

if there were beds closed at the Royal University Hospital -- 

and I will have to confirm this -- this would be a decision made 

by the Saskatoon Health Board that is also very much involved 

in trying to co-ordinate services, so there will be a movement 

of services from one hospital to another, for example.  I don't 

know whether these particular beds fall into that category.  I 

will have to find out the information on that.  But there are 

other things occurring in our hospitals right now that may 

result in services being moved, for example, from one hospital 

to another. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

Opinions are opinions, Madam Minister.  We have legal 

opinions; you have legal opinions.  But until the matter is taken 

to the court and adjudicated there, no one really knows what 

the opinion of your lawyers are as opposed to ours, Madam 

Minister. 

 

Now you made the choice, Madam Minister.  The entire 

province is getting just a wee bit tired, I would suggest to you, 

about the repercussions of your decisions and you blaming 

everyone for those decisions except yourself.  It is time that 

this government has to take some responsibility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Last April you accused the government of eroding the health 

care system by starving it of money.  It wasn't even a year later, 

Madam Minister, and under your government, beds are closing, 

nurses are being fired, and the health care system in this 

province is eroding because you will not provide adequate 

funding for hospitals which you always said you would do.  

Your choices, Madam Minister, are affecting the care of our 

sick children. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, will you stand today, try to regain some 

credibility, and admit you made some very wrong choices at 

the expense of sick people in this province? 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, prior to the election the 

members opposite received an opinion with respect to 

abortions that told them that it was unconstitutional and illegal 

to de-insure abortions.  They received . . . I have here 

information that they were advised to that effect, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the fact of the matter is they chose to go ahead with the 

plebiscite when they knew it was unconstitutional to de-insure 

abortions.  They were playing politics with a very, very serious 

issue. 

 

Now with respect to the question on adequate funding for 

hospitals, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this.  The interest on the 

debt created by the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party is 

some $760 million a year.  That's what the people of 

Saskatchewan are paying -- the interest on the debt.  The deficit 

this year is some 517 million.  You know what that means, Mr. 

Speaker?  If we weren't paying the interest on their debt, we 

would have $243 million.  And do you know what this 

government would do with that money?  Do you know what we 

could do with that money?  We wouldn't have had to have 

de-insured optometric services, for example.  We would not 

have had to take some of the steps with respect to chiropractors 

and other matters in health care, Mr. Speaker.  If we had the 

$243 million today that we're paying on their debt, many of 

these cuts would not have had to have been made. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A new question to 

the same minister.  We seem to have a parallel series of 

discussions going on here, so I will refrain from getting into the 

former but pick up on the fact, Madam Minister, that it took 

you three questions, I guess, to get back to your standard 

ideological blaming of everyone else for the conditions that 

you have inherited, Madam Minister, instead of giving direct 

answers to some very . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Does the member have a 

question?  If you have a question, I'd like you to cut your 

preamble and put the question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, you forced those choices on 

the Royal University Hospital.  A nurse working at the Royal 

University Hospital says that this closing of the pediatric ward 

will affect the care that is given.  Saskatchewan nurses say that 

you have no plan for medicare whatsoever. 

 

Madam Minister, your choices are underfunding and it is 

directly affecting the care given in hospitals.  Will you finally 

take responsibility for these actions because of your drastic cuts 

in funding for health care for hospitals?  And is it your opinion 

that children in Saskatchewan should be deprived of the health 

care that they so desperately need? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Royal 

University Hospital situation, I've said earlier I will inquire into 

the bed closures and find out what the circumstances are there.  

It may not be exactly as the members opposite paint it. 

With respect to hospitals, I want to say this in terms of hospital 

beds in the province.  Saskatchewan has approximately 7.1 

beds per 1,000 population.  This is the highest in the country, 

Mr. Speaker, with the national average at some 4.8 beds per 

1,000 population. 

 

Now as a result of those statistics, what we have done in this 

government is to talk to hospitals about co-ordinating and 

integrating their services; about the possibility of moving 

towards more community-based services so we can use less 

hospital beds and so we can remove the duplication in our 

system. 

 

And the members opposite were working on that.  They were 

working on those directions prior to us forming government, 

but they didn't have the leadership skills nor the commitment to 

health care reform in order to make it happen.  Now we know . 

. . 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I fail to catch any semblance of an answer in 

that response, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let me give you a very direct question, Madam Minister.  I've 

heard rumours, and so have many people in this province, of 

more bed closures, of many more lay-offs in store for hospitals 

all across this province.  Could you tell us today, Madam 

Minister, how many hospitals you are planning to close?  How 

you have come to the decision on those specific hospitals?  

And on whose recommendations are these decisions being 

made?  In short, Madam Minister, what are your plans for 

health care in this province?  People have the right and they 

want to know. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we will shortly, in a few 

short weeks, be tabling a document that sets out more of the 

direction and with some guidelines and goals for Saskatchewan 

citizens. 

 

But having said that, I have been throughout the province, as 

have officials from the Department of Health, to talk about the 

general direction.  And the direction we've moving in health is 

to a more wellness-oriented model of health care, where we put 

more emphasis on disease prevention and health promotion; 

where we go throughout the province and have communities 

get together on a district basis to co-ordinate and integrate their 

services, and to remove some of the duplication that exists. 

 

What we want to see happen throughout the province, Mr. 

Speaker, is this type of health care reform where communities 

come to a decision to remove much of the duplication; perhaps 

to move to a one-board system in their community, to look at 

ways of bringing more health care professionals out to their 

community in wellness centres, for example, Mr. Speaker, and 

to put more emphasis on health promotion, disease prevention, 

and move to more community-based service. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next question. 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We will get into 

your wellness program in a few minutes, Madam Minister.  

What your answer just confirmed is that you have no plan.  

You're telling us now, wait a couple of weeks and something 

might come out.  Just wait another couple of weeks. 

 

I have an article here, Mr. Speaker, from the Gravelbourg 

Tribune dealing with their foyer plans delayed again in St. 

Joseph.  And Ed Seamann, chairman of the board, makes this 

statement: 

 

 "We were led to believe that there was something in the 

budget for us . . . we were not stopped.  We met with the 

minister of health and we were (told) not (to) shut down.  We 

were told to continue with the planning right up to the 

tendering stage.  And if she (Minister of Health, Louise 

Simard) was going to stop us why didn't she stop us (in) 

January . . . when we met with her . . ." 

 

. . . at that time.  Answer that question, Madam Minister. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 

Gravelbourg situation, the Gravelbourg project has not been 

cancelled.  The Gravelbourg project has been deferred.  We do 

not have capital funding for Gravelbourg in the budget this 

year because of the deficit situation that they created in this 

province.  We cannot go out and fund a number of these capital 

projects that we feel will eventually be funded.  We will have 

to wait for some better times.  The fact of the matter is, is they 

have driven . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I wonder if the Leader of the 

Opposition has a question that he would like to get off his 

chest.  It's been a running commentary ever since question 

period started and I recognize the Minister of Health to finish 

her answer and the member from Rosthern. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- We will be asking Gravelbourg, as we 

will be asking communities throughout this province, to get 

together with their neighbours, co-ordinate and integrate . . . 

and the Leader from the Opposition sits there . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  You evaded 

answering that question very well, Madam Minister.  But I 

want to continue on in this article, and I quote: 

 

 What angered Seamann and Executive Director . . . Raymond 

Mulaire, was the continued spending of money on studies and 

architectural plans which could have been frozen.  The direct 

and indirect costs could amount to almost one half million 

dollars. 

 

Madam Minister, how many diabetic insulin syringes or eye 

tests would that half a million dollars have allowed you to do 

instead of cutting out those services?  Madam 

Minister, why did you waste that much money? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Let's just put Gravelbourg in perspective.  

That party over there has promised the Gravelbourg hospital, 

not once but through several elections and by-elections. And 

they did nothing. 

 

Now as far as Gravelbourg is concerned, it is a priority, but 

there is no capital funding this year. And we will be asking the 

community to get together to co-ordinate and integrate their 

services, as they are doing throughout Canada.  Can you get 

that straight?  Throughout Canada this kind of health care 

reform is taking place -- throughout Canada. 

 

Now I know that the members opposite laugh at it because they 

had no plan for health care at all, no plan at all.  They just went 

out and spent money left, right, and centre without any plan at 

all, without any new direction, without any new emphasis that 

would preserve our medicare system.  They did nothing. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, well, well, 

Madam Minister, you talk about a plan.  You talk about a plan.  

Let's take a look at what people think about your plan, and I 

continue on with the same gentleman in Gravelbourg: "Mulaire 

(and I quote) does not see how the foyer project has anything to 

do with the wellness program and emphasized that because of 

the condition of the foyer . . . waiting lists of patients . . ." will 

rise. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 "What this project is all about is a deficient building.  It's all 

about one bathtub for 50 people.  It's all about the lack of fire 

safety for 50 people.  It's all about the lack of space for 50 

people.  It's got nothing to do with the wellness concepts and 

health prevention . . . " 

 

He said, Madam Minister. 

 

Can you get that through your mind?  People in this province 

are sick and they need good, specialized care.  Why are you not 

providing that for the people of Saskatchewan, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite had a chance to 

build the Gravelbourg foyer, Mr. Speaker.  They chose to build 

Rockglen and Coronach.  They did not build the Gravelbourg 

foyer.  They did not.  I'm telling the members opposite the 

project in Gravelbourg is not dead, and Gravelbourg knows 

that, Mr. Speaker.  Gravelbourg -- there is no capital funding 

this year for Gravelbourg but the project is not dead. 

 

And with respect to health care reform, the provincial premiers 

at the western provincial and territorial health ministers have 

indicated . . . the premiers, rather, at their provincial conference 

have indicated that in order . . . and 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

this is a communique that came out of the meeting at the 

western premiers' conference. They indicated that to 

co-ordinate health care reform planning and to strengthen joint 

efforts to implement a wellness model of health care, that's the 

direction that the western premiers are moving, Mr. Speaker -- 

towards a wellness model of health care. 

 

They talk in this communique about health care reform taking 

place throughout the country, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say 

that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Next question. 

 

Review of Government Tendering 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I'd like to begin 

by commending the government for ceasing to indulge in 

capital projects at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- My question is to the Minister of Finance.  

I strongly support the effort by any governments for more 

openness as well as treating people fairly.  The Gass 

Commission reported that the people of this province demand 

an investigation into tendering practices and leases because the 

public believe that they were not being treated fairly.  When 

will this impartial investigation be started? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I say to the member from Saskatoon 

Greystone the review is under way at an early date, but I 

wouldn't be able to be too precise on that.  We'll be reporting to 

the members of the legislature. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Associate Minister, for 

seven months your government, Crown corporations, and a 

long list of boards and commissions have continued to buy 

supplies and award contracts. 

 

Now how can the people of our province feel assured that 

tendering will be fair when your government is in low gear 

when it really comes to starting an independent study on this 

matter? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I shall remind the member from 

Saskatoon Greystone that we weren't able to get into gear until 

after February 17 when the Gass report was actually received.  

Since then we have been in high gear attempting to deal with a 

tendering and procurement process which was the subject of 

the worst political patronage by the former administration. 

 

If we have been dealing with it for two months, I may say we 

have one of the worst problems in the country to deal with. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I remind the associate 

minister that nowhere in the Speech from the Throne did it talk 

about tendering practices.  As you no doubt know, the people 

of this province have guaranteed $1.7 billion 

in debts for companies like NewGrade, Saskferco, and Crown 

Life. 

 

There's secret clauses in the government's deals with these 

corporations, and I'd like you to now tell us:  will you remove 

secrecy and show Saskatchewan these deals so that we can 

know just how much risk we face of going into even further 

debt. 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I say to the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone, these arrangements are 

under review.  In many cases they are as complicated as they 

are disastrous for this province.  We are reviewing them and as 

soon as our reviews are complete -- and we've been working 

with something approaching breakneck speed -- as soon as the 

reviews are complete, we will be discussing it with the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I'm wondering, Mr. Associate Minister, if 

this is your version of opening the books.  The taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan face a possibility of paying $355 million for 

Crown Life, $344 million for NewGrade, 261 million for 

Saskferco.  Don't you think that we deserve to know the details 

of these deals now? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- Yes, we do think that the public are 

entitled to the details of how their money is spent, and as soon 

as we can analyse it and put it in a form in which it is 

understandable and comprehensive, we shall be doing that.  But 

I say to the member opposite these are extremely complicated.  

They are as complicated as they are disastrous.  We are 

reviewing them and as soon as we are in a position to do so, 

you and other members of the public will be taken into. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Associate 

Minister, I do appreciate that, as I'm sure everyone in the 

province does, and this government has brought down a budget 

that in fact should have been based on real numbers and the 

kind of numbers you're telling us that you don't even have 

today.  What has your government done in terms of real reform 

to ensure that the types of secret clauses and loan guarantees 

cannot be included in deals without the approval of this 

legislature? 

 

Hon. Mr. Shillington: -- I don't have the specific reference to 

it before me.  I do have a copy of the throne speech but not the 

specific reference.  I say to the member opposite that what we 

have done to assure ourselves, and what we are doing to assure 

the public that these sins will not happen again -- that these 

things will not happen again -- we have talked about 

democratic reforms, the thrust of which is to make Executive 

Council and the government accountable to this legislature. 

 

That is what the Gass . . . that is in essence is what the Gass 

Commission recommended.  And in the end that is the only 

real guarantee that these kind of abuses won't reoccur, is to 

keep the legislature informed.  That's what democratic reform 

is all about. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Opening of Eatonia Hospital 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Earlier we talked about 

a hospital in Gravelbourg that hasn't been built.  And I'd like to 

direct my question to the Minister of Health about a hospital in 

my constituency that has been built. 

 

This morning I talked to one of the members of the board of 

directors of the Eatonia hospital and she informed me that the 

opening of the new facility in Eatonia is scheduled for June 12 

or June 19. 

 

And, Madam Minister, she also informed me that the 

Department of Health informed them in Eatonia that no one 

would be available for the opening.  And it's hard for one to 

imagine that a department of your size, no one would be 

available for a grand opening in a hospital in Eatonia.  She also 

informed me, Madam Minister, that . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Does the member have a question? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- He's getting there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Get it right now. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- In light of the fact, Madam Minister, that they're 

talking also about off-loading of eight new beds in that same 

facility, my question, Madam Minister, is really quite simple.  

Can you assure my constituents today that there will be no 

further cuts to that particular hospital, and no further 

off-loading; and indeed, most importantly, will that hospital in 

Eatonia remain open? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, with respect to the opening 

of Eatonia, if Eatonia is opening in June, we will have someone 

there. 

 

With respect to his other questions about whether or not there 

are going to be any cuts, etc., I will have to get information on 

the Eatonia situation.  We will be asking the community of 

Eatonia, as we will be asking communities throughout this 

province, to co-ordinate and integrate their services with their 

neighbours, not just in their own local community. 

 

So they will be part of the health care reform that takes place, 

and we will be asking communities to determine what their 

needs are in a larger area than simply their local area.  And that 

is essentially the direction that we're moving and yes, Eatonia 

will be a part of that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Westray Mine Tragedy 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, thank you. I rise today to 

make a statement on the tragic accident at the Westray mine in 

Plymouth, Nova Scotia.  The deaths of 26 men at the mine after 

an explosion believed to have been caused by methane gas on 

May 9 is a real tragedy for the families and residents of the 

Plymouth area.  The explosion is also a reminder of the dangers 

miners everywhere must deal with each day. 

Mr. Speaker, I wish to offer my condolences to the families and 

friends of the 26 miners killed in the explosion, as well as 

commend the rescue teams who worked diligently to find the 

trapped men.  Rescue efforts did not end until it was clear there 

was no hope left for the remaining men trapped inside.  The 

loss of these miners is felt by all Canadians, but especially is 

felt by all Canadian miners, including those in Saskatchewan. 

 

This province does not have underground coal mines, so a 

similar incident could not occur here.  But, Mr. Speaker, this 

province does have underground miners working in potash 

mines, uranium mines, and gold mines.  These miners are 

among those who will be hardest hit by this tragedy for they 

know the risks of working underground.  Again, Mr. Speaker, I 

wish to extend the condolences of this government to those 

who suffered the loss of loved ones and friends in the Westray 

accident. 

 

I also wish to assure Saskatchewan miners that this government 

is committed to ensuring safety standards in provincial mines 

are not only high but also that those safety standards are 

properly met in every mine.  A commitment to worker safety, 

along with strong legislation, can help ensure a disaster such as 

this one does not occur in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan believe that we must 

protect all workers whose jobs present a danger to their lives or 

their health.  This applies to all workers in our province.  For 

this reason our government is reviewing and updating the 

occupational health and safety laws and the worker 

compensation regulations.  Disasters such as the one which 

struck Plymouth can, we hope, be prevented in the future if we 

have a real commitment to work-place safety.  Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Devine: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to take this 

opportunity to join with the Attorney General of the province 

of Saskatchewan in offering our condolences to the families 

and the friends of the 26 miners that were killed in the 

explosion at Westray mine in Plymouth, Nova Scotia. 

 

I want to say to the Attorney General that the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . and join with the Attorney General in saying 

that the people of Saskatchewan felt the tragedy right at home 

in our kitchens and in our living-rooms.  Indeed Saskatchewan 

families had relatives there, young people who were working 

there, and we knew people from across the country who had 

friends and relatives that were exposed to this terrible, terrible 

tragedy. 

 

I want to say to the family and friends of the people that were 

killed, that Saskatchewan has always looked carefully and 

closely at difficulties faced by tragic accidents associated with 

industry.  We have our own mines here as the Attorney General 

has pointed out.  We've had serious accidents in mines, 

accidents in my riding, for example, just as early as last year.  

We've had a long history of farm accidents that have been 

critical.  And Saskatchewan families are very, very close to the 

people who have suffered in accidents like this. 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

I want to specially say to the people who were on the rescue 

mission, the draegermen, that they went through unbelievable 

pain and suffering and anguish as they tried to find their lost 

colleagues.  And people here from across the province and I'm 

sure across the country would, I'm sure, at night say a prayer 

for the people who were looking and finding their friends and 

finding the horrors and discovering the horrors at what went on 

in the bottom of that mine as a result of that deadly explosion. 

 

All I can say is that we really sincerely reach out to these 

people.  We give our sincerest condolences to their families 

and to their friends, and we renew our respect for those that 

work in very dangerous situations.  And we join with the 

Attorney General and the Government of Saskatchewan in 

anything that we can do collectively to make sure that miners 

and people who work in high industry, industrial areas are as 

safe as possible. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I'd like by leave of the Assembly 

to make a few comments regarding this particular ministerial 

statement if I could. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you to all members of the Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I rise today to express, along with the minister, 

my condolences along with the Leader of the Opposition.  This 

strikes home fairly personally.  The disaster took place in the 

area where I spent the first 18 years of my life.  My sister 

works in the hospital, for example, where they brought the 

bodies of the deceased miners to it. 

 

And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if as a token of our sorrow whether 

or not it would be possible for the Assembly to send a copy of 

the message of condolence made by the minister, to the 

families and to the Government of Nova Scotia.  I think it 

would be appropriate for those families and for the government 

to know that we are thinking of them in this time of sorrow and 

that there are those of us who are deeply touched and are 

deeply sympathetic to the situation that our fellow beings 

faced.  Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is that agreed, that the minister, on behalf of 

the Assembly, send the ministerial statement? 

 

Agreed. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- I've asked the Clerks to prepare the 

proper motion so that would happen and go to the families as 

well as community leaders. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is that motion immediately before us? 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- No it isn't. 

 

The Speaker: -- All right, if members agree, we could come 

back, by leave, get back to the item a little later on the agenda.  

Is that agreed? 

Agreed. 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend the Marriage Act be now introduced and read the first 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act be now 

introduced and read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Adoption Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Adoption Act be now introduced and read for the 

first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to 

amend The Child and Family Services Act be now introduced 

and read for the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, if 

I could revert to the motion that we were talking about a few 

minutes ago in the House. 

 

Agreed. 

CONDOLENCES 

 

Hon. Mr. Mitchell: -- I move, seconded by the member for 

Regina Elphinstone: 

 

 That the transcript of oral tributes to the memory of the 

deceased coal miners killed at the Westray Mine, Plymouth, 

Nova Scotia be communicated to the Speaker of the Nova 

Scotia Legislative Assembly on behalf of the Assembly by 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I'm corrected, Mr. Speaker.  I make the motion, seconded by 

the hon. member from Estevan, the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

MOTIONS 

 

Resolution No. 5 -- Health Care Fees 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I intend 

to make some remarks on this particular motion as a follow-up 

to question period and some of the issues that the opposition 

members on this side raised about the concerns that we and 

indeed many of the people of Saskatchewan have about the 

direction into which our health care system is moving. 

 

And there are very deep concerns, as I travel around my 

constituency, about the potentially destructive forces that are at 

work in our society as proposed by the government opposite, 

Mr. Speaker.  And the motion that I will be proposing at the 

conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, is this, and I would 

just like to read it into the record at this time so that those 

people who are listening to the debate as it ensues will know 

upon the basis and the parameters of which this debate is going 

to be following.  And the motion is thus: 

 

 That this Assembly, acknowledging that the NDP 

government campaigned against medicare user fees and 

health premiums, and noting the Premier went so far as to 

write letters to families in the constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg opposing the closure of rural 

hospitals or any other so-called erosion of health care, and 

remembering the statements of the Minister of Health in this 

Assembly irrevocably committing to never impose user fees 

or premiums; conclude: (1) That the government has no 

moral or democratic mandate to impose any form of fee or 

charge for health care; and (2) to acquire a semblance of a 

mandate the government must engage the public in a detailed 

consultative process and; therefore, this Assembly demands 

the government hold full-scale public hearings on health care 

funding prior to any imposition of health care charges on our 

people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that is the basic premise of the position that the 

opposition is taking.  And that is that members on the 

government side were elected and they were elected primarily 

on the premise that when they formed government they would 

be spending more money on health care, education, 

universities, etc. 

 

And the last thing that particularly the Minister of Health 

would have told the people of Saskatchewan was that, yes, we 

will impose user fees.  Yes, we will de-insure optometric 

services.  Yes, we will do away with chiropractic-insured 

services and that we will do away with insulin for the diabetic 

patients of this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(1445) 

 

And that is the concern that we have, that members on the 

opposite side were elected essentially under false pretences, 

where they always said we will do this.  But now we are 

finding out that they are doing precisely the opposite.  That is a 

concern, Mr. Speaker, that those are the types of choices that 

members opposite are making. 

Because those are choices, Mr. Speaker, that need not have 

been necessary had they taken some of the suggestions and 

some of the policies that this administration was proposing, Mr. 

Speaker.  But obviously the people on October 21, 1991 took a 

look at both of our proposals, they took a look at both of our 

platforms for the election, and they said and they saw that the 

NDP (New Democratic Party) were promising to do more with 

less. 

 

So when you compare that type of a policy, and when you 

compare that type of a platform, Mr. Speaker, to what we were 

saying which essentially was, yes, we are going to harmonize 

with that hated and dreaded GST (goods and services tax), that 

harmonization was a way to access $181 million for the people 

of Saskatchewan; not just Saskatchewan money, Mr. Speaker, 

but federal money that would flow into Saskatchewan as a 

result. 

 

But the people saw that 7 per cent on a hyperbole of public and 

press opinion being exploited at the time and they said, well 

why should we do that?  Why should we tax ourselves by 

voting for the Conservatives if we can vote for the NDP and 

get more for less.  So I don't blame the people of Saskatchewan 

for making that decision back in October 21, 1991.  I don't 

blame them at all. 

 

But what I do blame the members opposite for is knowing full 

well the economic status of our financial position in the 

province of Saskatchewan and still going out on the hustings 

and saying, we can do more for less.  We can do more for less.  

And the people bought it -- they bought it.  They bought the pig 

in the poke.  And I know whereof I speak when we start talking 

about a hog industry. 

 

But now, Mr. Speaker, the reality of it is, when we start taking 

a look at what is happening to our health care system -- and 

that's precisely what this motion is trying to address -- we see 

exactly the opposite happening.  And that is the concern that 

we have.  Because when we take a look at the budget that was 

presented, Mr. Speaker, we do find indeed that it was a 

complete betrayal, a complete betrayal to the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

It confirmed this side's conviction, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP 

Party would say anything, would do anything, at all costs, 

because after all, the important thing was to get elected and to 

form government and to fulfil lifelong dreams of certain 

members of the opposite side. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion proves that fact.  And I could bring 

literally volumes and volumes of Debates and Proceedings of 

this legislature, of this Chamber, and I could randomly, Mr. 

Speaker, turn to any page, and on that page I'm sure I could 

find several references to health care and what the people . . . 

or what the NDP rather, would do to health care if they were 

fortunate enough to form a government. 
 

And that's the basis of the opposition's standpoint.  Again I 

repeat, that these cut-backs not -- and I want to make this 

crystal clear, Mr. Speaker -- not that we as an opposition have 

any hang up for efficiencies within the system, because it is a 

known fact throughout this great nation of ours that in the 

direction to which the health care system and the health care 

spending has gone, it is not a 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

bottomless well.  And we were quite prepared to improve the 

efficiencies of the health care system, but not in the manner 

and not in the mean-spiritedness of what is going on with 

members opposite.  And particularly the betrayal that is 

involved in them having said always, we will never cut back.  

We will always spend more.  That is the crux of the issue, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Because they did say they would always spend more.  You can 

find references to how they would increase funding to health 

care, how they would pay nurses more money, how they would 

never, never impose fees or premiums, how they would bring 

back the old school-based dental plan -- the old school-based 

dental plan.  Well we're not hearing too much about that right 

now, Mr. Speaker, because the dental plan apparently has no 

plan, and we're still waiting with a great deal of anticipation as 

to how that will finally and ultimately play itself out. 

 

We always heard, Mr. Speaker, how they would restore the 

prescription drug plan.  After all, Mr. Speaker -- I'm sure your 

memory is also as long as ours is -- that the NDP did claim that 

the 125 deductible brought in by the former government, 

ourselves, was destroying medicare.  That's what they said. 

 

We were trying to build in some efficiencies.  We were trying 

to make sure that health care for seniors, for heavy drug-users, 

was properly monitored for the welfare of the seniors and for 

the welfare of the prescription drug plan itself.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, $125.  We are now looking at $380, $380; $150 if 

you're a senior -- double.  Some are more than triple.  What 

does this do, Mr. Speaker?  What does this do to the health care 

system if $125 was destroying it? 

 

Mr. Speaker, the litany of promises can be traced and have 

been traced.  The members opposite repeated these promises to 

special-interest groups, to the media, to the elderly, and 

certainly as I know quite well, to those requiring medical 

assistance. 

 

Now the NDP members opposite, the NDP Party, spent nine 

years, spent nine years on the opposition benches plotting, 

planning, scheming their health care platform.  This platform 

was . . . over that long period of time and if you say something 

long enough and if you say something often enough, if you 

repeat yourself enough times, well, then it becomes entrenched 

in people's minds and that was entrenched in the people's minds 

by the time the election rolled around. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was solemnly repeated daily by NDP 

candidates during the election campaign.  But the sad part, Mr. 

Speaker, is that immediately upon forming government these 

health care promises were broken, one by one, two by two.  

They are being broken on a consistent basis. 

 

And it didn't take the NDP long to figure out how they could 

get out of their election promises.  And how did they do that?  

How are they at getting out of their election promises?  We 

heard it this afternoon again during question period, where on 

at least three separate occasions I have tried to get some hard, 

cold facts, direction, plans, out of the Minister of Health.  And 

what 

do we get?  Rhetoric, party policy, party song-book.  That's one 

thing I have to give the ministers credit for.  At least they're all 

singing off the same song sheet in their answers.  And what is 

that?  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's blame. Blame someone else, 

blame the former government, blame the media, blame the sick 

people, blame the federal government -- blame, blame, blame. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, is there any acceptance of responsibility, 

because with the confidence that the people of this province 

placed in the members opposite during the election by winning 

55 seats, which is a tremendous achievement, with that, Mr. 

Speaker, I think the people of this province have the right to 

expect some leadership, some firmness, some direction from 

members opposite.  And obviously it is sadly lacking as we go 

along, as they put the blame on everyone else, from the Tories 

to the feds. 

 

And during one of the question periods last week we heard the 

blame being put upon the hospital boards.  That the decision to 

cut back nurses in Regina, for example, was the responsibility 

of the Regina Health Board, not the Minister of Health, not the 

Premier of this province, and certainly not the NDP members 

across the way. 

 

Today, this afternoon in question period we heard the blame 

now was being put on hospital administration.  The blame was 

being put on Tony Dagnone.  It was his decision to amalgamate 

the two wards.  It was his decision to put a three-year-old 

together with an older 16-year-old cancer patient and have 

them sitting in the same ward. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, you can point the finger, you can bloat the 

figures, but ultimately what happens is that this government is 

going to be held accountable for its actions.  If they do not 

accept the responsibility, I submit to you and I suggest to you 

that the people of this province will certainly lay accountability 

at their doorstep. 

 

And so it hasn't worked.  It hasn't worked, Mr. Speaker, 

because the people do remember.  Each and every time the 

citizens of this province have to dig their hands into their 

pockets, deeper and deeper, to come up with money to pay for 

utility increases that we've experienced right across the piece, 

not only . . . And the damaging thing there, Mr. Speaker, is not 

only for this year, not only for profitable corporations and 

profitable companies that are making $60 million in five years, 

but we've already been told that this is going to be an automatic 

increase, that next year you're going to have to dig a little bit 

deeper, a little bit deeper until the hands of the people in this 

province are actually going to go sticking right through their 

pockets because there won't be anything left. 

 

They're going to have to dig deeper into the pockets to come up 

with money to pay for user fees, user fees to see the 

chiropractor.  Mr. Speaker, the people remember.  They 

remember each time they pay a user fee to see the optometrist.  

They remember -- the optometrists, the chiropractors. 

 

We can look at the fact that the throne speech indicated that 

this government intended to be open, that this government 

intended to be consultative, that it would get together with 

people to come to decisions based upon 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

their priorities, based upon their expertise, and based upon their 

expectations. 

 

And what do we see in the optometrists?  What do we see in 

the chiropractors?  Mr. Speaker, we see no consultation.  We 

see nothing.  The optometrists did not even know what was 

happening until the situation was brought up in question period 

here and they became aware of the fact that it was a done deal 

-- as it was -- with no consultation being involved.  So they 

remember, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The people of this province remember every time they pay for 

their prescription drugs.  They will remember.  They remember 

the promises made by members opposite.  And they remember 

the promises broken. 

 

They remember how the NDP have always said that they 

would improve access to health care -- they would improve 

access to health care.  They remember how the NDP said that 

they would restore the prescription drug plan to what it used to 

be, how they would improve it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I asked the Minister of Health. I asked her, 

too, during question period last week how increasing the drug 

plan deductible for a family from $125 to $380 -- that's more 

than a 300 per cent increase -- how, Madam Minister, is that an 

improvement?  How will the people of Saskatchewan think that 

they have been well done by this government that promised 

that they would do more for less? 

 

And what was her answer to the question, Mr. Speaker?  

Again, typically, it was an answer that was full -- chock-full -- 

of political rhetoric.  She said she had no choice, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Well I would like to tell members opposite that you did have a 

choice.  You had a choice of whether to stick to your election 

promises or to break them.  You had that choice and you made 

a cognizant decision that you were going to break the promises 

that you made during the election. 

 

You chose to tell people during the election campaign that you 

would be open, that you would be honest, and that you would 

listen to them.  Those are the kinds of things that you promised.  

And, Madam Minister, as Minister of Health you have broken 

all of those promises. 

 

Perhaps the most reprehensible action to date was the NDP 

government's decision, as we heard late last week, to continue 

to use taxpayers' money to fund abortions.  Clearly, clearly an 

ideologically driven motivation behind it; that was the basis for 

that decision. 

 

Is that listening to speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, is that listening to 

people?  Is that going out and being consultative?  Is that being 

open?  Is that being honest?  Is that responding to the wishes of 

the people? 

 

(1500) 

 

Now when 63 per cent of the people say no, I would suggest, 

Mr. Speaker, that they probably mean no.  And yet this 

government decides yes, we're going to do it 

anyway.  We have a few legal opinions, and the legal opinions 

that we have say that you can't do it without breaking the 

constitution, without human code of rights -- all of these kinds 

of sayings.  And they do not have the intestinal fortitude to 

stand up and take it to its ultimate conclusion, which would be 

to take it to the courts.  Let the courts decide.  It's not going to 

cost you anything.  And make a decision at that stage and have 

it drawn to its logical conclusion so that indeed you would have 

been listening to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

So you made the choice.  Three hundred thousand people -- 

over 300,000, I should say, Mr. Speaker, voted against publicly 

funded abortions.  And so you people made the choice.  

Madam Minister, you and your colleagues made the decision to 

exclude diabetics from the drug plan, and instead to use 

taxpayers' money to fund abortion against the wishes of the 

taxpayer. 

 

And when did you announce this choice?  You announced it on 

the day masses of nurses were being handed pink slips right in 

Regina -- numbers and numbers of nurses being handed pink 

slips because of your health care budgets cuts.  You were 

cutting the health care budget, but deciding because of your 

ideologically driven motivation that you were going to 

continue doing what the people of this province had said you 

should not do. 

 

Now of course the lay-offs were not your fault either because 

what did you do?  Well you blamed that on Regina's new super 

health care board; it was their decision.  They made the 

decision to do that. 

 

Who did you blame the abortion decision on?  Did you accept 

responsibility?  No.  You blamed someone else again.  Who did 

you blame?  You blamed the lawyers.  You said, we have legal 

opinions, and that removing this abortion from medicare would 

be both illegal and unconstitutional.  Well like I've said, we 

have our opinions on that, and the matter obviously is going to 

have to ultimately be decided by the courts. 

 

I would like to say to the Minister of Health, Mr. Speaker, and 

her colleagues, the only way to determine what the law upholds 

is to take those opinions to court.  This government seems very 

willing to take all kinds of things to court.  Whether it has to do 

with water conservation in the dry prairies or whether it is the 

farmers who are struggling for existence, we'll take them to 

court.  Oh yes, we'll take them to court.  And if we can't win, 

we'll pass a law saying that the farmers can't win regardless.  

Well if that doesn't do well enough, then what we'll do is 

simply say that letter was sent.  We know it wasn't sent, but we 

will deem that it was sent. 

 

So you have a lot of experience in court, and you're willing to 

take issues that suit you to court -- issues that you lose time and 

time again as the water problems that we've had here have 

indicated.  And yet on this particular issue you are saying no; 

we're not prepared to let the courts make that decision. 

 

Well why are they not doing that, Mr. Speaker?  I would 

suggest to you that, number one, they don't want to.  They 

might lose, probably will lose.  I suggest that's why.  And 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

certainly I believe also that they do not have the courage nor 

the conviction to do so.  They don't have the courage and the 

conviction, Mr. Speaker, to stand up for the Saskatchewan 

people's wishes. 

 

If a woman chooses to have an abortion, access will be 

provided in hospital, and the procedure will be fully funded by 

the government.  And the government has made that choice, 

Mr. Speaker, but they claim to remain strongly opposed to the 

establishment of free-standing abortion clinics in our province. 

 

Well what's the difference?  What's the difference, Mr. 

Speaker.  I suggest to you that a baby is just as dead whether it 

was aborted in a free-standing clinic or whether it was done 

under the sanitary conditions provided by a hospital.  In her 

ministerial statement last week, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 

Health stated that her government will work towards lowering 

the rate of abortions performed in Saskatchewan.  If this is the 

case, why are additional doctors being trained to perform this 

procedure?  If more doctors are able to perform abortions, Mr. 

Speaker, the rate is sure to rise and that concerns me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care changes are never easy to impose.  

We found that out while we were in government, and any 

changes that this government would have made would have 

been difficult.  I grant them that; there's nothing easy in that. 

 

Even positive measures are at times difficult for the public to 

accept.  We tend to be creatures of habit.  We tend to be 

creatures of the status quo as being the easiest way out.  Now 

although I admit this to be the case, Mr. Speaker, the public 

must be consulted on implementing any change.  They must be 

consulted because they're affected.  Changes affect the public, 

and they should have that input. 

 

Now when Saskatchewan people went to the polls, they voted 

for a party who told them that they would protect this 

province's health care system.  They voted for the party that 

said that they would never -- never, Mr. Speaker -- ever impose 

user fees or premiums. 

 

There are countless examples that I could quote from, from the 

Minister of Health while she was in opposition as the critic for 

health; countless times where we were berated on a daily basis 

in question period for the slightest change, for the slightest 

accountability, for the slightest efficiency change that we were 

trying to do as a government.  They would never do that.  They 

would always protect the health care system and improve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP reneged on that promise.  One of the 

reasons the NDP were victorious in October was, as I have 

indicated before, because of their health care platform. 

 

Now I'm going to tell you, and I'm going to tell the members 

opposite, that this NDP government has absolutely no mandate 

to arbitrarily impose user fees anywhere within the health care 

system.  You have no mandate because you were elected to do 

precisely the opposite.  You promised them, the people bought 

it, and the people of this province expect you to deliver on 

those 

promises. 

 

We don't want you to go hiding behind the deficit.  The deficit 

is there.  It's critical.  We were aware of it.  You were aware of 

it.  Mr. Gass, Donald Gass, says that himself.  The books were 

always open.  The facts, the figures were there for anyone who 

wanted to read them and was capable of reading them. 

 

And you knew it, because I'm not going to let you get off the 

hook that easily by you saying that you didn't know how to 

read an accounting book.  I think you could read an accounting 

book.  I think you can read an accounting book.  So you knew 

what the conditions of this province were . . . the conditions 

were during the election, prior to the election. 

 

And yet I'm not blaming the back-benchers sitting over there, 

and there are very, very many of you -- in fact, 45.  I'm not 

blaming you for that because the powers that be in your party 

told you that this is the way it must be and you accepted that. 

 

And I can really say that for 45 of you, you were probably out 

there knocking doors in your constituencies and heartfelt 

blaming us for what we were doing.  And I think the people 

saw you as being sincere because you were sincere.  I don't 

think that you thought anything different when you were out 

there.  And you campaigned and said, those PCs are wrecking 

health.  You elect us.  We will put the health back on the solid 

foundation as an NDP government always will. 

 

And I think you went out there and you honestly told the 

people that, and you were so good at it because you were 

convinced and convicted of it yourself.  But I say to you 

back-benchers, you were hoodwinking the people, you were 

hoodwinking the people out there in your constituency because 

you were hoodwinked by the elite circle of 10 -- well, elite 

circle probably of three.  I think that's the basis, that is the basis 

of why you won the election. 

 

So now you're reneging on your promises, now you are 

reneging on your promises.  And the people will remember.  

The people will remember it.  And the member of Elphinstone 

said, I said that already.  I have said that a number of times 

already, and we continue and we plan to continue to say that 

many, many times because we will remember, and the people 

of Saskatchewan will not forget that they were hoodwinked. 

 

So I say again, you folks over there have no mandate to 

arbitrarily impose user fees of any kind.  So far you've done 

that totally without consultation.  You have not gone to the 

affected groups, the medical providers nor the medical users in 

this province.  You have not gone to them, you have not 

consulted them, you have not asked them: can we cut you out?  

Can we disenfranchise you?  Can we disinsure you, de-insure 

you?  You have not done that.  Not until after the fact do these 

folks find out . . . or just prior to them finding them out because 

of some information that we have brought forth in this House. 

 

So regardless of what the Minister of Health may state, no one 

was consulted on the NDP health care changes.  The 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

Saskatchewan Medical Association was not consulted, 

chiropractic association was not consulted.  Optometrists tell 

me they had no idea what was going on till a couple of days 

before the budget when we brought it up in question period.  

The optometrists were not consulted.  And certainly the people 

of this province were not consulted. 

 

If proper consultation was conducted, I think that the people 

within the NDP Party would have been surprised.  No one 

would disagree that perhaps some fees must be levied with 

health care.  I've told you that before.  I talked about that 

before.  This party has no opposition whatsoever of instilling 

efficiencies within the system.  And in fact that's the only way 

that we can support our health system in the future.  We 

recognize that.  We recognized that prior to October 21.  You 

folks did not.  You chose not to. 

 

The point is, Mr. Speaker, what services are going to be 

affected?  What services?  Is it better to tax the sick or is there 

a better way?  And I know that there is a better way, and I 

know that the people of Saskatchewan know that there is a 

better way.  So this government must consult with the people 

who elected them.  And this government must consult with the 

people who are going to be affected by the changes that they 

have decided that they must impose upon the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker . . . I don't suggest to you.  I 

make this emphatic statement, that you must hold full-scale 

public hearings on health care funding because you have no 

mandate.  You have no mandate.  You must go to the people 

and say: whoops, we goofed; we were elected under false 

pretences.  We pulled the wool over your eyes; we said we 

weren't going to make changes; we said we were going to do 

more with less.  Yes we knew what the situation was like, but 

we wanted to get elected.  We are elected.  And now that we're 

elected we're going to have to do exactly the opposite of what 

we said. 

 

And we want you to go back to the people and say that, admit 

it, own up to it and take ownership of the responsibility that a 

government has to accept.  And go to the people and say: all 

right, this is where we're at.  Now what? 

 

So you have to go to the people and get direction.  And this 

government must serve the people of this province, not the 

ideologically driven party that they belong to.  And as we have 

witnessed now in the abortion issue, as we have witnessed with 

AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) memorandum of 

agreement, where ideologically driven components within the 

party are dictating to the rest of the back-benchers who know in 

their heart of hearts what is right, what should be done, but 

sorry we can't do that because of party discipline, and some of 

the party members and so on that are saying this is what we 

must do. 

 

(1515) 

 

So if they were truly an open government they would admit 

that they have gone back on their word.  And so, Mr. Speaker, I 

ask you why would the NDP members of this legislature not go 

to the people if this government wants to gain an ounce of 

credibility.  And when I'm in my 

constituency I know that you folks are sorrowly lacking that at 

this moment.  And when you go back to your constituency I'm 

sure that your folks are telling you the same thing. 

 

So at this point in time, if they truly believe their health care 

changes are right, then they would go to the people.  They 

wouldn't fear what the public has to say to them.  They 

wouldn't take that bunker mentality that they are so quickly 

developing and rather go out and actually meet the folks. 

 

They wouldn't be afraid, Mr. Speaker, to face our province's 

nurses and doctors.  They wouldn't fear the sick and the elderly.  

They wouldn't fear all those that are affected by this massive 

betrayal. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I want to ask government members 

opposite to stop the political games.  I ask that they stop and 

consider what their taxes and health care changes are doing to 

the people of this province. 

 

This moving budget that was just brought down, Mr. Speaker, 

is having dramatic, drastic effects on my constituency, mainly 

agriculturally based, where people are saying, if we could 

move these barns and the pits that are associated with them into 

Alberta, we would do that, because we are no longer 

competitive.  The competitive advantage, the competitive edge 

has been severely dulled. 

 

So I want these members opposite to consider the impact of 

what they are doing to the people of this province.  We are in 

tough times, Mr. Speaker.  I don't think anyone on this side is 

going to dispute that.  But what is happening here is that the 

government is making things tougher on the people than it need 

be. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 

Souris-Cannington, pardon me . . . the member from 

Souris-Cannington, I move: 

 

 That this Assembly, acknowledging that the NDP 

government campaigned against medicare user fees and 

health premiums, and noting the Premier went so far as to 

write letters to families in the constituency of 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg opposing the closure of rural 

hospitals or any other so-called erosion of health care, and 

remembering the statements of the Minister of Health in this 

Assembly irrevocably committing to never impose user fees 

or premiums; conclude:  (1) That the government has no 

moral or democratic mandate to impose any form of fee or 

charge for health care; and, (2) to acquire a semblance of a 

mandate the government must engage the public in a detailed 

consultative process and; therefore, this Assembly demands 

the government hold full-scale public hearings on health care 

funding prior to any imposition of health care charges on our 

people. 

 

I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



478 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure 

for me to address the Assembly today.  The resolution before 

us is an important resolution for many reasons.  It deals with 

medicare in our province.  It deals with honesty and integrity.  

It deals with democracy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in both the responses to the Speech from the 

Throne and during the budget debate, my colleagues and I have 

repeated many of the promises made by the NDP.  I realize we 

have talked in great length about a few in particular  

_- those being the NDP promises of open and honest 

government and listening and consulting with the people of this 

province. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, even though we have discussed other 

instances where this government has made no effort to listen, 

no effort to really consult with the public . . . like the plebiscite 

questions, the changes made to the GRIP (gross revenue 

insurance program) program, not consulting with SUMA 

(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) or the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association and other organizations 

before making drastic changes to health care, municipal 

funding, and the like. 

 

All of these, Mr. Speaker, are examples of the NDP forging 

ahead with their caucus mandate and not the mandate given to 

them by the people who elected them.  The people believed -- 

believed -- the NDP when they said: we will not impose health 

care premiums on this province.  The people believed the NDP 

when they said they would increase health care spending and 

improve services and benefits. 

 

The people believed the NDP then.  But, Mr. Speaker, they 

certainly no longer feel that way.  As a result of this 

government's misplaced priorities, every family, every senior 

citizen, everyone is affected by the betrayal from the members 

opposite me today.  The opposition to this government does not 

come solely from my colleagues sitting beside me here today, 

Mr. Speaker, but from MLAs (Member of the Legislative 

Assembly) across from me, from people in NDP 

constituencies, from union members, and the list goes on. 

 

In fact I have with me a one-page pamphlet that is being 

handed out in the Rosetown-Elrose constituency at several 

different events before the budget was announced.  Mr. 

Speaker, the title of this pamphlet reads: "Defend Medicare". 

The pamphlet goes on to say, medicare is under attack by the 

NDP government, that the NDP government plans to increase 

drug plan deductible to as much as double the $125 presently. 

 

Mr. Speaker, little did the people who put this pamphlet 

together know that it would actually triple, that it is rumoured 

cabinet is considering user fees for chiropractic services and 

increased ambulance services, and, Mr. Speaker, that the 

heaviest burden is felt by elderly, the chronically ill, and those 

with young families. 

 

The rest of the pamphlet urges the people who stand opposed to 

these changes to contact their MLA and join together to defend 

medicare.  And I'll quote from the last three lines of this 

pamphlet: 

To oppose Medicare premiums and user fees phone Berny 

Wiens, MLA . . . 

 

 Urge the Rosetown-Elrose NDP constituency executive to 

take a stand in defence of universal Medicare.  Contact 

executive members. 

 

 This leaflet was produced and funded by members of the 

New Democratic Party.  For additional copies phone . . . 

 

This is not the only document of its kind, Mr. Speaker, but it is 

certainly interesting because it is being handed out and funded 

by members of the New Democratic Party.  Members of the 

NDP, Mr. Speaker, having to fight their own party to hold true 

to their promises, to honour pledges of an open and honest, 

consultative government -- members of their own party, Mr. 

Speaker, their own card-carriers. 

 

If the members opposite aren't even listening to members of 

their own party, who are they listening to?  Who, Mr. Speaker?  

The president of the Saskatchewan Medical Association said 

the NDP did not consult his organization.  The president of the 

Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association said they were 

not consulted.  The SSTA, Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association, was in the rotunda the day of the budget asking 

other people what had been said about education.  It is more 

than obvious their organization was not consulted.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, the single mothers and the home-makers enrolled in 

the Saskatchewan Pension Plan weren't consulted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the list of organizations, groups, and individuals 

who are desperately trying to be heard by this government goes 

on and on.  They deserve to be listened to, not just because we 

live in a democracy, Mr. Speaker, but because the NDP 

promised they would listen.  Not only did they promise to 

listen more and care more and spend more than the previous 

administration, they scared people into thinking medicare 

would be gone under the Tories. 

 

The members opposite tried to use scare tactics with the people 

in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg.  They have tried it in many other 

constituencies, Mr. Speaker.  They even tried it last October.  

The Saskatchewan Government Employees' Union publishes a 

news-letter called Union Matters, and in the April '92 issue is 

especially interesting because it deals with the subject at hand. 

 

It reads, and I quote: 

 

 As we go to print, news reports claim the NDP government is 

about to impose health care premiums, raise the drug plan 

deductible and levy deterrent fees on ambulance trips and 

chiropractic services.  Romanow has not confirmed or denied 

the allegations.  "There are no sacred cows. We're examining 

everything," he told reporters in Saskatoon. 

 

 But that's not what Roy Romanow said during the 1991 

election.  Instead, the NDP leader accused 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 479 

the Conservative government of having a "hidden agenda" to 

cut health care.  In an October 6 news release, Romanow 

stated: 

 

 "This hidden agenda shows the PCs are looking at changing 

the health care system to make Saskatchewan residents pay 

30 percent of their chiropractic and optometric services . . . It 

also shows a PC government would look at raising the 

Prescription Drug Plan deductible . . . 

 

 "These planned cuts to health care and other services 

underscore the need for a responsible and caring government 

in this province.  They strike directly at the people who are 

least able to afford further changes to our health care system: 

the elderly and the ill.  These people cannot afford four more 

years of callousness and cutbacks -- no one can." 

 

To quote from the editors of the Union Matters says, "We 

couldn't have said it better." 

 

It is obvious from this publication that the NDP did not consult 

with the unions either, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, this Premier 

said it would be callous to implement these health care 

measures.  He said no one could afford it.  But he has done it.  

He has implemented premiums on health care.  He has raised 

the drug plan to triple -- triple, Mr. Speaker -- what it used to 

be.  And, Mr. Speaker, he has levied deterrent fees on air 

ambulance services, imposed premiums on chiropractic and 

optometric services and more, all of these things, Mr. Speaker, 

that before October 21 were callous and unaffordable. 

 

I guess the member was more interested in getting elected than 

he was in being honest.  Mr. Speaker, we all know if the 

members opposite would have told the public what they could 

expect from an NDP government they would not be on that 

side of the House.  We also know that they have no intention of 

listening to the needs and the wishes of the people even though 

they campaigned on a promise to do so. 

 

It is time the member from Riversdale kept a promise -- just 

one.  He had better honour at least one promise, Mr. Speaker, 

because he only has about three and a half more years or so to 

govern this province.  And that promise, Mr. Speaker, is to 

listen to the people on the issue of health care in Saskatchewan.  

Many residents view the health care system in this province as 

a sacred cow, an entity that should never be tampered with.  

And whether or not changes had to be made to the health care 

system, Mr. Speaker, is not the issue. 

 

(1530) 

 

What is the issue, Mr. Speaker, is that the people have been 

misled to believe they would have a say, to believe they could 

voice their opinions on important issues.  The issue is that the 

people of this province voted for a party that promised to 

preserve medicare, to never impose user fees, to increase 

programs and funding to health care. 

 

The members opposite ran an election based on false pretences, 

false promises they had no intentions of 

keeping.  As a result, the NDP does not have the mandate from 

the people of this province to do what they are doing to 

medicare -- no mandate, Mr. Speaker.  They should not allow 

all of the increases in health care services and all of the 

decreases in funding come about until consultation has taken 

place. 

 

Why not hold public hearings to see how the people feel about 

the new and improved health care system, NDP style?  Why 

not allow the people to hear statements from the Saskatchewan 

Medical Association and their assessment of the NDP's 

restructuring of health care?  They owe it to them. 

 

Before these hearings take place, this government owes it to the 

people of this province to start taking responsibility for the 

decisions you have made in this budget.  Your caucus voted for 

them.  The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg voted for the 

budget which cut funding to his hospital.  Was that the reason 

why he was elected, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Well most of the NDP caucus voted for this budget.  A couple 

of MLAs were noticeably absent during the budget vote.  I 

guess they couldn't bring themselves to betray their 

constituents as easily as other members opposite could.  The 

couple that didn't vote, Mr. Speaker, could not stand beside a 

budget that does go against everything they stood for for many 

years.  I respect those convictions. 

 

It is because of these facts, these kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, 

that the very least this government should do -- the very least -- 

is to hold public hearings across Saskatchewan before all of 

these additional fees are in effect, before the ink is dry on all of 

these changes.  Talk to the Saskatchewan Medical Association.  

Get the input of professionals who have many alternatives, 

many ideas.  Before cramming a premium for chiropractic and 

optometric care down the throats of people, ask the public how 

they would continue these services and still pay for them. 

 

Before devastating any more diabetics because of changes to 

the drug plan, research and find out how it affects these people, 

how it affects the seniors, how it affects families with diabetic 

children.  I think the members opposite are afraid to hold 

public hearings, Mr. Speaker.  They are afraid to face the 

diabetics, the seniors, the families, the nurses out of work, the 

thousands of people who would show up to make their wishes 

known to this government.  But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP's 

cowardly will does nothing to satisfy the needs of the people 

except breed more dissatisfaction with the government party. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP really does owe it to the public to find 

out just what will happen as a result of the restructuring of 

health care in Saskatchewan, even though they claim to be the 

only ones credible enough to make those changes.  If they truly 

feel that this is the best way to handle medicare, what are they 

afraid of?  If the NDP are so convicted, so sure of themselves, 

they should see no harm whatsoever in giving people a choice. 

 

The public would look at public meetings and hearings as a 

step in the right direction, a step towards what the NDP 



480 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

promised for a very long time -- open government.  Open 

government, Mr. Speaker, something the public has not 

experienced from this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP cannot continue to claim they want to be 

open and still take these kinds of steps.  Holding full-scale 

public hearings on health care is the right thing to do, Mr. 

Speaker, the only way this government can gain some 

credibility.  And I hope the NDP will care enough about the 

sick people in Saskatchewan to do what is right. 

 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I second this motion.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, sir, I'm delighted to 

have the opportunity of taking part in this debate on medical 

services.  I cannot in all humility claim to be an expert, because 

I neither have a legal degree nor a master's in business 

administration but 30-odd years of practice on four continents 

should give me some credibility.  And I hope to be able to 

propose an amendment to this resolution at the end of my 

speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sir, Delilah's cry to Samson was, the Philistines 

are upon you.  And it looks like history repeating itself, only 

today it's the hypocrites that are upon us, and will shrug out of 

their feeble efforts just as easily as Samson did.  As far as 

losing one's hair goes, it's not going to make much difference to 

me. 

 

But as in most species, sir, there is usually a greater and a 

lesser variety.  Here we have what is rather more unusual that 

you find it amongst the shrews, a pygmy variety.  The 

opposition foams at the mouth like some dubious TV 

evangelist just found converting a lady of rather doubtful virtue 

in the privacy of some back street motel in the deep South.  

The mover of the motion and the seconder both step into 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, sir, and I warn them that this is 

dangerous territory for both of them because this is my 

territory. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I shall defend it to the utmost, and I will not 

allow its name to be taken in vain. 

 

I would like to refer to question period today and point out that 

the former premier promised Gravelbourg its nursing home in 

1986, and we didn't get it.  He came to Gravelbourg during the 

by-election in 1988, and he sat at the boardroom table with his 

own candidate standing right behind him and said, if you want 

your foyer than vote for this man, or else. 

 

So we elected him, sir.  We still haven't got our nursing home.  

The vastly larger part of the $450,000 that the mover mentions 

was spent long before the 1991 election, because we were sent 

back to the drawing-board time and time and time again -- 

study this, study that, study this again, and study that again -- at 

enormous cost.  We were promised that the government would 

pay half of these costs.  So far we've got $20,000 out of that 

450,000, sir.  So much for the promises. 

But Lafleche, Coronach, and Rockglen have gone gaily on, 

especially Rockglen.  I wonder if you remember who lives in 

Rockglen, sir.  The NDP does oppose the Elmer Schwartz 

report, sir.  We oppose eroding rural health care and 

educational services.  We also oppose the closing of rural post 

offices by big brother Brian in Ottawa.  Perhaps the members 

opposite will pass on the message. 

 

How dare they rant and rave about moral or democratic 

mandate after 10 years of utterly despicable government.  Our 

democratic mandate is reflected in the fact that we have 53 per 

cent of the votes, which is more than the PCs and the Liberals 

put together.  And that gave us 85 per cent of the seats.  That 

gives us the mandate, sir, and the right. 

 

I would like to point out to the members opposite that in 1986, 

although the Tories had more seats, they had less popular votes 

than the NDP.  That made theirs a very shaky mandate, very 

shaky indeed.  And I would emphasize that it was the CCF 

(Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) that introduced 

hospitalization and the NDP that brought in medicare.  It was 

this party that brought in school dental care, chiropractic 

services, optometric services, and the drug plan.  This gives us 

our moral mandate, sir.  Our record stands up to scrutiny, 

unlike the opposition's books. 

 

We have our mandate, sir, in spades, and we will use them to 

fund services, not to pay fat cats to sit on commissions whose 

reports are invariably shelved.  We shall consult, sir.  We shall 

consult widely and wisely and well.  And we shall not fall into 

the trap of spending our money on 19 unidentified thieving 

objects instead of services. 

 

Perhaps the hon. member could explain to the House how it is 

that their federal counterparts can afford to spend $50 million a 

month to kill mothers and children in Iraq at a moment's notice, 

but doesn't have the money to live up to its Canada Health Act 

obligations to the provinces.  They have money for warships 

and bombs, but not for schools.  Is killing cheaper than saving 

lives, or is it different if they're fun little brown men, or red 

perhaps. 

 

Get the federal government to honour its commitments to the 

provinces by restoring the federal transfer payments in health 

and education and social services, and we will gladly reduce 

the health and education tax and the income tax.  We will start 

building the nursing home in Gravelbourg tomorrow as they 

promised in '82 and '86 and '88. 

 

These are the people who ran up a $14 billion deficit and 

expect us to govern with no deficit, no cuts, and no tax 

increases.  These are the party who had 10 deficit budgets in a 

row and have the hypocrisy to put the referendum on the ballot 

sheet last October on whether we want deficit budgets.  I ask 

you, sir. 

 

These are the people who were in power for 10 years and had 

the power to refuse to pay for abortions, but they didn't.  They 

leaned on gynecologists in this province with their immoral 

indignation.  But quietly and permissively, they paid for 

abortions that were done on Saskatchewan women in Alberta 

and Manitoba and down in Montana.  No problem. 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 481 

And then instead of practising what they preached, they put 

another plebiscite question on the ballot, a plebiscite which is 

not binding by their own definition; and in their unrighteous 

indignation, demand that we be bound by a vote which they 

themselves told us was not binding, after 10 years when they 

could have put the matter to rest but chose to prevaricate 

instead. 

 

Sir, they're bankrupt of ideas, they're bankrupt of scruples, 

bankrupt of morals -- and now after having bankrupted the 

province, despite having had an economist as premier. 

 

We are told, sir, that the public is sick of being told that all our 

problems are due to the Tory record of mismanagement and 

malfeasance.  Well I am sick of being unable to introduce 

programs because those unspeakables took out three mortgages 

on the house and then proceeded to pawn the furniture.  Until 

they admit responsibility and attempt to make some restitution, 

I shall harp back on this theme again and again and again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1545) 

 

Mr. Draper: -- Mr. Speaker, sir, enough of that nonsense.  I'd 

like to take this opportunity to air some ideas of my own on 

demythicizing the medical and nursing system.  If this or 

something like it were implemented, it could throw open the 

utmost peaks of the profession of medicine to the toilers in the 

bowels of any hospital basement who cared to put in the effort.  

It would take time and it would take them much effort, but all 

the barriers -- social, financial, and professional -- could be 

hurdled one by one, year by year, without putting someone in 

debt for the rest of their lives. 

 

The seeds of this plant were sown when I was working in my 

first post in Stonehouse Hospital near Glasgow, Scotland, 

30-odd years ago.  There were a group of male nurses in a 

uniform that was foreign to me and they had a qualification I'd 

not heard of in the rarified atmospheres of teaching hospitals in 

the city. 

 

These were men who had fought their way across north Africa 

from Cairo to Tunisia, against Rommel's panzer divisions.  

Then across the Mediterranean to Sicily and ultimately up the 

boot of Italy past Salerno to Rome and beyond. 

 

These were not infantrymen or tankers, sir, they were members 

of the Royal Army Medical Corps who learned their nursing 

the hard way.  They followed the battlefields, picking up the 

pieces of friend and foe alike -- Germans, Italians, British, and 

Australian, largely.  Theirs was a job of attempting to 

reassemble the pieces into working men.  These were the men 

who in the absence of surgeons had to set fractures, amputate 

legs, remove bullets and shrapnel, and sew up gashed open 

bellies -- and do it without benefit of penicillin and sulpha, in 

tents, in swirling sand, and in blinding heat. 

 

In addition, sir, they had to treat diseases like dysentery, 

hepatitis, malaria, pneumonia, and do the bedpan and 

the bottle rounds, serve meals in the tent of the severed 

emotional needs of dying men thousands of miles away from 

home.  Under the circumstances, you'll understand they have 

little experience in delivering babies. 

 

When they got back to the lands fit for heroes to live in, the 

general nursing councils deemed their training and experience 

insufficient to allow them to be registered as nurses on city 

streets.  Instead, sir, they were fobbed off with a status of state 

enrolled assistant nurse, or SEAN for short.  This relegated 

them to the position of lifters of bodies and carriers of bedpans.  

As men, of course they were forbidden access to the female 

wards and they were despised by most of the registered nurses. 

 

Their experience and skills, sir, were thrown away as so many 

yards of . . . (inaudible) . . . and bloody bandage.  They were 

not allowed any credit towards state registered nurse.  If they 

wished to become registered as a state registered nurse, they 

had to do the full three years resident course.  And when I say 

three years, I mean three full years, sir, with two weeks off 

each year for a holiday if they were lucky.  And as these were 

mature men with families, this was completely out of reach, 

and many bitter men were left in this position.  My uncle, sir, 

was amongst them. 

 

This was where it lay dormant in my mind until about 1974 

when I saw a front page article in The Medical Post, which is 

Southam's business publication.  It complained that medical 

school deans could not find suitable candidates for training as 

physicians.  Some schools chose students according to high 

school marks and still had many exam failures.  Others chose 

them for athletic prowess.  Profound at skill at hockey or 

football or baseball did not necessarily make for skill in 

medicine or surgery. 

 

My letter in response to that, sir, suggested that we recruit 

medical students from the ranks of registered nurses, lab 

technicians, and X-ray technicians - perhaps physiotherapists 

and dieticians as well. 

 

Here, sir, we have a pool of skilled personnel who have shown 

their interest in a paramedical field, have succeeded in it, and 

are now practising it.  If we choose our medical students from 

these, sir, we have a self-selected successful group of 

candidates.  They will be far more mature than 17- or 

18-year-old school leavers. 

 

The candidates themselves will have by this time decided if 

they have any interest in a medical career.  During vacations in 

medical school they would be able to work as RNs (registered 

nurse) or physiotherapists at 15 or $20 an hour instead of 

slinging hamburgers at some cafe or life-guarding at minimum 

wage.  This would reduce the necessity of excessive student 

loans or reliance on parental wealth, and allow those of limited 

means the opportunity to enter medical school. 

 

If the path to a degree in medicine is via a qualification in a 

recognized paramedical specialty, there's unlikely to be a 

shortage of students for those courses in themselves.  Should 

they not get into medical school or else drop out half-way 

through for some reason, they would still have a well paid 

profession to pursue. 



482 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

Rapport between physicians and medical auxiliary professions 

would improve enormously if all physicians had been through 

one of these.  An internist for example who had trained as a lab 

tech would be unlikely to order unrealistic blood tests; an MD 

(medical doctor) with a prior RN qualification would 

understand the possible problems that can arise in understaffed 

wards. 

 

Such esteem would necessitate new attitudes from the top 

down, and the mechanisms may require some revision.  But 

this could lead to a new and integrated medical system which 

may well include other disciplines.  But we are in a time of 

radical changes, and I put it to you, sir, that this could be one of 

those changes. 

 

In practical terms, I've got this scheme a little bit out of joint, 

but I'm tackling the chronological order in which the ideas 

came to me.  So if you'll permit me, sir, I shall descend to the 

bottom of the pyramid.  Many of our small hospitals -- and 

Gravelbourg is the same, so was Lafleche, and I'm sure that 

Rockglen and Coronach are no different -- are staffed by 

mature women, usually farmers' wives, tradesmen's wives 

whose children are now adult enough to look after themselves 

and their younger siblings. 

 

Most of these women are untrained and they work in the 

kitchens and the laundries and as cleaners.  Some of them take 

a one-year diploma which gives them the title of certified 

nursing assistant, abbreviated as CNA.  This gives them 

enhanced status, sir, and better pay.  And many of them get 

bitten by the nursing bug and wish to upgrade to registered 

nurse.  The problem is that the RN course is two years long, 

and the year they spent training as CNA only counts as three 

months towards the registered nurse. 

 

So despite their one year they still have two years left to go if 

they want to become a registered nurse.  And they have to do 

that in the one shot.  What I would like to see is some sort of a 

ladder so that the current one-year course leading to a CNA 

would be more comprehensive.  With this, she could practise as 

she is as long as she, or he, wished.  At some time in the future 

she could elect to take a further one-year course which would 

give her further status and an increment in salary.  I've coined 

for myself the qualification name, "enrolled nursing assistant" 

or ENA, but the terminology's not important. 

 

Incidentally, sir, please allow me to use the pronoun "she".  

The overwhelming number of these people are female, but 

access of course would be available to both male and female, 

equally and equitably. 

 

This second-year course could include the now controversial 

subject of distributing medicines.  At present, sir, only 

registered nurses are allowed to distribute medicines to 

patients.  There's a discussion going on at the moment of giving 

CNAs a course in this and then allowing them to hand out 

aspirins, Tylenols, what have you, maybe even castor oil. 

 

This two-year certificate that I'm talking about could then 

practise at this level, again at an enhanced pay and privilege, 

until she decides to take the third year to complete the RN.  

And she would be allowed perhaps to 

distribute pills to the patients, although the pills in fact would 

be put into the little boxes, little cups, by the registered nurse 

herself. 

 

You see, sir, one of the problems is that such women just 

cannot afford to leave their families for two full years.  It 

would be too much of a strain on the family and most simply 

could not afford it financially.  In most cases the reason for 

working outside the home is financial in the first instance. 

 

I understand at the moment that the title CNA is being replaced 

by licensed practical nurse or LPN but this does not affect my 

thesis. 

 

Essentially at this time, a person has a choice to make at 

school-leaving: either go to medical school and become, in 

effect, a commissioned officer, to use military terms; go into 

nursing, laboratory, or x-ray work and become an NCO 

(non-commissioned officer); or remain untrained and enter 

hospital or nursing home employ, sometime as in other ranks.  

The problem is at the moment that it's impossible for the other 

ranks to get promotion in the field and become a commissioned 

officer or even an NCO. 

 

My system, sir, would allow both to run in parallel and in 

series, to put it in electrical terms.  Students could still go 

straight into medicine.  They could go into nursing and stay 

there or they could go into nursing as a pre-medical student or 

they could go in as a nursing aid or orderly and upgrade one 

year at a time and possibly end up as a consultant, heart 

surgeon or neurologist, or stop at any stage along the way that 

they themselves choose and which is not forced upon them by 

financial considerations. 

 

This gives everybody a choice at grade 12 level, a further 

choice at RN level, and the same choice at MD level as to 

whether to continue to fellowship as any doctor like myself 

has.  And choice, sir, is the epitome of democracy, the sine qua 

non of our society, and certainly the society that this 

government wishes to introduce into this province. 

 

No political labels need to be attached to the scheme, sir.  This 

is not a socialist idea, not a Conservative dogma, and it's not a 

Liberal dream.  It's a blueprint for a logical, integrated, and 

democratic ladder of nursing, medical, and surgical skills, sir. 

 

I'll stop at this point, not because I've run out of ideas, but this 

is where I got writers' cramp.  And I would like to make the 

following amendment, moved by myself and seconded by Ms. 

Doreen Hamilton . . . I beg your pardon, by the member for 

Regina Wascana Plains.  I'm reading sir, I'm sorry, I'm reading: 

 

 That all words following "Assembly" in this motion be 

deleted and replaced with the following: 

 

 commends the government for standing firm in its 

commitment to universal health care by keeping 

Saskatchewan one of the few provinces not to charge annual 

health premiums and for showing leadership by expanding 

medicare into a wellness 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 483 

model in spite of the staggering financial obstacles now 

facing this administration. 

 

Thank you, sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to support 

the amendment that is placed before us and to speak against the 

resolution as presented by the small rump opposite. 

 

I would like to point out that there is a reason why there is a 

small rump that does not have representation from any of the 

cities, and it would be the narrow-minded attitude and 

approach to health care that's been represented over the past 

number of years, the sad 10 long years of debt and financial 

mismanagement that's been displayed by the members opposite 

when in government. 

 

People in Regina and Saskatoon understand the preventative 

health care model, proactivity, and the need to look at wellness 

as defined by the World Health Organization that you would 

consider all aspects of life, aspects of social justice when you're 

talking about health rather than just the absence of disease. 

 

(1600) 

 

People of Saskatchewan also know and understand quite 

clearly that this government had very difficult decisions to 

make.  No one likes to be faced with the decision where they 

have to tell people, we require more dollars to run a 

government efficiently and effectively because of what's gone 

on in the past.  No one likes to be forced with the decision to 

decide where you're going to cut back on programs and 

services because you can't borrow to the extent of the amount 

of the deficit that these people have placed before us in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  They know we were faced with 

very difficult decisions and they're not easy decisions that this 

caucus was faced with and had to make. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, people of Saskatchewan know that life is 

very busy and at times they don't keep their eye on the political 

arena, and the members opposite are counting on that.  That 

people would somehow, as the member from Rosthern has 

been trying to do, say that we've been placed in this time and 

space somehow magically without a past record of the last 10 

years.  And I want to point out to the members opposite that no 

matter how hard they try, the people of this province will not 

forget what happened under the Tory rule. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Tories have no credibility whatsoever 

when it comes to either health care or consultation.  We all 

remember that it was under the Tories that funding was slashed 

for mental health, slashed for preventative health services.  

They completely eliminated the school-based dental program.  

And in a quite callous manner one of the members opposite, 

who is now a senator, had said: well I can take my children to a 

dentist, what's wrong with the rest of you?  A very callous 

attitude indeed and not really considering that there are a large 

number of people who are single parent families or people in 

poverty who cannot on a routine basis take their 

children to a dentist.  Or that people in rural Saskatchewan 

somehow can drive in miles and miles to a local dentist to have 

care that they could have in a school-based dental program. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was the members opposite who also 

began the user fees for chiropody treatment, a preventative 

program, a program that was . . . a serious program for many of 

the seniors in our community, and also introduced user fees for 

hearing examinations.  They underfunded therapy programs 

and we all know the desperate need for occupational therapists 

and physical therapists in this province. 

 

It was the same members opposite and perhaps they forgot to 

tell their new members, Mr. Speaker, the extent to which 

they've driven this province into a debt situation. 

 

I know the new members all sit there in shocked silence when 

we talk about this, and deny that they had somehow anything to 

do with this because after all, they're new members of the 

rump, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

It was the opposite members in government, and particularly 

the member from Estevan, who built hospitals based on a 

political ribbon cutting ceremony, and in some instances three 

ceremonies.  After all you have to come out and make an 

announcement and bring everyone with you to show you what 

a television production can do for you when you're announcing 

a new program or a new cement and mortar building. 

 

Then of course you have to come out for a shovel and spade 

turning ceremony so you can turn the ground at which you 

were going to plan to build the hospital.  A lot of shovelling 

happening here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we were talking 

about these projects. 

 

And talk about consultation.  Was there consultation before 

people came out to say, aren't you glad that you're getting a 

new bricks and mortar facility?  You may not have any funding 

available to operate this, or you may not have the proper care 

when you do get the bricks and mortar, but aren't you pleased 

that you are getting it because now we'll be able to cut a ribbon 

in your community. 

 

Many of these communities said with no dialogue, no 

consultation, they were presented with this type of construction 

program; not asked whether there was a better way to deliver 

the services, whether they as a community wanted to see some 

community-based support for appropriate care within their 

community; not asking the local boards or local home care or 

other people to be involved in what is really needed and desired 

in those communities.  No.  Pure political cut the ribbon, and 

here we are with expensive capital project.  We'll worry about 

operating later, or better still, we'll leave the mess with the next 

government and they can worry about it. 

 

Well while eroding direct services, as I mentioned earlier, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, the Tories also refused to acknowledge the 

added cost to health care that was caused by increasing 

poverty.  And here's the crux of why 



484 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

they are not represented by any members from the cities, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. 

 

Under their administration poverty was allowed to flourish.  

We saw that with the increase in the number of children who 

were requiring the food bank to be their main source of food in 

their homes, and the number of people who were put at serious 

risk in illness when they're living in poverty and substandard 

housing conditions. 

 

A callous response to the many kinds of programs and services 

in local communities that would be preventative, proactive, and 

community based.  They somehow disassociated that with the 

idea that you could have good health care if you poured more 

dollars in, in a political short-term solution for a ribbon cutting 

ceremony, and totally forgot that people require good health 

care. 

 

It also means that they need housing, that they need to have the 

ability to feed and clothe their families.  And they need the 

ability to be able to access programs and services when they're 

greatest in need.  They refused to acknowledge and recognize 

the important role of the community groups and NGOs 

(non-governmental organizations) and the role they play in 

maintaining people's health. 

 

As funds were slashed to these groups, they've been forced to 

withdraw services instead during the 10 long years of Tory 

regime.  As these groups spoke out . . . Now here is the Tory 

consultation method.  If you speak out and tell people what 

you're doing to transition houses, what you're doing to mobile 

crisis associations, what you're doing to rape crisis lines and 

sexual assault centres, when you speak out and you tell people 

what you're doing to advocates for those on social assistance 

and you have groups that are speaking out, what you do is you 

in effect put the mum on them by slashing their services, 

slashing their programs, by slashing at the funding available to 

those groups.  Good consultation process? I doubt it.  And have 

the nerve to stand up and tell us that we're not consulting with 

people.  Well that's not the kind of consultation that anyone, 

and this member of the government, believes in. And we 

believe in good consultation with those groups who are active 

out in the communities, wanting to make a difference in health 

care. 

 

But the members opposite are also relying on that people will 

not remember its sad, sad financial and fiscal mismanagement.  

I tend to think it's not the childlike innocence or the nave 

manner in which they ran the province that got them in this 

shape, which it purely was, constantly misleading the people of 

the province about the finances and the deficit situation, 

constantly pouring more and more dollars into something big 

from somewhere else -- we'll do it from Saskatchewan and 

recovery will be just around the corner.  We haven't seen it yet.  

And blatantly misleading the public in the two election years 

where they said in 1986, oops, we miscalculated just a little -- 

$300 million-and-plus were estimated; $1.2 billion later.  What 

do we see again in the 1991 election?  We're told that we 

shouldn't believe the minister of Finance because somehow we 

should know that the minister of Finance is deliberately 

misleading the 

people of this province.  We shouldn't believe . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Order.  It is really unparliamentary to 

say that someone is deliberately misleading.  If you refer to the 

minister of Finance as deliberately misleading that is 

unparliamentary, and I ask the member to withdraw that 

statement. 

 

Ms. Hamilton: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  My intent was that 

someone who would state in a letter to the people of the 

province that the correct financial situation -- and it was well in 

hand -- was indeed $265 million when we indeed again find 

another whoops after the 1991 election and it turns out to be 

well in excess of $900 million, Mr. Speaker, I was referring to 

that incident in the letter from the former minister of Finance, 

Mr. Hepworth. 

 

In 1982 there were promises to reduce income tax, they were 

going to eliminate E&H (education and health) tax completely.  

Instead what do we see?  They were increasing income tax and 

they were going to introduce the harmonized PST (provincial 

sales tax) -- an unfair tax, a tax that wouldn't take $125 million 

in additional taxation that we're requesting that people help us 

to pay the deficit situation in this province, but over $400 

million from the people of Saskatchewan in a blatant tax grab 

that they didn't say would go down to putting down on the 

deficit and reducing the deficit in this province. 

 

They forgot to mention to the people of Saskatchewan that they 

stripped the Crowns and so on.  So everywhere we turned, Mr. 

Speaker, everywhere we looked . . . The next decision we had 

was the debt from SEDCO (Saskatchewan Economic 

Development Corporation), what we were going to do with 

that.  We turn around, we look at the Crown situation and we 

found that not only that, they'd stripped the Crowns and were 

forcing them to borrow to operate and putting that to make 

their deficit look smaller.  And so we had to do something 

about that situation. 

 

And everywhere we turned around . . . I think the next 

nightmare was we were going to open the next door and find 

someone said, you forgot, you owe me $341 million.  And 

some creditors we don't even know about, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

I think of the . . . or, Mr. Speaker, I'm sorry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, they also didn't tell us about many of the 

situations that they were in, and somehow if the new members 

over there in their again shocked and stunned silence forgot to 

tell people that they paid $9 million out to people who we're 

not sure where they worked or what they were doing . . . One 

person was so efficient in not being here and not showing up 

for work that in STC he was paid $54,000 and he was so good 

at doing that, Mr. Speaker, that he got paid $57,000 the next 

year -- a raise for not showing up.  We could point out what 

$57,000 does to provide good health care in the health care 

system. 

 

The list goes on and on and on.  And they say that we're not 

prepared to consult, Mr. Speaker, that somehow the health care 

system where you had a board that looked after the boards, 

who looked after the directors, who looked after the deputy 

director, who looked after the 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 485 

supervisor, who looked after the assistant supervisor, who 

looked after the nursing manager, who looked after the nursing 

assistant supervisor, who then looked after a nurse, who finally 

was someone who was taking care of the patient, was a way to 

efficiently address health care in this province. 

 

So we saw management, we saw the boards and the committees 

and commissions proliferate.  The monies we were spending 

for those people rather than for hands-on care in the health care 

system was somehow their method of saying that we were 

going to keep a strong and adequate health care system for the 

province. 

 

Well the board that we have in place in Regina now did outline 

that there was an Atkinson report that's been released.  It 

advertises in a fairly substantial advertisement what some of 

the recommendations are and asking for consultation.  We have 

people who are asking us to come out to their communities and 

talk with them about their ideas of community-based health 

care.  We're prepared to go out and consult with those 

communities. 

 

We have a long history of consultation with groups and 

organizations.  At this point, we were working on warp speed 

to try and get some of the recommendations from Gass, get to a 

position where we could make some difficult decisions, 

granted, and we will be talking with those groups and 

organizations -- how they impact.  But we want to consult with 

those people and say that we have a way to deliver a wellness 

model and the wellness approach.  And that'll soon be 

launched.  People are excited about that approach. 

 

Instead of trying to bring to mind peoples' understanding of 

that, we're in a difficult situation and we've asked people to 

help us in some small way to maintain a strong medicare 

system which we all fought for and we'll all fight to maintain, 

instead of bashing at us around the edges and corners.  We'd 

ask the members opposite to be more like their counterparts in 

other provinces, where after the premiers' conference this past 

weekend they underlined their government's determination to 

step up co-operative efforts to reform the delivery of health 

care in the western provinces and territories. 

 

We'd ask the members opposite to be co-operative and to join 

hands in the new wellness approach, even though they don't 

understand it or somehow they allude to, as the member from 

Souris-Cannington thought, we had implemented premiums in 

his speech, he said, and alluded to it.  Another way to sort of 

half-speak about what's happening and allude to something 

that's not reality.  We would ask them to join hands as the 

western premiers are doing to look at the wellness approach.  

And the premiers agreed that medicare is the important symbol 

of Canadian unity. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we as the new government recognize that 

health is far more than the absence of disease and far more than 

treating just the illness.  It's very important that we launch a 

broad base perspective on health care, and that in doing so that 

we form new partnerships with Saskatchewan communities to 

promote the development of community-based services.  And 

we will be doing that. 

(1615) 

 

That was the promise on our platform card and that is the 

promise we will keep.  The first thing was getting our financial 

house in order.  The first thing was to make sure we have a 

strong, secure base in medicare, and then to branch out into the 

second generation of health care as contemplated by Tommy 

and others -- the community-based wellness approach. 

 

We want to focus our resources on prevention of illness.  It's 

something the members opposite don't understand when you're 

talking about a very sensitive and very emotional abortion 

issue.  They don't understand that when you're talking about 

that issue that you have to have services for women in this 

society to provide the best life choices for all of us to make. 

 

They don't understand about the good information and sex 

education, reproductive health education, that young people 

need, and in particular, in a day and age where they're faced 

with the illness AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).  

They don't understand the preventative, the proactive approach 

and therefore can't somehow join with us in co-operation to 

address this.  Instead they play short-sighted, mean-intended 

political games with the issue. 

 

As our member from Gravelbourg was saying, they knew that 

they couldn't do anything about the issue as far as in the courts, 

and what they did was put before the people a plebiscite -- not 

a binding issue but a question, knowing that they wouldn't be 

around to answer for that short-sighted, political manoeuvring 

and trickery on the backs of women and women's health in this 

community. 

 

Addressing urgent health needs in northern Saskatchewan is 

very important.  To allow a part of our province, our proud 

province, to become somewhere near and approaching the 

third-world countries in their lack of sewage and water and 

good health services and in promotion of health is a shame -- a 

shame that's gone on far too long and needs the attention of this 

government and the funding to be directed to a part of our 

province that needs our care and attention. 

 

We'll be enhancing mental health services, and that was 

announced in the budget, Mr. Speaker, and encouraging 

everyone to develop healthy life-styles, as I note the member 

from Souris-Cannington maybe, with the cough, could use a 

preventative and a wellness approach to his healthy life-style. 

 

The measures that I've outlined this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, 

these measures reflect our commitment to community-based, 

community-driven health care founded on wellness and 

promotion and prevention.  The people of Saskatchewan and 

my party together, we pioneered medicare.  Today the people 

of Saskatchewan and this government, together we'll forge 

ahead building a new generation of health care in this province. 

 

There were difficult choices in the budget.  And yes some 

people will be paying more, and there may be some ways we 

have to look at alleviating some of the decisions for those 

people who are people who require long-term care 



486 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

and long-term drug use -- people who are asthmatic and heart 

patients and so on, and insulin users. 

 

But we do those decisions with a compassion and concern for 

everyone.  We want to let everyone know we believe in a 

strong health care system for everyone.  And if dollars were 

available, we would be doing the opposite.  Our vision is one 

that was carried forward, and as monies was available we 

pioneered many of the programs like the school-based dental 

program.  The opposition gutted that program, destroyed the 

equipment or sold it off or gave it away, and we're not able to 

return to that as quickly as we would like because of the 

financial mess that's been created in this province. 

 

In returning to a community-based, community-driven health 

care system and one that sparks the innovation and creativity of 

everyone in this province, the budget also pointed to measures 

that would help to reduce the level of poverty and to also help 

those greatest in need in our community and those members of 

our community who are vulnerable. 

 

So we've pledged additional funding for child hunger 

programs, and that will increase by 35 per cent.  We've 

increased grants for child care centres by 21 per cent, after the 

Tory counterpart in Ottawa has devastated that program and 

butchered child care in this country. 

 

We've increased the Saskatchewan Income Plan by $120 

annually.  We've announced the Saskatchewan child tax 

reduction for low income families will be increased by 25 per 

cent to $250 per family per child annually effective July 1. 

 

We've added an additional $28 million to the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan, and the new community employment program 

will create about a thousand jobs.  In addition the transit 

assistance for the disabled will increase by 15 per cent - 

_ quite a different story than the previous government who was 

asking the transit for the disabled to pass on the dollar to the 

local community who could least afford it and also slash some 

of the funding in that program.  We were here and fighting for 

that to be returned to those people who require that for their 

lifeline to their community and to their activities. 

 

Four million dollars has been targeted to meet priority in water 

and sewer infrastructure needs in northern communities, and as 

I've mentioned before, we need much work to happen for the 

North.  And the northern food allowance for the Saskatchewan 

Assistance Plan will be doubled to $50 a month. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're committed to compassionate policies, and 

that commitment is reflected in the budget, and it's reflected in 

the priorities of this government toward a proactive, 

community-based, consultative approach which is very much 

unlike the approach the last government took in all of these 

issues. 

 

So I'm standing before you in support of the amendment that's 

before us, saying that it is here to redirect our resources into the 

new community- and home-based programs and services such 

as home care and others. 

I have a great number of areas where home care underfunded, 

priorities for the disabled were not identified and funded by the 

members opposite; areas of education, areas of training that 

received no attention from the members opposite; areas such as 

suicide prevention that needed further attention and care and 

didn't receive it from the previous government, and so on.  The 

list goes on and on and on of the areas where the previous 

government and the members opposite haven't even begun to 

address those issues and not even begun to say that they'll work 

with us in co-operation on a preventative and proactive 

approach to health care. 

 

They say that their government and the governments that they 

represent were doing better or doing something that was going 

to support health care.  And they quote some of the labour 

representatives where I note CUPE (Canadian Union of Public 

Employees) was saying, and a member of CUPE, the national 

president Judy Darcy was saying:  What is happening to health 

care in Canada is symbolic of the corporate and 

neo-conservative attack by the government in all areas of the 

public sector. 

 

Federal transfer payments to the provinces for health care are 

shrinking.  It's just the number of dollars that we've lost 

because of the off-loading by the federal government, again 

addressed by the premiers in unison this past weekend, is 

phenomenal.  The decisions on generic drugs versus the brand 

name pharmaceutical drugs has had a great impact on the 

funding available to health care in this province and so on. 

 

But Judy goes on to state that federal transfer payments to the 

provinces for health care are shrinking; hospital services across 

Alberta are being turned over to the private sector; privatization 

of the health care system -- the neo 

_conservative corporate agenda for health care, as people 

would know in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I support and would second the amendment to 

commend the government for standing firm on its commitment 

to universal health care, keeping Saskatchewan as a leader in 

health care reform, a leader in community-based wellness 

model that we'll see announced very shortly, and showing 

leadership by expanding medicare into that wellness model. 

 

And in spite of the staggering financial obstacles now facing 

this administration -- and we know that it's difficult when 

you're looking at trying to recapture $700 million in interest 

payments, the third item in expenditures.  Health care 1.6 

billion; our education system 900 million; and then we have 

$700 million out the door, out the window to the banks and 

financial institutions -- in spite of this we're trying to recapture 

those dollars so we can work at restoring a strong vision for the 

people of this province. 

 

I stand in support of the amendment before us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I count it 

a privilege to be able to stand in this Assembly to speak on the 

emotion brought forward by my colleague, 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 487 

the member for Rosthern, and also to address the amendment 

as it's been presented by the member from 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe when we look at the motion and we look 

at the amendment that we have before us today, certainly it 

indicates that health is a topical program and a topical question 

that is before all people in the province of Saskatchewan.  It's 

something that interests each and every one of us. 

 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, I don't know of anyone in this Assembly 

that isn't concerned about health, and isn't concerned about 

health care funding, isn't concerned about what wellness, as the 

members opposite would suggest -- they're looking at bringing 

out a wellness model in Saskatchewan -- about the fact that we 

all want to live healthy and fit and well-cared-for life-styles. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the question as it has been raised by the member 

from Rosthern is the fact just that we want to remind the people 

of Saskatchewan of the many promises made by the present 

government when they were in opposition; and indeed the fact 

that the promises they made then and the comments that were 

made -- even in the by-election in Gravelbourg -- just remind 

people in Saskatchewan that we are going to hold this 

government, and I'm sure the people of Saskatchewan are 

going to hold this government accountable for all their 

promises.  And the fact that they're even . . . the number of 

broken promises. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just also want to take note of a few comments 

coming from the member from Regina Wascana Plains, 

indicating that the former government showed lack of respect 

and showed complete disregard for the people of the large 

urban centres of Regina and Saskatoon by pouring most of 

their emphasis and putting most of the emphasis on rural 

Saskatchewan by building health care facilities across the 

province of Saskatchewan out in the rural areas, and left the 

impression that possibly the former government didn't take the 

time to look at the large urban centres. 

 

Well I want to remind the people of Saskatchewan that not only 

did the former government take the time to look at the needs of 

the rural communities, look at how we can provide better 

service and better access to health care in rural Saskatchewan, 

the former government as well spent and had allocated 

substantial funding dollars -- dollar funding to health care in 

urban Saskatchewan. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, if we were to take a drive around this city, 

and certainly a drive around the city of Saskatoon as well, we 

would find that there has been substantial dollars put into the 

General Hospital in this city, substantial dollars put into 

renovations and construction of new facilities at the General 

which, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest when if you were to ask 

patients who have been at the hospital or patients who are there 

today or patients, men and women who probably . . . or boys 

and girls who will be facing the need of health services, would 

tell each and every one of us that they're sure happy to see the 

fact that the government of the day . . . and the previous 

government did look at the needs not only of rural 

Saskatchewan, but indeed of urban Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Speaker, as well, not only was there money put into the 

General Hospital, but look at the Pasqua Hospital.  And I 

believe, Mr. Speaker, there are many people across this 

province . . . and certainly my colleague from Thunder Creek is 

really appreciative of the dollars that were spent in that facility, 

a facility which is noted for its work in the treatment of cancer.  

And certainly many patients who are forced to lay in bed in 

that hospital suffering from this dreaded disease, I'm sure the 

pleasant surroundings they now face make it a lot easier, 

although we all want to extend to them our deepest regards and 

trust that they will be able to overcome the problems that 

cancer has inflicted on their lives. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you take a look around the province of 

Saskatchewan, and we can go back to Tommy Douglas, the 

former premier of this province, and we've heard it brought 

forward time and time again in this House of how medicare 

was introduced into the province by Mr. Douglas. 

 

I want to also remind the people of Saskatchewan that it was a 

former Saskatchewanite as prime minister of this great country 

who aided and helped and indeed promoted the idea of 

medicare across Canada and also enhanced the program here in 

Saskatchewan.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that 

without the support of the federal government, Mr. Douglas 

and the government of the day might have had a very difficult 

time in really bringing in the medicare program as we now see 

it, introducing it at that time and seeing it expand as we now 

see it here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I look at construction here in Regina and 

construction around the province, and remind people of 

Saskatchewan of the fact that through the late '70s there was 

just a complete lack of funding for capital projects in the 

province of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, we look through the . 

. . from I believe it was 1978 through to 1981, there wasn't a 

dollar spent on capital projects. 

 

And yet, Mr. Speaker, at that time my grandfather who would 

have had and needed continuing care was forced to, in the end, 

Mr. Speaker, we were forced to look at a facility outside of our 

community and ended up in Moose Jaw, which in those days it 

was considerable travel time. 

 

Even today, just thinking back 20 years, Mr. Speaker, the 

ability to get from point A to point B has certainly changed, 

and it is even more convenient. And we see that in the way 

people shop these days, how it's very easy for people in small 

rural communities to drive to our large major centres and do 

the greater portion of their shopping, or even to drive across the 

line. 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning about my grandfather, 

if we would have had that opportunity and the ability to have 

him placed in a home closer to or even in our community, 

which we would have today, Mr. Speaker, it would have been 

lots easier for not only his wife, but for myself as a grandson 

and my parents to have been able to visit him a lot more often.  

And, Mr. Speaker, it probably would have enhanced his ability 

to enjoy life  



488 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

to a greater degree than he did towards his dying days, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government made a commitment to 

health care.  The former government did indicate to the people 

of this province that they were not only willing to support the 

needs of construction of facilities here in Regina and Saskatoon 

and other major centres, but also looked at how they could 

better provide services in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

When we drive into Saskatoon and we see the construction 

taking place on new City Hospital, we see the construction that 

is the upgrading that has taken place at St. Paul's and certainly 

University Hospital, we want to indeed give credit to the 

people of Regina and the people of Saskatoon for having been 

able to put forward a plan that the government could accept in 

helping them upgrade their facilities. 

 

But I also must remind members that people in rural 

Saskatchewan needed access to facilities such as that.  It wasn't 

just . . . I don't believe, Mr. Speaker, it wouldn't have been 

responsible for government to continually tell people, well you 

must travel from wherever you are, whether it's in the 

south-east corner of Saskatchewan, into Regina for your health 

services.  Or whether if you need the care of a care home, that 

you must find it in our large major centres like the Reginas and 

Saskatoons, like the Moose Jaws or the Prince Alberts or the 

Yorktons. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the former government made a commitment.  

And yes, the former government also faced 10 years of 

depressing agricultural prices, of a depressed agricultural 

economy, depressed prices in the energy sector and our 

minerals and our natural resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's also fine and dandy to always look at putting 

the blame on somebody else.  Mr. Speaker, certainly the people 

of Saskatchewan will be watching this government and they 

will be looking at how this government indeed intends to 

implement its promise of compassion and understanding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the present government may 

have already indicated that they really do not have much 

compassion.  They really do not have an understanding of the 

needs of the problems our province faces. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the 1980s under the former 

administration, health care funding . . . or funding to health 

care rose from 700 million in 1981 to 1.6 billion in 1991.  That 

is more than double over a 10-year period.  I believe, Mr. 

Speaker, it was an indication of what the former government 

had . . . its commitment to health care in this province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the resolution presented by my colleague 

talks about the Government of Saskatchewan, the present 

government, suggesting that they would not implement 

medicare user fees and health premiums.  And we're all aware, 

Mr. Speaker, of all the literature and the comments made by the 

NDP, by the Premier of the day, by many of the his candidates 

as they went around the province telling people that if you vote 

for us, we will 

support, we will show compassion, we will indeed provide the 

funding to maintain our health care system, we won't bring in 

user fees, we won't bring health care premiums. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what was it, about three months ago, the 

news broke that the government was taking a serious look at 

possibly implementing premiums, health care premiums in this 

province. 

 

What I found very interesting, Mr. Speaker, and I continually 

run into it every day, is that there are many people in 

Saskatchewan and it would be interesting to do a poll and find 

out how many people really believe that premiums would not 

be such a bad idea. 

 

I find many people stopping me on the street, and they've done 

that since I was elected to this House in 1986, and telling me 

that they see no reason why we shouldn't pay at least some 

form of a health care premium.  And it's an indication to me 

that, Mr. Speaker, many people feel that the cost . . . they 

appreciate the funding that is required to provide the services 

but maybe they feel as well that they would like to at least be 

part of it.  By paying a premium, it would give them an idea 

and a sense of feeling that they contribute to their well-being. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, I believe that people spoke out three 

months ago when the government of the day laid out the . . . I 

would say they put out a fleece to the public just to get a 

feeling from the Saskatchewan people what they really thought 

of health care premiums in light of the fact that they said they 

would never introduce them, they would never bring them 

forward.  Then all of a sudden after the election's over they're 

telling us the finances of this province are in such tough shape 

that, oh they might have to reconsider.  Maybe they shouldn't 

have said that.  Maybe they shouldn't have told the people of 

this province that they wouldn't implement health care 

premiums. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's no one in this province who doesn't 

believe it costs money to provide care to individuals.  All 

people are asking of government is that they act responsibly 

and that they place values on the systems that are most 

beneficial to our community, to our livelihood, such as 

providing the funding to upgrade our health care system, 

providing the funding for education, providing the funding to 

help those who are less fortunate than some of us, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about health care premiums, and the 

thing I find about many people, when they talk about health 

care premiums and indicate that maybe it wouldn't be all that 

bad to introduce a health care premium, I find that many people 

think back to prior to 1978 when the NDP government 

eliminated health care premiums, and they think back to that 

$72 annual fee.  And, Mr. Speaker, they think, well $72 isn't all 

that bad; why don't we bring it back?  Well I would suggest to 

you and the members of this House and to the people of 

Saskatchewan as I have to many people on the street, that if all 

we were to do was to bring in the $72 premium, it would 

probably cost more to administer and collect the premium and 

with very little actually going into the health care budget. 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 489 

So, Mr. Speaker, in that case, when people start thinking about 

it, they say, well you know you may be right.  Then what do we 

do?  Well I guess if we're going to talk about a health care 

premium, we'd have to look at something in the neighbourhood 

of say $400 to be of any benefit to health care funding in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Then again, Mr. Speaker, if you did introduce a premium, if it 

was an effective premium, would it address the problems that 

our health care system faces?  Would it address the abuses that 

we see in our health care system? 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it doesn't matter what area of our society we 

look at, we live in, we're involved in, whether we're involved in 

business, whether we're involved in the agricultural sector, 

whether a health care giver or whether we're an educational 

person, Mr. Speaker, what we find is men and women, we're all 

human, and we always seem to look at ways of how we can 

beat the system.  And certainly our health care system over the 

last few years, there's been strong indications that many people 

have taken advantage of the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, might I suggest maybe a way we could address 

some of the problems, and let me give an example of an 

initiative that was taken by the medical profession in our 

community.  Last summer the doctors in our community ran an 

advertisement suggesting to the people of the community that I 

live in that they could help the funding of health care and help 

address the problems in funding of health care by coming and 

making sure that they made their ongoing medical 

appointments and operated through their . . . went through their 

local clinic rather than coming and tying up time in the local 

out-patient service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how many people in Saskatchewan realize or 

know that every time you go to see a doctor and use the 

out-patient service, that you are paying more than twice the 

cost of seeing the doctor in his own medical practice.  Did you 

realize that, Mr. Speaker?  Or I wonder how many people in 

Saskatchewan realize that it costs that much more. 

 

You know it's interesting when you're talking to people and 

you mention this to them and they say, really?  You mean if 

I've got a cold and I'm in a rush, so I run into the out-patient 

clinic because I might be able to see the doctor quicker, that it's 

going to cost the medicare system almost two and a half times 

the cost of what it would cost if I went to the local health 

clinic?  And I say, that's what the figures are.  That's right. 

 

Well why don't people tell us that?  Why don't professionals let 

us know?  Why don't we know what it costs to run our system? 

 

And so I have to commend the doctors in our community for 

telling people.  This is what they said.  They ran an 

advertisement that said: we are asking you in the public to 

come for any minor problem you're facing or minor ailment or 

any common ailment that you're facing, to make your 

appointments through our medical clinic.  We will have a staff 

person there at 9 o'clock in the morning.  Come to the clinic.  

We're asking that only people that we 

have referred to the hospital for x-ray or blood tests or other 

tests or strictly emergency procedures to come to the hospital 

service.  Because we believe it would be a more effective way 

of providing service and health care to our people. 

 

And certainly when the government of the day talks about 

wellness I would suggest that, Mr. Speaker, we should take a 

moment to maybe put some information out there, and in some 

way look at a way in which we can educate people as to how 

the cost of health care in this province adds up. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that men and women across this 

province would look at ways of how they can use the service 

more effectively if they actually knew what the costs were.  

And certainly maybe, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at other 

ways of putting preventative measures in, or ways of . . . and I 

hate to use the word, but Mr. Thatcher brought in deterrent fees 

a number of years ago, and certainly his government was 

defeated shortly after.  But there must be ways of addressing 

the abuse of our system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just can't take things for granted.  We just 

cannot.  Just take the fact that we've got a health care system 

that is costing each one of us as taxpayers an enormous amount 

of money.  In fact for the people of Saskatchewan at least in the 

neighbourhood of -- what is it? -- $1,600 per man, woman, and 

child, it costs us.  Mr. Speaker, if we were in the United States 

of America or in other parts of the world, we would be putting 

out probably in the neighbourhood of $6,000 a year to get the 

same kind of service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I've been indicating, we need to look at ways 

of making the cost to our system more effective.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, by just taking away the services from people is not 

addressing the problem. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Wascana Plains asks 

members on this side of the House to co-operate with them in 

developing a wellness model for this province.  I would also 

like to suggest to the member that the members on this side of 

the House will certainly be watching very carefully and we will 

be asking the question: what do they really mean by a wellness 

model? What do they mean by providing a wellness model for 

the province of Saskatchewan?  What does their wellness 

model mean?  What all does it entail? 

 

Certainly I find many men and women across this province, 

and teenagers . . . and we just have to walk outside of this 

Legislative Building at noon and at 5 o'clock and we see 

people, from toddlers right up to elderly men and women, 

jogging around this beautiful park.  It's an indication that 

people are taking a very strong interest in their wellness and 

taking care of themselves.  What does the government mean by 

a wellness model, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe over the past number of years and 

certainly since I've been in this House, the former government 

looked at ways of trying to present ideas for people and asking 

people of this province for ideas in how we can address the 

problems we face in health care. 



490 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

Mr. Speaker, the throne speech talked about a consultative 

motive.  We will be looking in and observing the government 

as they implement this so-called wellness model as to . . . we 

will be watching as to how consultative they are with the 

professions and with the men and women across this province, 

with the men and women who provide the services in this 

province.  Or will they show the same consultative effort or 

lack of it that they have shown recently by allowing the 

funding of abortions to be continued in this province.  And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that it's always 

easy to look and blame somebody else. 

 

(1645) 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health even indicated 

today that it would be impossible for them to discontinue 

funding of abortions.  However in an article in the Star-

Phoenix, May 14, it says: "Gov't dithering on abortion doesn't 

sit well with either side." 

 

There is a comment here by federal Justice minister, Kim 

Campbell, has said: 

 

 . . . there is no federal law governing abortions and that it 

falls within provincial jurisdiction to determine what falls 

under medicare protection. 

 

The Minister of Health as well indicated in spite of a strong 

public vote to end publicly financed abortions, the province 

will continue to pay for the procedure, Health minister Louise 

Simard announced Wednesday. And I'm quoting from the 

paper here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the minister stood here in the House and 

said, well they cannot discontinue funding because they have a 

legal opinion.  She said here, if in consultation with her doctor 

-- her doctor, one doctor -- a woman chooses to have an 

abortion, we will provide access.  And yet, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal minister indicates that the provinces have the ability to 

decide whether to discontinue funding of the procedure or not. 

 

I would also like to remind people across this province that the 

. . . oh, there was one other area too.  I want to quote from an 

article where the minister suggests that they had a legal 

opinion.  I want you to listen to a word here, Mr. Speaker:  

those who are glad the government won't attempt to end 

funding abortions can thank the equality section of the Charter 

of Rights and Freedoms.  That section, along with the 

anti-discrimination section of the Human Rights Code and the 

Canada Health Act, were the main reasons why a prominent 

Regina law firm told Health Minister Louise Simard it didn't 

think abortion funding could be even partially de-insured. 

 

Mr. Speaker, their opinion was they didn't think that funding 

could be taken away.  Well what does that mean, Mr. Speaker?  

Were they really certain when they gave that opinion to the 

minister?  It would appear to me that this law firm . . . it was in 

their opinion that they didn't think the minister or the 

government could bring in legislation that would disallow 

funding of this procedure.  And yet at the same time, the 

federal minister . . . and I'm reading from a letter to the editor 

in the Shellbrook Chronicle.  Here's a letter to the editor and it 

says this: 

your refusal to meet with representatives from Saskatchewan 

Pro Life Association forces me to communicate with you in 

this public manner. 

 

And the letter goes on to bring out the fact that the federal 

Minister of Justice, Kim Campbell, has given assurance that 

you have the authority, referring to the Minister of Health, to 

remove such funding.  In fact, this letter also indicates that 

Morgentaler has admitted that one-tenth of one per cent of 

abortions performed are medically necessary -- less than 

one-tenth of one per cent.  And yet over the past few weeks we 

have seen this government allowing Mr. Morgentaler to kind of 

dictate policy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the abortion question -- and 

certainly it's a question that touches the hearts of a lot of men 

and women across this province -- but I would also have to 

remind this House and remind the members opposite that for 

the four or five years prior to 1991 that I was in this House, that 

the opposition of the day continued to berate the government of 

the day for their lack of support for the abortion procedure in 

this province. 

 

And I want to remind the minister and remind members and 

remind people in Saskatchewan that the former government, 

yes they didn't go all the way to de-insuring or discontinuing 

the practice, but they set limitations.  They set guidelines -- 

guidelines which said a woman must be given all the 

information on the traumatic effect that abortion may have on 

their life.  That women must also be reminded of the 

possibilities that they could . . . the health problems they may 

face through this procedure.  The government also, Mr. 

Speaker, limited abortions, or availability to abortions on the 

basis of the approval of two people in the medical profession. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, as the numbers have indicated, because of the 

strong stand taken by the former government, certainly the 

availability wasn't there and the members . . . the present 

government, the former opposition, continually ran down the 

former government for not standing behind the women of this 

province. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to you we were listening to 

a lot of women in this province, because I find there were 

women from all political persuasions, young and old, across 

this province, regardless of race, religion or creed who really 

are in favour of life.  And they believe in life from the moment 

of conception. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the abortion question, it's 

not just a matter of even funding, Mr. Speaker, we must look at 

ways of addressing the problem and addressing the problems 

that . . . And I give the Minister of Health, I commend the 

Minister of Health for talking of an education model of 

informing our young teenagers of the problems that can be 

faced through unwanted pregnancy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about health care in this 

province and we take a serious look at health care and we talk 

about the lack of funding in a number of areas, certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, when we look at the fact that capital projects are all 

put on hold again, a person seriously wonders if indeed we're 

going back to the late 



May 19, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 491 

'70s when indeed there wasn't any capital funding whatsoever. 

 

And I'm not sure, Mr. Speaker, if you were the minister of the 

day responsible but, Mr. Speaker, nevertheless, we must 

continue to look at ways of improving our health care system. 

 

We cannot . . . we will not or cannot improve our health care 

system by taking it away from those who need it most.  Mr. 

Speaker, by taking and raising the annual drug premium from 

125 to $380 is going to put a substantial burden on many 

families across this province. 

 

And just the other day while helping move a piano so the piano 

teacher in our area would have a more pleasant environment to 

teach his students, one of the individuals who came to help 

says:  I didn't realize that our drug premium was going up as 

much as it is.  He said, we meet our $125 level within the first 

three months because of the fact that two of his boys have 

asthmatic problems. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, bumping that $380 a year plus the annual 

deductible going from . . . or the annual deductible rising to 

380, and then the ongoing cost of 25 per cent of those drugs . . . 

or 35 per cent of those drugs, rather than 35 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker, is going to put an added burden upon many families 

in this province. 

 

And you know who it hits most, Mr. Speaker, or who is going 

to feel it the worst?  It's the elderly and it's our young couples 

with families and it's the single women of this province who 

are going to feel it the most, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there isn't a person across this province who 

doesn't believe in paying their way.  There isn't a person who 

doesn't have an understanding at being and doesn't know how 

to be compassionate and want to reach out to help those who 

are less fortunate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, by off-loading the cost of these programs on the 

less fortunate it's going to make it more difficult for people in 

this province to meet their daily needs because of the fact they 

are going to need . . . The finances they need to provide their 

medical services are going to take away from the finances they 

need to put the food on the table.  And, Mr. Speaker, it would 

seem to me, that when in opposition the former . . . the present 

government, the former members, continually reminded us of 

taking money from this person or taking money from over here 

and taking it away from those in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard today too, the Minister of Health 

suggesting that the question of funding in health and the 

cut-backs in funding and the fact that we're bringing the 

government to task on what they promised the people of 

Saskatchewan and what they're doing with their promises is 

indeed just playing in politics. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that the government, 

while in opposition and certainly during the election, played 

with the politics and used health care as a way of trying to or . . 

. and indeed receiving support of the people in this province to 

form the government.  What did the Premier, the present 

Premier, do in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg in that by-election, Mr. 

Speaker? 

Mr. Speaker, I think we all remember and we all can recall the 

pamphlet that went out, or the letter that went out saying that 

there will be no more . . . If you elect a Tory government, all 

your hospitals will be closed down. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what about my constituency?  I want to 

remind the members opposite.  What kind of promises did they 

make in my constituency?  What did they tell the people of 

Moosomin?  The people of Moosomin were promised a 

hospital in, I believe it was the spring of 1989, Mr. Speaker, 

and were in an ongoing process of discussion to put in place 

the programs that were needed to . . . and the information that 

was needed to develop their plans so that they could send their 

hospital to the architectural stage. 

 

And you know what's interesting, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of 

the province, the then opposition leader, was in Moosomin and 

what did he tell the people of Moosomin?  He said if we form 

government, we will not cut funding; we will go ahead with 

your hospital.  What did the Associate Minister of Finance say 

to the people of Moosomin, Mr. Speaker?  The Associate 

Minister of Finance promised the people of Moosomin, when 

he was in Moosomin, that they would get their hospital.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, what do we see?  The budget that's laid out before 

us, Mr. Speaker, the budget has taken away funding for capital 

projects in our province, putting on hold the project in my 

community as well. 

 

And not only has it affected funding for our capital project of a 

facility which is going to need some work on it because of the 

ever increasing cost of maintenance, but in that facility alone, 

because of the funding cuts brought forward in this budget, 

because of the funding cuts to the Minister of Health's 

portfolio, Mr. Speaker, now we find that there are two full-time 

nursing positions that have been eliminated, 13 part-time and 

casual positions have been cut from the work-load in the 

Moosomin hospital. 

 

Mr. Speaker, do you think that bodes well with the people of 

Moosomin?  Do you think that the people of Moosomin 

appreciate what has happened in their community and their 

health facility, Mr. Speaker?  Mr. Speaker, it appears to me just 

from talking to people recently that they're very disillusioned 

and very disappointed and very annoyed because they believed 

that when the Premier of the province was in Moosomin, they 

believed that he was going to do what he said.  They believe 

the Associate Minister of Finance.  They believed that they 

would indeed live up to their promise. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, what we have seen in this budget, 

the people of Saskatchewan believed for a lot more and they 

have become very disillusioned, very disappointed.  In fact, as 

one commentator indicated, Mr. Speaker, they've been handed 

a bitter pill.  And I believe, as we look at it, this bitter pill is 

becoming harder and harder to swallow every day. 

 

And we will continue to let the people of Saskatchewan know 

that we will not . . . we will stand up for them and we will 

continue to remind the government of their promises.  And we 

will continue to let the government know that, yes they were 

elected, they were elected by 



492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 19, 1992 

the people of Saskatchewan to provide responsible 

government.  Not to take it away, but indeed to hand it out and 

provide the funds that are necessary for people to survive, for 

people to continue to live and live a healthy life-style in our 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on for the next three, four, five hours 

and probably the next week, Mr. Speaker.  But at this time, Mr. 

Speaker, I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 4:59 p.m. 

 

 


