




















































Hansard: July 09, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1365 

 July 9, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 

 

Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that 

I shall on Monday next ask the government the following 

question: 

 

 Regarding the Public Service Commission's competition for 

the purpose of hiring farm stress counsellors: (1) What types 

of counselling will these officials offer farmers? (2) What 

types of assistance will these stress counsellors provide to 

farmers? (3) Will that assistance involve any new services? 

(4) During what hours will these persons be available to 

farmers that call the farm-stress line? (5) For how long will 

these stress counsellors be employed and at what level of 

pay? (6) At what distance will they be able to operate from 

government?  And (7) what qualifications are required, and 

who determines what those qualifications are, and how are 

they deemed to be most appropriate? 

 

Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's my pleasure 

today to inform the Assembly of an event that will be 

happening in the city of Moose Jaw, which I think is very 

significant for our city and also for the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that is the official opening of the Snowbirds 

gallery at the Western Development Museum this weekend. 

 

The first public viewing will be Friday evening, tomorrow.  

And it is in conjunction with the air show that everyone in 

Saskatchewan has become familiar with, and I think, 

appreciates as a very major tourist component.  It's particularly, 

I think, nice that Moose Jaw was chosen by the Canadian 

Armed Forces to be the home of the show-case, if you will, for 

the Snowbirds, their history, the impact that they have had on 

aviation in Canada, indeed around the world. 

 

The gallery includes a mock-up of the control tower, other 

paraphernalia, an actual airplane that go along with the 

Snowbirds.  And I guess the highlight of the whole display, Mr. 

Speaker, is a Cinema 180 which is a poor man's version, if you 

will, of an IMAX theatre but it was the best that could be done 

under very limited budgets.  And I must congratulate the 

manager of the Western Development Museum and all her staff 

for putting this together, because it has the potential to draw a 

lot of tourists to our province, indeed to our city. 

 

And I would just ask all members of the Assembly, if they have 

the opportunity in going past Moose Jaw or in for the air show 

this weekend, that they take the opportunity to go to the 

Cinema 180 at the Western Development Museum and fly with 

the Snowbirds.  And I think it'll be 

very worthwhile. 

 

And they tell me that you should hang on to your seat because 

if you're weak of stomach and heart that it may be more than 

you can take.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to 

make a statement today on a matter which has been very near 

and dear to my heart and to members of this side of the House 

and indeed to the people of Saskatchewan.  Yesterday, Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Finance announced that $560 million 

worth of Saskatchewan savings bonds had been purchased by 

the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding that that is a 

record placement by any province in the history of this country, 

and is indeed four times larger than the amount projected by 

this government. 

 

It means, Mr. Speaker, the purchase of those $560 million of 

bonds, it means that we won't have to borrow $560 million 

from foreign financial institutions in New York or Zürich or 

Toronto.  It means, Mr. Speaker, that the interest on that 560 

million won't leave the province but in fact will go into the 

pockets of Saskatchewan people to help rebuild this province 

over the coming years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, more 

importantly it means this.  It means that the people of 

Saskatchewan, when shown leadership as the type shown by 

this government, will rally around to provide the solutions to 

the problems that face us.  It means that the people of 

Saskatchewan are ready to get on with the task of rebuilding 

this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to express my congratulations . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Atkinson: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

rising today to talk of the accomplishments of our community 

employment program.  In just a few months of operation the 

program has created 563 jobs in Saskatchewan, and by the end 

of the year we expect that over 1,000 jobs will have been 

created. 

 

The community employment program was implemented by our 

government to help persons receiving social assistance find 

employment and receive training.  The community 

employment program is based on the belief that people in our 

province want to work.  And the results of the program have 

confirmed this belief. 
 

The program is designed to provide maximum benefit to our 

communities and to the participants.  For the 



1366 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

participant, the job provided is part of a career planning process 

that provides both work experience and training.  We have 

ensured that nobody becomes worse off by working.  

Supplementary health coverage, for example, is maintained by 

the people who are employed in the program. 

 

The community employment program also is providing 

important services to our communities.  For example, in my 

own riding Services for Seniors has been given assistance to 

operate an innovative composting project.  The project 

combines assisting seniors to maintain their yards and thus live 

independently, with the composting of grass clippings and 

other vegetation. 

 

This innovative program gives work to assistance recipients, 

helps seniors stay in their own homes, and takes a small step to 

protecting the environment.  This is the type of imaginative 

project that the New Careers . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  The member's time has elapsed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Economic Development and 

Trade announced a new tourism destination program in 

Saskatchewan.  Today I'm glad, pleased and privileged, to 

stand with the member from Thunder Creek and the member 

from Moose Jaw Palliser in welcoming Saskatchewan's newest 

tourist destination, that being the Snowbirds gallery in the 

Western Development Museum in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as you well know and as all members know, the 

Snowbirds Canadian Armed Forces precision flying team is 

based in Moose Jaw.  They have performed across this nation 

and across this continent to literally millions of people and 

have won a reputation as the best precision flying team in the 

world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- The gallery in the Western Development 

Museum in Moose Jaw celebrates this fact and will give us, as 

the member from Thunder Creek points out, a hands-on 

experience of the Snowbirds.  This is destined to become a 

major economic boost to the community of Moose Jaw and for 

the province of Saskatchewan through increased tourism. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this gallery is the result of a partnership between 

the private sector, volunteers, the Western Development 

Museums, the provincial government, federal government, and 

many people who have worked hard, including and especially 

Lynn Johnston and the staff at the WDM (Western 

Development Museum). 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Mr. Speaker, across the province there are 

billboards appearing now which will say, come fly with us at 

the Snowbirds gallery.  Tonight the Premier of Saskatchewan 

will be at the gallery.  I invite all members in the course of this 

session to take the opportunity to visit 

Moose Jaw and the new gallery. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It gives me a great 

deal of pleasure to report to you on the 13th annual 

media-MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) ball game.  

This event began in 1980.  In 1982 the trophy was dedicated in 

memory of the late Michael Sharpe, a reporter who passed 

away suddenly that year. 

 

Picture it if you would, Mr. Speaker: a beautiful evening, the 

sun still high in the western sky, the ball diamond groomed to 

perfection.  Baseball fans have been waiting for this event for a 

long time.  For you see, Mr. Speaker, this was a tie-breaker, 

each team having won six games apiece. 

 

Then I heard the familiar cry: play ball.  We took the field first, 

but the pitcher's mound was empty.  Surely something was 

wrong.  Then it began, barely audible at first, and grew into a 

deafening roar: Serge, Serge.  From out of the dugout came 

Serge Kujawa, with his usual flair.  He doffed his traditional 

golf hat and bowed to the crowd.  They loved it. 

 

Our team was so professional, Mr. Speaker, never casting 

aspersions on the opposition once, but always encouraging 

them, for there were several within our ranks who actually 

believed they had a chance to win this one. 

 

It was late in the inning, Mr. Speaker.  It was late in the ninth 

inning, Mr. Speaker, and the game was tied.  Things were 

looking very good for us.  A ball was driven by Trew to deep 

centre, but Mandryk makes a shoe-string catch -- or so he 

reports -- guns it to Traynor on third, over to Foster on second, 

who displayed her usual dexterity, leaping high into the air and 

pulling the ball down to retire the side. 

 

What would we do?  Stop and call it a tie?  The crown 

screamed: more, more!  The decision was made.  The game 

would go on.  With the game tied at 11, we went into the 10th 

inning.  Quickly the opposition fell -- swish, swish, swish.  

Serge was hot. 

 

Our bat again, runners on first and second.  Suddenly Flavel 

pulls a muscle.  Who was left?  What could we do?  There was 

only one person left, and that was the lady who had cared for 

us so well during the game and brought us this far  

_- our bat lady.  Out of the dugout she came, knocked the mud 

off her cleats and stepped into the batter's box.  The crowd was 

silent.  One pitch, Mr. Speaker, it was gone deep into left field.  

I still get goose bumps thinking about it.  And the moral of the 

story, of course, Mr. Speaker, is: it ain't over till the bat lady 

swings. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Sonntag: -- Finishing it on a serious note, Mr. Speaker, as 

a result of the game there was a total of $115 donated to the 

very worthy Chili for Children, and I thank everyone who was 

involved and participated in this event and made it so 

successful.  Thank you very much. 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1367 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Flavel: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to just say a 

little today about, and realize to the people, that Big Valley 

Jamboree today officially opens.  It's been open, I guess, since 

Monday as the trailers have been rolling in there. 

 

This, Mr. Speaker, becomes one of the largest events in 

Saskatchewan.  The town of Craven becomes the third-largest 

city in Saskatchewan for four days.  It started as a dream and it 

was built into an event, and it has now turned into more of a 

happening in the valley of Qu'Appelle near Craven.  I want to 

congratulate the people of Craven and to everyone who works 

so hard in putting this attraction together, and invite everyone 

out for the weekend. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 

 

Farm Debt Refinancing 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My question is 

to the minister responsible for Crop Insurance.  After 

considerable pain and sacrifice, Canadians, particularly 

farmers, finally have a chance to benefit from low interest 

rates.  Those least able to take advantage of these rates are 

farmers with large debt, locked into high interest rates. 

 

What have you done to ensure that farm families most in need 

of low interest refinancing can benefit from these lower rates? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, Crop Insurance has a 

policy of interest rates, which is passing the interest rates on 

that we receive and we'll continue to do so. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, that really is 

not good enough.  Lending institutions are using the lack of 

predictability of the new GRIP (gross revenue insurance 

program) pay-outs as an excuse not to refinance loans at these 

lower rates for farm people in this province. 

 

What are you going to do?  It's your responsibility.  What are 

you going to do for the hard-pressed farmers and rural 

businesses that are unable to benefit from this chance to save 

thousands upon thousands of dollars in interest rates that are 

now ending up -- those dollars -- on Bay Street in Toronto? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, if the lending 

institutions are ripping off farmers, I hardly see how that 

becomes the responsibility of Crop Insurance Corporation.  If 

lending institutions are turning down loans, it's not because of 

the unpredictability of crop insurance.  And that is merely an 

excuse. 

 

This program is very predictable.  The bottom-line coverage is 

there.  Lending institutions have told us that this was bankable 

and we have agreed that it is bankable.  And if lending 

institutions out there are not treating it as 

bankable, that is not the responsibility of Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, I do suggest 

that you make some of the calls that I have to lending 

institutions and you talk to agrologists as well, just to find out 

exactly how predictable those banks are thinking that your new 

GRIP insurance program is all about.  It is not bankable one 

little bit. 

 

There's no question that the old gross revenue insurance 

program was flawed.  But it's your inept approach to fixing 

what has gone on in this program that is robbing farmers right 

now of a chance to take advantage of these low rates. 

 

Now I want you to explain to people -- you be the one to 

explain to financially strapped farmers, you be the one to 

explain to rural business communities, and you be the one to 

explain to men and women and young people who are losing 

jobs in small towns just what you're going to do, what your 

government is going to do, to get all that extra interest money 

that is going to the lending institutions into the hands of . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Does the member have a 

question? 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I just asked it, sir. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- I believe there was a question 

there, Mr. Speaker.  I'm not sure exactly what it was, but I 

believe there was a question.  I think, Mr. Speaker, that again 

lending institutions have a responsibility to act responsibly in 

this province.  I think if there's a problem with lending 

institutions ripping off farmers, then that should be addressed 

and will be addressed in an appropriate manner if we can find 

the means to so do it.  It is not a responsibility of Crop 

Insurance. 

 

I repeat again, this is a bankable program, and lending 

institutions have told us that it is bankable.  And that is not the 

problem with the credit out there.  And there certainly are a lot 

of problems with farmers getting credit.  We've gone through 

some very tough times. 

 

Farmers, many of them are in grave financial difficulty, and 

those difficulties do not arise because of the changes to the 

program this year.  They arise from the difficulties that have 

arisen over the past 10 years.  And that's the reason the farmers 

are having a problem getting credit, not the changes to the 

GRIP program. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Minister, there are many people out 

there who would adamantly disagree with you on this.  This is 

the break that Saskatchewan needs.  And you can't blame 

Ottawa for this one, and you can't even blame the Devine 

government for this one.  This is really something where we're 

. . .  
 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I think the member knows she 

is not to use the names of people in this legislature, 



1368 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

but their constituencies. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- I apologize, Mr. Speaker.  The previous 

Conservative government.  The extra money in the hands of 

bankers isn't going to do us any good.  And what we need to do 

is to understand this, not as an agriculture problem but as an 

economic problem.  And we're talking about people here, we're 

talking about jobs here, we're talking about business, and we're 

talking about people being able to live in viable, vibrant 

communities.  That's what this is all about. 

 

And it was your government, and as Acting Minister of 

Agriculture, you gave a non-moratorium moratorium to this 

province, and you said you were meeting with lending 

institutions.  Now I'd like to know when you've met with the 

lending institutions, how recently, and what the results were of 

being able . . . for having farmers in this province benefit from 

low interest rate loans. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I think the question 

of when we met with lending institutions, that's being done by 

the Minister of Agriculture, and it would be more appropriately 

put to him.  As to all the problems of the farmers being 

attributed to the new changes to the GRIP program, I think that 

is a ridiculous statement. 

 

I think that farmers were in trouble last year; farmers went 

broke last year; farmers had trouble getting credit last year.  

And the interest rates are lower now and presumably farmers 

are getting credit at lower interest rates than they have in the 

past, as is everybody else in Saskatchewan.  And certainly we 

are working with the bankers.  We are proposing to bring 

legislation forward to provide a six-year leaseback to farmers.  

And we are working as hard as we can to provide farmers with 

the means to continue and earn a livelihood. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Minister, 

this House has been told that your government is committed to 

meeting with lending institutions and credit unions to bring 

people together around the table to come to some conclusions 

about how farmers in this province can remain viable and to get 

loans. 

 

What I'd like to find out from you, sir, is when you have met 

with lending institutions about this particular issue, so that 

farmers who are being told that their loans will not be 

refinanced at lower rates, that they cannot get them because of 

the lack of predictability of the GRIP program . . . when have 

you met with the lending institutions about this issue, and what 

were you told? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, we have met with the 

lending institutions many, many times.  The Minister of 

Agriculture has met with the lending institutions.  The Premier 

has met with the lending institutions.  There was a committee 

formed with lending institutions being part of it.  And they 

have told us that the new GRIP program is bankable, and they 

would accept it as bankable. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, it was this 

week that the Wheat Board commissioners, the market analysts 

and the grain industry officials, stated that they expect no 

improvement or a decline in Wheat Board grain prices for the 

1992-93 crop year. 

 

Farm people need a fair shake, and they are feeling extremely 

hopeless, Mr. Minister.  And you know this as the Minister for 

Rural Development.  The actions of your government have 

made things worse for these individuals.  They feel highly, 

highly stressed.  And all the calls that come to me are talking 

about the desire that they have for a fair shake from your 

government. 

 

Will you tell me exactly when you met with the lending 

institutions about the issue of low interest rates and what you 

were told? 

 

Hon. Mr. Cunningham: -- Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting 

the member refers to the fact that she's predicting that grain 

prices are going to fall.  In the case of grain prices fall, the new 

GRIP program will provide the same or a better level of 

coverage than last year.  The complaints from the opposition 

have been that if we had a drought and grain prices were to 

move up, there would be a small decrease in the bottom-line 

coverage.  So I think if grain prices are not going to move up, 

then the new GRIP program is certainly as good and probably 

better at bottom-line coverage than the old one.  So I fail to see 

the connection there. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Changes to Health Care 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 

direct my first question to the Minister of Health.  Madam 

Minister, yesterday in this House you refused to come clean on 

your secret plan to devastate the rural health care system.  

When confronted with the actual report, you said that it was a 

couple of months old, which is a relatively short time. 

 

In the two months since this so-called draft, will you tell us 

whether the decision to close or convert rural hospitals funded 

for fewer than 10 acute care patients per day has been 

reversed?  Will you tell us now that that decision has been 

reversed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the document that the 

opposition refers to is a document that was prepared by 

officials in the Department of Health for discussion purposes; it 

was a working paper.  There were a number of things in that 

particular document that I did not agree with and asked them to 

go back to the drawing board.  There has been at least, I think, 

two or three versions if not more than that since then. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is that cabinet or caucus has not yet 

discussed the final version of this particular document in detail 

and therefore there has been no specific decision on the 

document that was presented by these individuals, or on the 

final document that we have. 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1369 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you very 

much.  Madam Minister, I was very interested in the last 

statement that you just made.  You do have a final draft; that's 

what you're saying.  That was the final document that you have. 

 

Madam Minister, to make sure that you do not cause undue 

pain, undue anxiety for the residents of this province, will you 

then commit that you will this afternoon table that final report 

that you have just referred to?  And you yourself, Madam 

Minister, said the final report.  Will you table that document so 

that we can see the differences that have occurred from your 

so-called first draft, or whatever it is, and the final draft that 

you have just admitted that exists.  Will you table that, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I would think that after 10 years in 

government the member opposite would have a little better 

understanding of what happens in government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The fact of the matter is, as I said, it has not been discussed in 

detail or approved by cabinet and caucus.  Therefore it's not 

final in that extent.  And when it has been through cabinet and 

caucus, we will make it available for the public. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is becoming 

evident, Mr. Speaker, that the proof is in the pudding.  If it's not 

public, then it's secret.  That's exactly the position that I have 

taken.  So, Madam Minister . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Please let the member 

ask his questions. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- And then, Madam Minister . . . Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker.  Then, Madam Minister, because it is secret I 

guess we'll have to go through the painful process of extracting 

some of the details rather slowly.  We asked you questions in 

question period yesterday.  We didn't get any answers.  What 

we know is that those hospitals with 10 acute care patients per 

day are being considered for closure or conversion. 

 

So I ask you, Madam Minister, for a piece of information that 

has always been public to the citizens of this province.  Will 

you, Madam Minister, provide for us today, this afternoon, a 

list of the hospitals in this province that are now funded for 10 

or fewer acute care beds per day?  Will you give that list to the 

Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan this afternoon? 

 

It's a simple thing.  It will be a public . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  I think the member has 

asked his question.  Let the minister answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, as we deal with the working 

paper and the final health care documentation, 

we will make the information public that the public will want 

to know with respect to our health care policy.  And we will be 

seeking input from the public because the document that will 

be coming forward, the document that will be coming forward 

will be asking for input from the public. 

 

It will be a working paper that we'll send out to the public, 

setting out goals and directions and guidelines, some general 

principles under which people can operate if they want to get 

together and organize on a district basis.  But essentially it will 

be a consultative process.  As we move through the health care 

reform, we will be asking input from people, from small 

communities that have rural hospitals, as to how best we can 

meet their health care needs.  And therefore that input will be 

taking place and is required. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I will give the minister, Mr. Speaker, the 

courtesy of assuming that she did not hear my question.  This 

question was a very simple one.  It's a public document for the 

Department of Health.  And all I'm asking for you is to table in 

this Assembly that document that indicates those hospitals that 

have 10 or fewer acute care patients per day.  That's all I'm 

asking, Madam Minister.  Will you do that? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Could I ask the government 

back-benchers please not to interrupt.  I'm sure if the members 

wanted to direct questions to them, they would do so.  I think 

they're directing their questions to the Minister of Health.  I'd 

ask the Minister of Health to answer. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the documentation that the 

member requests will be provided in due course, as we come 

forward with our health care policy.  The fact of the matter is -- 

and I want to say this, I want to say this, Mr. Speaker -- we will 

be asking communities to look at co-ordinating and integrating 

services, and this is assuming that cabinet and caucus agree 

with this approach.  We will be asking communities to organize 

and co-ordinate on a district basis, to look at the health care 

needs in their district, to determine what facilities they want or 

what role they want for their facilities, to provide us with their 

plan and their input.  And that will be the general thrust of our 

health care reform, not as the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 

are trying to paint a picture. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm just amazed, Madam Minister, why you 

won't give me that information.  It's a simple, simple request.  I 

have the '89-90 document, but I don't have the '90-91.  And 

that's all I'm asking for you is to update me on that particular 

piece of information. 

 

You talk a good talk, Madam Minister, about consultation.  

One of the items on page 2 of your report, of your document, of 

your plan for devastation of the health care system says, and I 

quote: the wellness team also heard that now is the time to do 

something.  Now is the time to do something.  There have been 

enough studies 



1370 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

and enough discussions and it is time to get on with it.  That's 

your report. 

 

Madam Minister, will you admit now that you have rejected 

that element of this report?  Is that one of the rejections that 

you were referring to? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, the public of Saskatchewan, 

the health care people, people throughout this province, realize 

there has to be health care reform and they want the 

government to get on with it. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The members opposite were in 

government for 10 to 12 years and they refused to do anything 

with respect to health care reform except to bury their heads in 

the sand.  They did nothing at a time when every other 

province across this country was playing some sort of 

leadership role in making health care services more efficient 

and providing a higher quality of health care services for the 

people of their province. 

 

But that government did nothing.  They had no long-term 

strategic plan.  They had nothing.  And now what they want to 

do is try and destroy the future of medicare in this province 

with their political gamesmanship based on a document that 

was rejected when it first came forward and has been revised in 

many different manners in the last month or so. 

 

That document is not the document that we are working with 

now. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

there may well be justice in this world after all.  I'm very proud 

and happy for the people of Saskatchewan that, Madam 

Minister, you were prevented from doing your dastardly deed 

by presenting this report tomorrow by the simple fact that it 

was leaked, that it was leaked by your own people to me in 

order that the people of Saskatchewan could become aware of 

the perilous condition of their health care system. 

 

Madam Minister, you speak about the wellness team, the 

wellness team that was announced back in January.  I want to 

ask you (a) and (b) of a question.  Number one . . . or (a) is, 

who were the members on that wellness team?  Who were the 

members on that wellness team?  And it also said that the 

wellness team will contact appropriate people for consultation.  

Who were these appropriate people that your wellness team 

consulted with? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, we have been talking in this 

legislature since before we were government about the need for 

health care reform and organizing and co-ordinating health care 

services on a district basis.  We've been talking about it a long 

time.  We continue to move in that direction regardless of your 

political games and any leaked documents.  We will continue 

to move in that general direction because it is the right way to 

go, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now with respect to the wellness team in the Department of 

Health and the Department of Health itself, it has been meeting 

with stakeholders throughout this province; it has been meeting 

with all sorts of people in the health care area, with health care 

professionals. 

 

There have been extensive consultations in this regard with 

health care professionals, Mr. Speaker, as they analyse the 

Murray Commission report which that government had 

solicited, and other documents in the area of health care reform 

as they came forward with the proposals.  But they have had a 

very . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before the member asks his 

question, I did notice the member interrupted the minister three 

times while she was trying to answer his question.  And I also 

want to remind him, she only took seven seconds more than 

you did in asking the question. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand chastised.  

Madam Minister, you claim changes would only be made 

through open consultation -- you've said that again -- open 

consultation with this secret report of yours that you refuse to 

share with the people of Saskatchewan, putting an anxiety in 

the hearts of all of our people. 

 

Earlier this session I asked you if you would be prepared to 

truly consult with the people on the health care system.  And 

I'm going to repeat that request right now.  Madam Minister, 

will you agree to hold full-scale public hearings into any plan 

before you make a major overhaul of our health care system?  

Will you commit to hold full-scale public hearings? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, our plan is to go out to 

Saskatchewan and hold meetings with people throughout the 

province.  They will be public meetings.  They'll be open 

meetings.  And we'll be going throughout rural Saskatchewan 

and talking to people. 

 

But I want to say that there's a very large sector of 

Saskatchewan that aren't the Neanderthals of the members 

opposite, Mr. Speaker.  The fact of the matter is, is there are a 

lot of communities already who are ready to move with district 

organization.  And I've heard from some since this matter 

became an issue.  They want to move with a community and a 

district organization, and they're ready to move.  They're ready 

to move in this direction. 

 

Those communities that are ready to move, we will be helping 

them and providing them with ever support and incentives we 

can to get themselves organized on a district basis.  Meanwhile 

we . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Next question.  Very close to 

yours again. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Madam Minister, 

I'm wondering, Madam Minister, that now that this document is 

public -- and I'm sure that you're going 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1371 

to be forced now to make some kind of an answer to the people 

-- I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if you have plans to 

immediately launch a mail campaign to do some damage 

control?  I know, Madam Minister, for example, I know, 

Madam Minister, I know that you are right now in the process 

of implementing a massive letter campaign.  It started this 

morning. I know that. 

 

I'm wondering, Madam Minister, if these letters that you are 

going to be writing out, and probably are in the process right 

now, will be the usual inflamed political rhetoric that for ever 

spews forth from the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

government offices.  Or, Madam Minister, will it be, will it 

finally be a request for public input into those changes, Madam 

Minister? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Well because of the scare tactics of the 

members opposite, because of the gross exaggeration and . . . 

because of the gross exaggeration . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  The member just got 

through asking his question.  Let the minister answer, all right? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Because of the irresponsible behaviour of 

the member from Rosthern and other members across the 

House and the scare tactics, we will be writing to hospital 

administrators.  We will be writing to them.  I haven't seen the 

letter that will be going, but we will be writing to them and we 

will be advising them of the general direction we're intending 

to move.  That is true.  And we are doing that because of your 

irresponsibility. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I beg leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, 

sir. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Draper: -- I'd like to introduce to you and through you 

again to the members, Mr. John Bumbac, a teacher from 

Assiniboia who's spent a day here to see our proceedings.  

Thank you, sir. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 

Report on Constitutional Negotiations 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I 

want to give members of the House a very brief report on the 

state of the constitutional negotiations.  As members of the 

House will know, much has happened in the last week in this 

most recent round of negotiations on the constitution.  And I'm 

pleased to provide this brief report on the outcome of those 

most recent efforts. 

Before doing so, however, I'd like to advise members that on 

Monday of this week I briefed both the Leader of the Official 

Opposition and the Leader of the Liberal Party, the member 

from Saskatoon Greystone, on the status of the negotiations in 

general, but specifically on the question of Senate reform, 

which was the main agenda, before attending Tuesday's 

intergovernmental conference in Ottawa.  And I'd like to thank 

both members for their valuable insights and ideas. 

 

I'm pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that there appears to be at least 

a tentative agreement reached on a package of constitutional 

reforms which could be the basis for all Canadians to agree on 

the renewal of our federation. 

 

Those who participated in this round, the so-called Canada 

round of constitutional talks, and they were the representatives 

of the nine provinces, the Territories, the aboriginal 

organizations, the federal government, and ordinary citizens -- 

and a very massive consultative mechanism -- all those who 

participated responded positively to the desires expressed not 

only by Quebec, but to the desires expressed by the people of 

western Canada, other parts of the nation, and by the aboriginal 

peoples of this country. 

 

I might say that we were parenthetically very ably represented 

at these negotiations and discussions by my colleague, the 

Minister of Justice and his able -- small, but able -- group of 

officials. 

 

Saskatchewan's goal was to keep Canada united, not at any 

costs but through reasonable and fair compromise.  And as I 

said, I believe that this package formed the basis for the 

realization of that goal. 

 

Time does not permit, in a ministerial statement, to get into all 

the details.  I would however like to very briefly refer to some 

of Saskatchewan's specific objectives and their status as the 

result of the last meeting. 

 

First, there has been improvement on the equalization 

provisions.  The federal government now seems prepared to 

commit itself to payments with respect to these equalization 

matters, and this is an extension from the mere commitment to 

the principle of the equalization. 

 

There is an agreement to have enforceable, constitutionalized 

five-year agreements on the Canada Assistance Plan.  And 

thirdly, there appears to be agreement on a new political accord 

through which the provisions of EPF -- the established program 

financing mechanisms -- will be strengthened.  These three 

together are sometimes called, I think wrongly but for the 

shorthand, the equalization package. 

 

We did not attain what we would have wanted, but we did 

make significant progress and the other governments 

particularly concerned about these matters, I think shared that 

view. 

 

On the recognition of the right of Canada's aboriginal peoples 

to self government, there has been an agreement to entrench 

that in the constitution and to negotiate and to define it over the 

five years following constitutional amendment. 



1372 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

There's also been greater representation for smaller, less 

populous provinces like ours with respect to the question of a 

reformed Senate, and with improved and increased powers on a 

matter of particular importance to the provinces like 

Saskatchewan and Alberta, namely natural resources and in 

specific matters, the taxation of natural resources. 

 

One other matter dealt with section 121, the so-called 

economic union.  We did not achieve our objective with respect 

to 121, which was, quite frankly, that this should not be 

entrenched in the constitution. 

 

But none the less through hard bargaining we were able to 

mitigate many of its worst features.  We will want to monitor 

and carefully assess future developments with respect to this 

particular section. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, as you can see by this brief report, like all 

participants, Saskatchewan gained in some areas and 

compromised in others and did not succeed in others.  But in 

doing so, overall we reached a consensus which was consistent 

with our overall goal, namely keeping a united and unified 

country -- Canada, the best country in the world in which to 

live. 

 

I'd like to remind the members of the House that this package, 

as I say, does not achieve all, nor does it probably represent the 

end or the final end of the constitutional negotiations.  Legal 

texts will have to be developed.  Our officials are prepared to 

participate.  Once the texts are completed -- texts, I might add, 

and/or resolutions -- these will be forwarded to the various 

legislatures, including ours, where they'll be studied. 

 

(1415) 

 

And it's our intention to refer these texts as soon as possible, 

the moment that they're prepared, to be debated by our own 

Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs, and through this 

committee to be presented to the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan, and to decide thereafter on what, if any, other 

steps need to be taken. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I'll try to keep the House more fully informed on 

other developments as they occur.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it is a 

pleasure for me to rise today on behalf of the official 

opposition to congratulate the participants in the recent 

constitutional negotiations, particularly Mr. Clark for dealing 

with a situation that, I'm sure from anyone that has been a part 

of that process would say, can be difficult at most; and to the 

first ministers of our country and the leaders of our territories 

who obviously spent a great deal of time and thought in 

keeping our country together. 

 

It's been a long process which has included many individual 

Canadians, many interest groups.  And certainly I think the 

very nature of the process that we have here in Canada tells us 

that we as Canadians sometimes have to expand our tolerance 

level. 

I think Canadians as a whole are overjoyed that with this 

process now seeming to come to a reasonable conclusion, that 

the participants who have put so much time into the 

constitution will be able to look at the jobs, the economy, some 

of the stability that Canadians seem to want in a unified 

country. 

 

It's our understanding, and we will be looking for clarification 

from the Premier and the Minister of Justice, that this package 

now allows Quebec to re-enter the process in a negotiating 

position that has a conclusion at its end. 

 

I think people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have spoken very 

clearly and certainly will be waiting for the constitutional 

process that is under way in this province to give direction.  

But I think Saskatchewan people spoke very overwhelmingly 

to the need for ratification by individual citizens in this 

province.  And whatever that vehicle is, I would hope that our 

government respects that wish and that our Constitutional 

Affairs Committee of this legislature is able to fulfil that wish. 

 

It was good to see that ministers, first ministers, were able to 

put aside some of the problems that dealt with Senate reform 

that allow western Canadians in particular to have a stronger 

voice on natural resources, the various divisions of powers, that 

first ministers on the economic union aspects were able to put 

aside some philosophical differences.  We believe that the 

concept of interprovincial free trade is one that should be a 

foundation of our country, and we appreciate the fact that some 

were able to put aside some of their philosophical leanings. 

 

Once again in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would congratulate most 

heartily Mr. Clark for his stewardship and first ministers for 

their diligence.  Canadians now have something to work with.  

Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and to 

members of the Assembly.  I'd like to take this opportunity to 

add my congratulations as well, and most specifically to the 

Premier of Saskatchewan and to our representative, the 

Minister of Justice.  I think that they represented us ably.  And 

we should all be very, very proud of the accomplishments of all 

the first ministers and the people who worked in concert with 

one another to the benefit of the citizens of this nation. 

 

I am particularly pleased, the fact that some decision was made 

regarding a Triple E Senate.  I know I've spoken in this House 

previously about my desire for a Triple E Senate and the 

reasons for that.  But I do think that what was arrived at was a 

particularly ingenious way of, first of all, entrenching the view 

of representation by population right where it belongs, and that 

is in the House of Commons, by ensuring that there is true 

representation by population there, and giving more to Ontario 

and larger-populated provinces, thereby in fact giving us 

greater credibility in stating that we should have representation 

by region. 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1373 

As well I was very pleased by the movement that was made, 

and would like to take and make special note of the work of our 

Minister of Justice, with regards to native self-government.  

And it was with some pride that I was able to watch the 

member from Fairview on national television with the native 

leader.  And I felt as though we were well represented there as 

well when you consider how many people we have in our 

province of aboriginal descent. 

 

I too have a dream.  I know that people talk about a national 

referendum, Mr. Speaker.  But what I'd very much prefer 

would be for each of the 10 provinces of Canada to hold their 

own referendums; the territories of Canada; for us to join hands 

together one province next to each other; not have a national 

referendum, but truly have a renewal of Confederation in our 

country. 

 

So I do wish them good luck in future negotiations.  And it's 

with some relief that I've looked around and spoke with people 

recently who had just undergone the 125th birthday 

celebrations for Canada. And with the things that were arrived 

at over this last week, a lot of people did say with some 

twinkles in their eye, I think perhaps we may have a 126th 

birthday on the horizon. 

 

So I thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 69 -- An Act to amend The Planning and 

Development Act, 1983 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to amend 

The Planning and Development Act be now introduced and 

read the first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next session. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Before we proceed, could I have some 

clarification from the Government House Leader as to when 

this Bill would have second reading. 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- My understanding is next session of 

the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Next session. 

 

Bill No. 70 -- An Act respecting Local Improvements in 

Urban and Northern Municipalities and to Effect Certain 

Consequential Changes 

 

Hon. Ms. Carson: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that a Bill to 

introduce The Local Improvements Act be now introduced and 

read a first time. 

 

Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time 

at the next sitting. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 

question put by member No. 41, I provide the answer. 

 

The Speaker: -- The answer has been tabled. 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Shillington that the second report of 

the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures be now 

concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I'm sorry, I was not able to see the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton.  I've already called the 

member from Wilkie, but I will go at the direction of the 

House. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- In the spirit of co-operation of the moment, 

Mr. Speaker, this side of the House will say that we will take 

our place momentarily and let the member opposite from 

Prince Albert Carlton have his say. 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I want to 

thank the leader of the opposition for his co-operation, and I 

hope that he's . . . the House Leader, pardon me -- the aspiring 

leader of the opposition.  And I hope that he is still in the same 

type of co-operative mood after I have finished my remarks, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to make a few brief comments today, primarily in 

response to in some cases what I would call the misinformation 

that some of the members opposite have been attempting to 

present to this House.  They've been attempting to present 

several things as fact to the media and in this House in the last 

week or so. 

 

The issues that I want to address mainly, Mr. Speaker, are the 

issue of majority versus unanimous consent with respect to rule 

changes, and also a bit about the record of the members 

opposite with respect to rule changes in the past.  And I will 

then summarize at the end, Mr. Speaker, by talking briefly 

about the purpose and our purpose in putting forward this 

motion. 

 

I should mention, Mr. Speaker, that first of all the members 

opposite have on numerous occasions tried to make the case 

that past precedent requires that changes to rules of the 

Assembly proceed only with unanimous consent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this assumption is blatantly incorrect, and the 

members opposite know that.  In fact while members have 

always tried to reach consensus on changes to the rules and 

procedures in this Assembly, that consensus sometimes has 

been rather illusive.  In fact previous rule changes have 

occasioned considerable debate in this Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there have been three major reviews of the rules 

of this Assembly in the past 25 to 30 years, and many 



1374 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

of the resulting changes have been implemented without the 

unanimous approval of all members.  Difference of opinion on 

rule changes were apparent in 1970 when the House adopted a 

series of changes after much heated debate, both in committee 

and in the Assembly.  In fact, the Thatcher government of the 

day ended up amending the committee report by adding several 

new provisions including one related to voting on division. 

 

Clearly agreement and consensus are laudable objectives, but 

they are not always achievable.  And they certainly do not 

extend to any requirement for unanimous consent. 

 

Other jurisdictions have also experienced deep divisions on the 

matter of rule changes.  For example in 1969 the federal 

government used closure on the rule change that provided for 

time allocation on government legislation.  In this case, Mr. 

Speaker, closure was introduced after 12 days of very heated 

debate.  Clearly there are precedents, Mr. Speaker.  Clearly, 

Mr. Speaker, rule changes in Saskatchewan and in other 

Canadian jurisdictions have never required complete agreement 

and in fact on contentious issues have often been implemented 

with much less than unanimous consent. 

 

The second matter that I feel compelled to raise today in the 

House involves the record of members opposite on this matter 

of bell-ringing.  Well, Mr. Speaker, actions speak much louder 

than words, and I want to review the actions of the members 

opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite do sound so self-righteous 

on this particular matter.  But I simply have to remember that 

members opposite, that when they were in government just a 

little over a year ago, they moved and passed a motion right 

here in this Assembly that limited bell-ringing to 10 minutes -- 

10 minutes, Mr. Speaker -- on all votes taken with regard to the 

Bill which implemented the infamous harmonized provincial 

sales tax. 

 

This was done, Mr. Speaker, unilaterally, not by taking it to a 

committee, not by allowing for discussion in committee stage 

or providing time.  But it was done unilaterally right here in 

this Assembly. 

 

(1430) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite limited the bells in this 

Assembly to 10 minutes on all recorded divisions related to 

that piece of legislation.  And this wasn't the first time the 

previous government attempted to limit the time on the 

bell-ringing.  Previous occasion in 1989, Mr. Andrew, who was 

the minister at that time, who was, I believe, house leader, 

introduced a motion to limit the bells at that time. 

 

So you see, Mr. Speaker, this House has already seen limits on 

bell-ringing under the previous administration.  And believe 

me, Mr. Speaker, there was no provision for a compromise or 

for compensation of the suspension provision which we are 

offering at this time.  There was no such move by the members 

opposite at that time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this main portion of my remarks, I want 

to reiterate that I've shown that unanimity is not always 

possible in the House.  And secondly, that the members' own 

record belies their present position. 

 

I now want to speak very briefly, Mr. Speaker, on the purpose 

and reiterate the purpose of the rule change, purposes that we 

found it necessary to proceed with this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the public wants us in this Assembly to get on 

with government business.  They tell us, get in there.  It's a 

debating forum, debate, make compromises where possible, but 

get in there and pass the Bills and do the business of the 

people.  They want us especially not to get bogged down in 

partisan posturing.  They say to us when we do that: a plague 

on both your houses; in fact, a plague on all three of your 

houses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have what I think is the best system in the 

world.  But it gets into disrepute only because -- and I think 

largely because -- of the waste the people that hear about, of 

patronage and of partisanship.  It also gets into disrepute when 

they find that the government has reached a stalemate, when 

the opposition is using the bells in a situation such as this 

where they are trying to give themselves a virtual veto. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we feel very strongly that there is a need to 

restore public confidence in our system of government.  And 

one way is to listen to the public on this particular issue.  And 

the public are clearly saying, bell-ringing can no longer be 

considered a legitimate tool. 

 

I do believe, Mr. Speaker, that the Star-Phoenix editorial of 

July 4, '92 summarizes public opinion on this to a T.  And the 

last paragraph of this particular Star-Phoenix editorial states 

that reasonable people, and I quote: 

 

 Reasonable people should need about five minutes to agree 

on a time limit for the bell-ringing tactic.  Let the MLAs just 

do it, then get on with what the public pays them for. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that sentence in itself I think underlies, in 

large part, the reason for us moving with this particular motion 

and presenting this motion to the Assembly. 

 

In doing so, Mr. Speaker, we understand that we are removing 

from the Assembly a tool that has been used rather efficiently 

and effectively by members of this Assembly.  And we felt that 

it was very important not to just remove something without 

compensating, without putting something else in place. 

 

So what we have decided to do, Mr. Speaker, and what we are 

offering the opposition and offering this Assembly and the 

people of Saskatchewan, is a way of suspending the business 

on a specific item or specific Bill that is in contention and 

allowing the House and the proceedings of the House to 

continue without disrupting the total proceedings of the House. 

 

That is why we've attached to this a suspension rule.  I want to 

put this suspension rule in . . . and take a few minutes to put it 

into a larger context in the context of parliamentary democracy, 

a lot about which has been 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1375 

spoken in this Assembly over the last two days and a lot of 

which I believe we are in agreement with. 

 

Parliamentary democracy works for two reasons, Mr. Speaker.  

It works because a government is able to exercise that for 

which it was elected -- the government can get a job done.  

And secondly, it works because our system of government 

provides for a minority view to be presented, and it is the job of 

the opposition to always present that minority view. 

 

When things start . . . If those two things are in place and as 

long as those two things are in place, our system works.  If 

there was no opportunity for a minority to place its position or 

a minority to be able to mobilize the public, our system would 

break down.  On the other hand, if there was no way for a 

government to pass a Bill, to proceed, and to be able to govern, 

then the system also breaks down. 

 

And that's what we're seeing happening now.  We're seeing the 

opposition members demanding a veto, effectively demanding 

a veto.  And, Mr. Speaker, I put it to you that that simply would 

make our system unworkable.  Every other jurisdiction in the 

Commonwealth and in Canada found that they've had to 

change the rules of their Assembly to make provision for 

limiting the bells for that particular reason. 

 

The government members or any government member or 

anybody in the public, and particularly members of the 

opposition, may and have asked the question, well what tools 

do we have?  And I think it's instructive for us to look at our 

system and review what tools we have, what tools are available 

to the opposition and what tools are available to any member in 

this Assembly.  I want to take a couple of minutes just to do 

that. 

 

Every time a Bill comes before this House, Mr. Speaker, it 

goes through three readings on three separate days.  That is 

done for a reason, and the reason is to provide time for all 

members to become familiar with the Bill, for the public to 

become advised of the Bill through the media, and to provide 

time and opportunity for changes and amendments. 

 

The opposition members, as well as any other member in the 

House, can move an amendment in this Assembly.  That is an 

important tool. 

 

The members of the opposition, as well as members in the back 

bench of this Assembly, have direct access to the ministers in 

the House.  And quite often we see members from the 

opposition, or any of the government members, sitting behind 

the bar or alongside a minister and discussing a particular issue 

which may be of concern to him. 

 

Another tool that's been widespread, is of widespread use, often 

used by members of the Assembly and by the public, and that 

is the method . . . the tool of petitions.  We haven't had that 

many petitions submitted to the Assembly this term, Mr. 

Speaker, but in addition to the bell-ringing tool we found the 

petitions are a very good way of getting a gauge of public 

opinion. 

The members opposite at this current time are now using what I 

would call as the fifth major tool, and that is the tool of the 

filibuster, the extensive debate which gives the public time and 

the government time to assess. 

 

And last of all, there was the bell-ringing -- the bell-ringing 

tool.  And I mention again, Mr. Speaker, there's only one 

problem with the bell-ringing tool, and that is that in addition 

to stopping the process on a specific Bill, it stops the process of 

the entire government.  It brings everything to a halt.  It's like 

turning the keys off in an automobile after you're stalled in a 

snowstorm or whatever.  It turns everything off.  It turns the 

heat off, it turns the lights off, it turns off your life-support 

system. 

 

So that's what's happening, Mr. Speaker, when you reach an 

impasse where the bells are used as the tool to stop the House 

for a long time.  That's why we have to resolve this or use the 

other tools to better advantage to resolve issues. 

 

I would remind the members opposite of the original purpose 

of bells.  The original purpose in this Assembly and in the 

British parliamentary system was to use the bells to summon 

government members and all members to a vote, to a recorded 

vote.  That was the purpose.  And they allowed a specific 

amount of time, or not so specific amount of time, in order that 

the government members could all be summoned so that the 

government . . . so the vote when it was held would not be held 

in the absence of a majority of government members.  And that 

has to be the way.  Otherwise we would be into an election 

every two or three months, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So the purpose, the real purpose of the bells ringing in this case 

. . . or in tradition, and as has been the case which has been 

returned to other jurisdictions, has been simply to summon the 

members to come to the vote.  It is only more recently that it 

has been used as a tool with which to discipline government. 

 

Much has been said, Mr. Speaker, about the issue on which the 

bells were rung.  I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that there will 

always be an issue.  In '89 it was SaskEnergy privatization.  

This year it's the GRIP.  Next year it could be something else.  

There will always be an issue.  That is the purpose of this 

Assembly, for us to find ways . . . for us to debate issues and 

then figure out ways of resolving them. 

 

But I submit, Mr. Speaker, that there was a bit of a difference 

between the way the government, previous, used the 

bell-ringing . . . pardon me, the opposition, previous, used the 

bell-ringing tactic and the way the members presently are using 

it. 

 

At that time the New Democratic Party and caucus went out 

and attempted to mobilize public opinion -- had rallies around 

the province, sought petitions.  Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with 

what the present opposition, the Tories, are doing or did.  I saw 

no attempt at public rallies; I saw no attempt to gather 

petitions.  What I did hear about in the House was about a 

dozen phone calls. 
 

And it was also interesting to see on television what some of 

the members opposite were doing while the bells were ringing.  

The Premier himself was photographed on a golf course.  The 

Premier -- excuse me the Leader of the 



1376 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

Opposition, and I was at grave error.  The Leader of the 

Opposition himself was photographed on a golf course. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Where? 

 

Mr. Kowalsky: -- On a golf course, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And his comments were well, I'm not sure when we're going to 

come back.  It seemed he was enjoying his golf slightly too 

much to be bothered with what was happening in the House, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another member was quoted, although I didn't hear this 

directly, that he really enjoyed the holiday.  Well, Mr. Speaker, 

I think that that is abuse and misuse of bell-ringing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close my remarks because I think I have 

mentioned those things that I thought was important.  I thank 

you for this opportunity to enter this debate.  I invite the 

members opposite to continue to put their points into the 

debate. 

 

I also invite the members opposite to recognize the 

compensation and the compromise that has been provided and 

that we are attempting to provide, and that is a system and a 

method of putting aside the business of the day, of a Bill, using 

the suspension rule, using the proposed suspension rule in 

addition to the existing rules.  That is the compromise, Mr. 

Speaker.  That is the compromise. 

 

(1445) 

 

The members can take any Bill and at any one time any 

member from the opposite, if these rules are passed and 

changed, can stand up and say and request under the rules that 

that Bill be suspended for a period of up to three days, over and 

above all of the other tools that they can use, over and above. 

 

And I want to underline that this is an innovative thing.  It is a 

creative approach.  It has not happened any place else and it 

does not exist anywhere else in the Commonwealth or in 

Canada. 

 

We came up with something, Mr. Speaker, in our deliberations.  

We came up with it; we offer it to them; we hope that they 

accept it.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- A point of order, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

heard during the member's comments, right at the tail-end of 

his comments, made reference to the former . . . or to the 

opposition leader golfing instead of being in the House.  I 

thought we had a rule in this House, Mr. Speaker, where . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Order.  Order.  That is not a 

point of order and the member well knows it.  That is not a 

point of order. 

 

You are not to refer to members in debate at that 

particular time, whether they are in the House or out of the 

House.  Whether somebody was in the House last year or the 

year before that, has absolutely nothing to do with the debate 

that is taking place, and that is not a point of order. 

 

Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Could I just exercise the right to ask a 

question for clarification of your ruling?  I don't understand 

you. 

 

The Speaker: -- I ruled that it's not a point of order.  I have 

made my decision.  It's not a point of order. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I 

listened with some interest to the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. And, Mr. Speaker, today is not a day that I would 

thank you and then say it's a pleasure to speak to the motion on 

the floor.  It is not a pleasure to speak to this motion.  Mr. 

Speaker, this motion that's on the floor in my opinion, sir, is an 

outrage. 

 

And this motion that's on the floor today, Mr. Speaker, was put 

on the floor for one reason and one reason only, in my opinion.  

And that is to accomplish something by, if I might say so, a 

very devious way to get something done they couldn't do in 

another way. 

 

And as you have allowed, Mr. Speaker, the connection between 

the motion on the floor and the GRIP motion, I would like to 

say to you, sir, that in my humble opinion, that that's the only 

reason that the government would try to ram through a motion 

that is not even an honourable motion.  It's not just a bad 

motion, it's a dishonourable motion in my opinion, sir. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton said that they had 

walked out and they had filibustered a motion that my 

government had on the floor a year ago or so.  Mr. Speaker, the 

point he made makes the point we're trying to make.  After 

listening to the members from the opposition side, the PC 

(Progressive Conservative) government withdrew the motion to 

change the rules.  And that's all we're asking today.  That's 

what we're asking today.  Yes, we are not as headstrong and 

obstinate as the members opposite seem to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are asking them to do the same: listen to the 

people.  And I can take you, Mr. Speaker -- and I will do so 

later on in my remarks -- to the polls that we did to show that 

we are listening to the people when it comes to bell-ringing.  

The member also said that ringing of the bells had been used 

effectively by the opposition in days gone by.  And I would 

also add to that, Mr. Speaker, that it was done sparingly. 

 

There is no long history of abuse of bell-ringing.  And no one 

could make that argument.  No one could make that argument, 

Mr. Speaker, particularly in the province of Saskatchewan.  To 

my knowledge -- and I stand to be corrected - 

_ there's been only twice that there was a major bell-ringing 

episode.  That was in 1989 for 17 days and in 1992 for, I 

believe, 18 days. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the life of the province it would be hard 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1377 

for anyone to make an argument that that's abusing the power 

of the bells.  That, I would suggest to you, sir, and to the 

members opposite, that that negates the remarks that the 

member from Churchill Downs said in his opening remarks 

that they have no assurance that we on the opposite side would 

not use these bells again and again and again.  That, in my 

opinion, Mr. Speaker, is a very weak, very weak argument. 

 

The other thing the minister from Churchill Downs said, the 

very first controversial piece of legislation that came before the 

House, we walked out.  Mr. Speaker, that is not only nonsense, 

it is untrue.  It is very untrue. 

 

Mr. Speaker, no one walks out of the House lightly.  I'll give 

that to the opposition when they walked out in 1989.  I don't 

think they done it lightly.  And I can assure you, sir, and all the 

members opposite and all the people in the province who 

happen to be watching here today, we don't do these things 

lightly.  But when you're reduced to your final, your final tool, 

then you have to use that tool.  And we did that, sir. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it a little difficult to understand, when we 

look at the motion that's on the floor today, I suggest that 

there's a hidden agenda in that motion.  And I will try to tie that 

together for you, sir, and for those members of the back 

benches over there who may not realize what they're doing 

with this motion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, July 7, 1992 I believe will go down as a very 

black day in the legislature of Saskatchewan.  Mr. Speaker, this 

motion today will be remembered a long time.  Mr. Speaker, 

this government will be remembered for this motion for a long 

time.  And I would suggest to all the back-benchers, if and 

when you get on your feet to defend what you're doing, which 

is fair ball, I would say to you, sir, and you, madam: you will 

be recorded the same as I am being recorded today, and the 

same, Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite were recorded in 

1989. 

 

Now I have in my hand, quotes.  Those were recorded, and as I 

said to the back-benchers, when and if you get up, remember 

you will be recorded as I am being recorded today.  And that's 

fair. 

 

Let me say to you, sir, and to those who are here in this 

Assembly, not only will you be recorded but you will be 

remembered.  And the way you will be remembered, and I say 

this to the Minister of Agriculture and the minister of Crop 

Insurance, you will not be remembered for the mistake you 

made.  You will be remembered of how you fixed your 

mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in my life as an employer and my life as a father, 

the philosophy I tried to put forward was simply this: if you 

make a mistake, why is it so hard to say, I'm sorry, I made a 

mistake, but I will fix it?  Because how you fix what you've 

done will be remembered long after what you have done. 

 

And I say to the member, why is it so hard to say, I'm sorry, I 

made a mistake when I brought the new GRIP program in, and 

here's what I'm going to do to fix it up . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Yes, that's fine?  Now okay, 

fine.  I get hoots of laughter, Mr. Speaker, if in fact that is not a 

good philosophy, fine.  I lived by it.  I didn't find it hard to say, 

I'm sorry.  You may suggest that I made so many mistakes . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, right.  That I made so many 

mistakes I found it easy.  Well, Mr. Speaker, that could be true.  

Because I did not find it hard to say, I'm sorry. 

 

But I can tell you, I can tell all of you people sitting there, it's 

not the mistake, it's how you try to fix it.  This motion today, 

that was on the floor today, is not an honourable way to fix up 

an honest error.  It could be an honest error.  I'm not saying it 

was . . . I don't say it was deliberate.  It was bungled.  Could the 

minister not have said, I'm new to my job, give me a little time, 

I made a mistake, here's what I'll do to fix it, I'll give you a 

choice, I accept the responsibility, I'm sorry, let's get on with 

the job.  No. 

 

What you're doing with this Bill, and what the back-benchers I 

think must understand, what you're doing with the motion that's 

on the floor today is you're asking your members to commit 

perjury.  All right, think about it, think about it.  This Bill is for 

no other reason than to get the GRIP Bill through.  And when 

the GRIP Bill comes to the floor of this House you're going to 

stand in your place and say yes to something that is not true.  

Think about that.  Think about that. 

 

And I would suggest to you that's what you're going to be 

doing.  The Minister of Agriculture, the minister for Crop 

Insurance, is putting the onus on his back-benchers to stand in 

this House and say yes to something that is not true. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, another reason why this day will be 

remembered, this motion, is because the NDP used their 

majority to ram through a motion to make something possible 

that they couldn't do otherwise when they tried to get a Bill 

through this legislature to manufacture evidence, to win a court 

case they knew they were going to lose. 

 

And that is what I am talking about.  The cause of this was 

because of the bungling.  And as I said, maybe it was an honest 

mistake.  okay?  Why is it so hard, why is it so hard to admit 

you made a mistake? 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, there's nothing wrong with being 

in error.  But what is wrong is how you fix it up.  And this is 

not the way to fix that up.  This is an unhonourable way to fix 

up a mistake. 

 

And as I said before, you will be recorded and you will be 

judged long after you and I are out of this.  Hansard, my 

friends, never forgets. 

 

Well I have quotes here, Mr. Speaker, and it'll take a little 

while to go through them.  But I have quotes here that repeats 

what the members said when they were on this side of the 

House, when they were arguing against legislation to change 

the rules. 

 

And as the member from Maple Creek said yesterday, I can't 

understand how you can flip-flop so dramatically.  Nobody got 

up and said we were wrong then or right then.  And I ask the 

House, I ask any one of them, does two 



1378 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

wrongs make a right?  If you were right in 1989 and you're 

right now, that makes us wrong.  That makes two wrongs 

trying to make a right. 

 

(1500) 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think this is something that has to be addressed.  

And I would ask the members over there with some legal 

background, if they were standing in the court of law trying to 

defend a client and someone brought in evidence that was 

manufactured after the case started and that was not true and 

they lost the case, how would they feel?  That's exactly what's 

going to happen here if we allow this motion to pass. 

 

The member from Prince Albert Carlton also said that there 

was a compromise made -- 3 days; 10 minutes and 3 days.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that is absolutely, 

totally nothing.  That is nothing.  He also mentioned it takes 

three days to get a Bill to third reading.  They also didn't 

mention to you and the rest of us that you can only do that 

once. 

 

Now if I was on the government side and I wanted to ram an 

outrageous Bill like this through, what would I do?  If the 

members on the opposition side moved an amendment, what 

would they do?  Yes, what would you do?  You then would 

wait until the hoist was made and then you would make an 

amendment.  The opposition then are stymied.  Their hands are 

tied.  They can do nothing. 

 

Now if you think that we on this side of the House don't 

understand why you're doing this, then I would suggest you go 

back and look at your whole card.  Because that is exactly what 

you're trying to do.  You then would make an amendment to 

whatever Bill was on the floor of the House.  You've already 

used your three-day hoist, Mr. Speaker, and your hands are 

tied. 

 

Well, well, well.  Well, well, well.  The other thing, Mr. 

Speaker, the other thing we others don't understand . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . the member from Lloydminster 

chirps up from her seat, Mr. Speaker.  I will listen with bated 

breath, ma'am, when you're on your feet defending your 

position in this.  I want you to understand that.  I want you to 

tell those farmers that have phoned me from your area, asking 

me: where do I put my hundred dollars down?  Where? Tell me 

where?  Do you want some names?  Come into my office and 

I'll give them to you.  Madam, where were you when the rally 

was up in Prince Albert . . . or in Paradise Hill.  You weren't 

there, but some of your constituents were. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I intended to try today and find out to the 

members opposite the total inconsistency that there is here 

between your approach in 1989 and your approach today.  No 

one, no one, I feel, can made a hundred per cent flip 

_flop like you folks have done.  I wonder . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Well, the member from Humboldt wants to 

know a few things. 

 

Well, well, well, I'll listen to your remarks, but you don't have 

the intestinal fortitude to get on your feet and try to defend 

yourself when you know, you know very well, this is the most 

outrageous motion that ever come onto the 

floor of this House.  Now I would like . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . Fine, you'll have your turn.  Mr. Speaker, as I 

said, I will be recorded, I'll be recorded, and I'm not afraid to be 

recorded.  Because what I'm saying today is exactly the way I 

feel. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there's another thing that has to be addressed.  

There's another thing you have to address is your own 

conscience, your own conscience . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. Ah, yes, that's fine.  Mr. Speaker, I have a conscience.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'm beginning to wonder if there is any social 

conscience on the other side of the House.  Sixty thousand 

farmers stand in peril because of the devious methods you're 

trying to use to get that Bill through the House.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I can see that there's no . . . I'm not making any 

headway with the few members that are here. 

 

But let's go on, Mr. Speaker.  What we're doing here is trying 

to deny the citizens of Saskatchewan a fair day in court.  Now 

that's basically what it's all about.  And I believe the members 

over there will probably get on their feet some time and argue 

that's not the case.  At this point in time, I'm saying that that is 

the case.  If it's not the case, stand up and tell us why it's not the 

case.  That's all I say.  Because this is the way I feel and I'm 

saying it because I feel that way.  That's right. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, another reason why this motion will be 

remembered and another reason why the NDP government will 

be remembered is because this motion that's on the floor of the 

House today, this motion sets another precedent. 

 

The NDP government will be remembered by their precedents.  

The first precedent was on April 21, 1989, when they walked 

out of this Assembly before first reading, before first reading of 

a Bill.  That had never been done before. 

 

And this was the first time that I know of where a government 

tried to manufacture evidence; tried to put a Bill before the 

House that wasn't true just to win a court case, after the court 

case had gone before the courts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first time a government -- this is another 

precedent -- the first time a government tried to bring in rule 

changes to accomplish something they knew they were not able 

to do in another manner.  Another precedent, Mr. Speaker, is 

the first time a committee ever brought a prepared report before 

the committee meeting was held.  That's the first time that ever 

happened that I know of.  Now what kind of a precedent does 

that set? 

 

Does that mean that any chairman or any committee because of 

the preponderance of the members on one side, can prepare a 

report before the meeting is even called or held?  Okay?  Is that 

what it means?  That's what this motion will do for you because 

a precedent has been set.  And that's another reason you will be 

remembered. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you, sir, and to the members 

opposite, this motion on the floor of the House today, this 

motion to change the rules of the House, has a very, very 

devious objective and has a deeper meaning than what we are 

led to believe. 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1379 

Mr. Speaker, today . . . not today, sir, but on Tuesday the NDP 

have introduced this motion to win a court case that's being 

against farmers of Saskatchewan.  And I suggest to you and all 

the members opposite that there is no other reason.  Why 

would this have to come before the House at this time? 

 

We had a 50-day trial period, the new rules.  Why couldn't it 

have waited at least until after the 50-day trial period was up?  

We heard today, Mr. Speaker, in question period, of another 

Bill that may be coming before this House that has far-reaching 

consequences. 

 

It makes me wonder how many more of those obnoxious Bills 

are going to be forced through this House simply because of 

the motion that's on the floor today.  It bothers me, Mr. 

Speaker.  It bothers me.  And it's obvious to me, Mr. Speaker, 

they want to win this motion limiting bell-ringing just to win a 

court case -- absolutely unbelievable. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can say to you and the members opposite, 

we will not allow the GRIP legislation to be voted on unless 

the retroactivity part of that Bill is removed. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- You want to bet? 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Yes I do.  The member from Humboldt, who's 

very quick to talk from his chair . . . and I can understand why 

he don't want to get up in his seat because when he talks he 

doesn't make any sense anyway.  So why would he want to get 

up? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, if bell-ringing is limited, the Bill can be 

introduced in three days time and the opposition's hands are 

tied, as I said.  The option that the the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton offered is absolutely nothing.  And we will be 

powerless, Mr. Speaker, to stop it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . 

. That's right. 

 

We, Mr. Speaker, are in opposition as they were a few years 

ago.  There is no reason to believe that the tables won't be 

turned.  If they keep on, Mr. Speaker, on this headlong, chaotic 

trip into the past, I suggest that they will be back on this side at 

the next election. 

 

If that legislation that's before the courts, the farmers have 

before the courts, is allowed to lose, there are great and terrible 

harm will be done to the farmers of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we're not arguing, we're not arguing the farmers 

are right.  That's not what we're arguing.  What we're arguing 

is, they have a right to be in court and be heard.  If the judge 

rules against the farmers, that's fine.  We're not saying that we 

agree with the changes of GRIP.  You know we don't.  But 

we're not saying . . . what we're saying is, the judge is the one 

that will tell us whether the farmers are right when they said 

they did get proper notice.  And you, sir, could have fixed it -- 

you and your partner, the Minister of Agriculture.  You could 

have said, I am sorry; I made a mistake. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP want the people of Saskatchewan 

to believe that bell-ringing and GRIP are two separate issues.  

Well I disagree.  I say it's not so.  I say it is not so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion on the floor of the House today has 

more to it than meets the eye, and I truly believe that.  This 

motion, Mr. Speaker, will give the NDP the opportunity to ram 

through any legislation that they desire and any legislation that 

suits their vindicative spirit, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . That's right.  Mr. Speaker, this motion that's on 

the floor I suggest has got far-reaching implications.  That is 

why we are not going to allow it to go as it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, bell-ringing was to be discussed in a co-operative 

manner during Rules and Procedures Committee meetings.  

When we went into the Rules Committee meetings that was 

supposed to take place.  Instead, instead, Mr. Speaker, the 

committee had a prepared report before the meeting was even 

started.  Just imagine that, imagine, no consultation with the 

opposition side at all, yet the report was prepared in advance of 

the meeting.  And I'm not going to read from that report just 

now, sir.  The report was prepared before the vote was taken. 

 

Now we know with ten members -- seven government 

members; two opposition, official opposition; and one, the 

member from Greystone who is the Liberal leader -- we knew 

on a vote the government would win.  But to have it 

pre-ordained makes me very, very nervous as to what could 

happen if this motion is allowed to go through as it is. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion completely ignored the opposition.  

Mr. Speaker, the opposition committee members never had an 

opportunity to put forward any suggestions for consideration.  

And when they did, they were not considered.  Now the NDP 

were guaranteed victory, Mr. Speaker, no matter, no matter.  

They had the members to do so. 

 

And it's ironic, Mr. Speaker, the day this motion hit the floor of 

the House was supposed to be private members' day.  In fact, 

the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow had a motion on the 

paper dealing with parliamentary democracy -- that very day, 

parliamentary democracy, that very day, on the order paper.  

What a sham.  What a sham.  What a sham. 

 

This motion that they brought in today, Mr. Speaker, destroys 

the credibility of that private members' motion.  How can you, 

on one hand present a motion talking about democracy, and 

then take this outrageous motion that we're talking about today 

and put it on the floor of the House? 

 

(1515) 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members on the opposite side, I think, should 

be embarrassed.  I think they should, I would say particularly 

those back-benchers who are from the rural community, those 

particularly who are farmers. 

 

I spoke with one of the back-benchers in a casual manner, Mr. 

Speaker.  And I suggested to him that on the GRIP side that the 

government was trying to break a contract.  And 



1380 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

he said to me, I don't believe that there was a contract.  The 

obvious answer . . . or the question that I must ask that 

member, then why do they have to pay a penalty to get out? 

 

Under the old GRIP, '91 GRIP, you went in for three years. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Point of order. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Upshall: -- Mr. Speaker, you have ruled before on the 

substance of the debate, and I think the member is off the topic. 

 

The Speaker: -- The member makes a good point.  That was 

my ruling yesterday, and I was just going to get up and remind 

the member not to get into the details of GRIP '91 or GRIP '92.  

If it makes the link between this motion and the GRIP, that's 

fair enough but not to get into the details. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I respect your ruling, sir, and I thought I was 

quite loose, but I have no intention of trying to over, over . . . 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I reiterate to you, sir, they should be 

embarrassed because this motion will effectively stifle the 

opposition's ability to act on the people's behalf.  Mr. Speaker, 

the only tool left, if this is taken away, as the member from 

Prince Albert Carlton mentioned, is filibuster. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, a filibuster probably will work if you have 

a fair amount of members.  If you're limited in members, that 

maybe brings up another reason why this motion is tried to be 

rammed through the House, because they maybe felt the 

members on this side of the House would not talk about the 

motion because we're few in numbers.  Mr. Speaker, nothing 

could be further from the truth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion has taken away the opposition's right 

to put forward its constituency's concerns. 

 

Excuse me, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, when we walked out of 

the House and rang the bells, it went far beyond the 

constituencies.  It went far beyond the constituencies, Mr. 

Speaker.  We, the opposition, were acting on behalf of our 

constituents and all of the other people in Saskatchewan.  And I 

will get to that, Mr. Speaker, a little later when I want to show 

you why the people are behind us on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the members on the opposite side of 

the House have short memories, very short memories.  And I'm 

going to bring their memory back.  I want the members . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Would the members please cut 

down the noise and let the member from Wilkie have his say. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, the members do 

have a short memory.  I want you to think back to the 

comments made in 1989 when a similar 

motion was on the floor of the House and was being discussed.  

And I will go into that a little later, Mr. Speaker, because I do 

want to bring some memories back to some of the members 

who were there then and are here now. 

 

There was a massive outcry from the NDP that their 

democratic rights were being trampled upon.  Well, well, Mr. 

Speaker, imagine that -- their democratic rights were being 

trampled upon.  Well what about our democratic rights?  Are 

we not as democratic as they are?  Do we not have the rights 

that they have?  Now that we are in the opposition, does that 

somehow make us not democratic, our beliefs not as equally as 

honourable as they thought theirs were at the time of the 1989 

debate? 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there's been times when I've been on my 

feet and I may have had some harsh words for the opposition at 

that day, and I believe there's been some harsh words said and 

pointed in my direction, Mr. Speaker, a few times.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I say to you, sir, and I say to the House, we do those 

things but I don't remember that we impinged on the integrity 

of the people on the opposition.  I don't think I ever suggested 

that the members opposite, ill-advised maybe, but that they 

didn't believe in what they were saying. 

 

My job as opposition is not much different than it was when I 

was in government.  It's to try to explain my point of view and 

hopefully change the point of view to some extent of the 

members on the other side.  Equally I expect them to be on 

their feet trying to change my opinion in some instances.  I 

have never, Mr. Speaker, considered myself that stubborn that I 

couldn't change my mind, nor have I ever found that I couldn't 

say I'm sorry. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, it was agreed.  It was agreed that that 

motion would be handled in an all-party committee -- all-party 

committee.  Back in 1989 that's what was decided.  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, as all members in the House today know, an 

agreement was not reached.  An all-party agreement was not 

reached in 1989.  It was not reached. 

 

The government of the day, my government, the Progressive 

Conservative government, did not strong arm a decision.  They 

did not come to the meeting all ready with a report written up.  

Because we had a majority, we could have done it.  We didn't 

do it.  Now you could argue, Mr. Speaker, that it took a long 

time to convince us.  You can argue that, and you can do that 

fairly and squarely that we were dug in, if you will.  But 

eventually we listened to what you had to say. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, that would have been 

undemocratic had we done that.  That would have been no 

more fair then than what you're doing to us today is fair.  I 

would have said again, that would have been undemocratic. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what is this government doing?  What is 

this government doing today?  You're ramming it through.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, on the morning of July 7, 1992, they forced 

this motion in committee, and they will now attempt to force 

the vote and pass the motion -- not with consultation, not with 

agreement, and as I might point out, not with any rebuttal other 

than the member from Prince Albert Carlton who got up and . . 

. I can say to 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1381 

you, sir, a very weak defence, very weak defence of your 

actions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will suggest to you and to the members, they 

have a fight on their hands if they think that they're going to get 

this motion through just by sitting there and waiting for us to 

run out of ideas. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  There are lots of members who 

really seem to want to get into the debate.  If they would just 

indicate that to the Speaker, I would recognize them and if they 

just got on their feet, I'd let them speak. 

 

In the mean time the member from Wilkie does have the 

privilege to speak at this time and I would ask members to 

please let him have that privilege. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was saying, the 

government does have a fight on its hands because we will not 

and we cannot sit still for this.  The reason we will not is 

because fundamentally we don't agree with it.  The reason that 

we cannot sit still is because our people don't agree with this 

motion.  And we were hired by those people to defend what 

they think is right, and we're prepared to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the farmers of the province who will be directly 

affected by this motion will not sit still for this.  The farmers 

will not let us sit still for this.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, the 

people of Saskatchewan will not let us sit still for this.  The 

people of Saskatchewan, I think, Mr. Speaker, will become 

very alarmed at how far this government will go to try to 

achieve its ends. 

 

I said in my opening remarks, Mr. Speaker, that I have stood in 

my place and I have spoke to different motions.  Most of those 

motions, Mr. Speaker, I believe were honourable. 

 

This motion we're talking to today, Mr. Speaker, in my humble 

opinion, is a dishonourable motion.  This motion was not put 

on the floor for what it contains in the motion itself.  This 

motion was put on the floor, Mr. Speaker, to gain ends that are 

not honourable. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, I don't think any honourable 

member will walk out of this legislature and ring the bells on a 

whim.  You do not do that in a fit of anger -- at least I don't 

think you should -- and I'm sure we did not.  We walked out, 

we rang the bells because we had a fundamental difference of 

opinion of what was going on in the House. 

 

Now the member from Churchill Downs said we didn't try to 

reach an agreement to get back to work.  Mr. Speaker, that is 

simply not the truth.  And I will go through a few instances, 

Mr. Speaker, to prove what I say.  The member from Churchill 

Downs, in his opening remarks, made a few remarks that 

simply were not the facts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he said that there was no attempt made to 

compromise.  I would like to suggest that there was quite a 

number of attempts.  I have a communication here, June 19 of 

this year; another one June 22, 1992; June 23, 1992; June 24, 

1992; June 25, 1992; June 26, 1992.  Mr. Speaker, I stop there 

because there may be some other 

communications going on and, as you know and we all know, 

there are things that are done in confidence and they must 

remain in confidence. 

 

(1530) 

 

But I say to you and I say to all the members opposite that what 

the member from Churchill Downs said in his opening remarks 

simply is not true -- not true.  And I have to say that.  I have to 

bring that . . . I have to have that recorded so that in the future 

someone might read that and suggest that we were 

uncooperative; that simply is not the truth and it should not be 

allowed to go unchallenged. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Churchill Downs also 

suggested in his opening remarks that the difference between 

their walk-out in '89 and the walk-out in 1992, they had the 

support of the people and that we had no support.  And he 

based his argument on the fact that we didn't have a whole lot 

of people standing around in the front of the legislature, 

smashing through the doors, led by the Minister of Finance, 

actually physically, bodily, tramping on the guards.  We didn't 

do that, Mr. Speaker, and I'll tell you two reasons why. 

 

We didn't go out to lead the charge and our people don't do 

that.  We don't have the radicals on our side that we could give 

a phone call to and they show up here in the hundreds.  That, 

Mr. Speaker, is exactly the way I feel. 

 

Now I want to tell you, we done a poll, and to prove to you that 

the member from Churchill Downs, on top of being very 

hypocritical in his opening remarks, was also to a certain 

degree, untruthful. 

 

And I want to read to you some of the reports from the poll.  

He said, we had no support from the people, the masses if you 

will.  Well let me say, have you heard of the GRIP 

controversy?  Yes, 80 per cent, 80 per cent of the people knew 

why we walked out. 

 

And I'm not going to go through the whole thing because you 

probably had a copy.  But I wanted to point out a few things to 

show you why I have to mention a few things that the member 

from Churchill Downs said, which I don't think is fair. 

 

And another question: is the government acting properly?  Is 

the government acting improperly?  And I'm going to go to the 

valid percentage on all of these quotes so that you can't accuse 

me of cherry-picking through to get the best results, Mr. 

Speaker.  The valid percentage on that, is the government 

acting properly?  No, 82 per cent.  Improperly, 82 per cent; 

properly, 17.6.  That indicates to me that we did have support 

from the people. 

 

The next thing was: do you agree with the legislation?  

Strongly agree, 13.5 per cent; strongly disagree, 39.3 per cent; 

somewhat disagree, 37.5. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the other question: should you wait for the court 

decision?  Go ahead now, 16 per cent; wait for the courts, 83.6 

per cent.  To me that is support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The other question was . . . another question was: are you 



1382 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

aware of walking out?  The questions were, yes, 81 per cent 

were aware.  They were aware of what they were talking about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest that that is . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A lot of awareness. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Pardon? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- There was a lot of awareness out there. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- That's right.  My colleague says there was a lot 

of awareness.  And the point I think that brings out is that they 

were not talking about something they didn't know anything 

about. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another question was: are you satisfied with the 

government?  One heading was very satisfied -- 6.2 per cent.  

Another one was, were you very dissatisfied? -- 24.4. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have not gone through the whole thing but I 

want to give you another one or two here.  Who answered these 

questions?  And its breakdown -- farmers or non-farmers.  

People that owned the farms was 31 per cent.  Those who did 

not own farms, there was 68.2 per cent.  So, Mr. Speaker, in 

answer to the member from Churchill . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order, order.  Why is the member on 

his feet? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- I do not recognize the member because he is 

not in his seat. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I think 

I answered some of the questions . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lautermilch: -- Point of order, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, the member's comments, although may be interesting, 

are pretty wide-ranging and varied and have from what I can 

ascertain very little to do with the topic of bell-ringing.  And I 

would ask, Mr. Speaker, that you rule on this. 

 

The Speaker: -- I have listened very carefully and I think the 

member is attempting to relate it to the topic at hand.  And . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Don't I have the right to speak to a point 

of order? 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  If it's on the same point of order? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I want to speak to the same point of 

order, please. 

 

The Speaker: -- If it's on the same point of order, I don't need 

any further advice.  I'm ruling that I think the member is quite 

in order in the way he's speaking and the 

member can continue. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Now I can't even speak to him. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I just want to remind the 

member from Rosthern that Speakers in the past, if they 

disagree with the point of order that is given and are ruling in 

favour of the member that is speaking, have often said, I don't 

need further advice and I'm ruling in favour of the member 

that's speaking.  If I had ruled against the member who is 

speaking, I would have taken your advice, sir. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I just wanted to show . . . That's the 

second time now. 

 

The Speaker: -- That's right, and I'll do it the third time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, I believe that I made the point 

that I was making in response to the opening remarks that the 

member from Churchill Downs made in terms of our support, 

and no attempt to consult with the government on this issue.  

Mr. Speaker, the member from Prince Albert Carlton, if you 

will allow me, sir, did make some fairly wide-ranging 

comments and I would like to . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Beg leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, 

Mr. Speaker, and to all members of the Assembly here today a 

long-time former civil servant, a person who has worked in the 

public service of this province, Mr. Nelson Bryksa, who is 

seated in your gallery.  Mr. Bryksa is presently a renowned 

diving coach with the Saskatchewan divers and is one of those 

people who has helped raise the stature of diving in this 

province so that at national meets across the country 

Saskatchewan is becoming a power in diving.  I'd like all 

members to welcome Mr. Bryksa here today. 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

(continued) 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, in these 

opening remarks another comment the member from Churchill 

Downs made was that on the first controversial Bill, we rang 

the bells.  Mr. Speaker, that again I must challenge because it's 

simply not true.  I can refer you, Mr. Speaker, to several Bills 

that are very controversial and certainly, Mr. Speaker, not 

agreed to by us on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is Bill No. 9, the mineral tax Act.  There 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1383 

was Bill No. 10, The Crown Minerals Act.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

I can go back to an Act . . . Bill 18, very controversial.  And I 

stood in my place, Mr. Speaker, when that Bill was brought, 

and I did make my disapproval noted.  So there again, the 

minister, the member, the associate minister, was not exactly 

truthful when he made those remarks.  And I'm not suggesting 

that it was deliberate; I'm just saying, for one reason or another, 

they were not truthful. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned Bill 18.  Well, Mr. Speaker, we 

know who brought Bill 18 in.  And I would like to remind that 

member, I'd like to remind that member, Mr. Speaker, of some 

of the comments he made in 1989 when we were talking about 

the rule changes in 1989.  And the reason I want to bring that to 

the attention of the member from Saskatoon Fairview, Mr. 

Speaker, is that it's a little hard for me to accept the complete 

flip-flop of that member.  And I'm going to read some excerpts 

from Hansard, May 29, 1989.  And I'm quoting the member 

from Saskatoon Fairview who is now the Attorney General, 

and he says and I quote: 

 

 I'm going to try again, Mr. Speaker, as previous speakers 

have done, to explain to you, and through you to the 

members on the government side, why what they are doing, 

why what they are doing is clearly wrong -- trying to explain 

that we can and should approach the question of rule changes 

in the normal, traditional way, and why that's a good idea; 

and in particular, trying to explain why we shouldn't be doing 

this rule change at this time, in this climate, and in this 

particular way. 

 

May 29, 1989, and that was in Hansard.  As I mentioned 

before in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, Hansard never forgets.  

Mr. Speaker, I go on to quote from the same member: 

 

 . . . Mr. Speaker, these are not the rules of the government; 

these are not the rules of the Minister of Justice; these are not 

the rules of the cabinet; these are not your rules, Mr. Speaker. 

These are the rules of the Assembly. 

 

Why then are these rules not the rules of the Assembly today?  

He goes on to say: 

 

 These are my rules; these are the rules of my colleagues on 

this side of the House every bit as much as they are the rules 

of the government members. 

 

May 29.  Well, Mr. Speaker, again I ask the question: why then 

is it different for us?  Now that we are in the opposition, why 

wouldn't we be the same?  Why wouldn't we get the same 

rights, the same privileges?  This is the member, your member, 

the Attorney General of the province saying these words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say and I quote: 

 

 These are the rules of the opposition; these are the rules of 

the entire Assembly, and they ought to be changed by the 

Assembly, not by the government 

 using its majority in terms of the number of seats won in 

order to force through rules that they find convenient to their 

particular agenda right now.  That's wrong . . . 

 

That's what he said.  That's what he said.  Now again I tell you, 

and I quote from Hansard, May 29, 1989.  And I go on again, 

Mr. Speaker, the same member: 

 

 Indeed, it is a form of tyranny, Mr. Speaker.  And I believe 

that to be completely parliamentary as a term to be applied to 

what's happening in this House. 

 

And I believe, he says, that to be completely parliamentary. 

 

(1545) 

 

He's calling the government of the day tyrants.  But he says it's 

parliamentary.  Well I guess we have used some harsh words 

too.  But again I say, why is it different now that they're 

government?  Again I quote: 

 

 It is a form of tyranny -- the tyranny of the majority in a 

situation where the majority ought not to be exercised . . . 

 

He's saying there, if I interpret him right, Mr. Speaker, that just 

because you are the majority, you don't always force your will 

on other people.  And that's what we're doing here today. 

 

 . . . where the majority ought not to be exercised, where the 

fact that the government has the number of seats that it has is 

being used to change rules which have always been changed 

by discussion and by consensus. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this motion that's on the floor today which we are 

speaking to, never had consensus -- never had consensus. 

 

And I want to go on to the same member, Saskatoon Fairview: 

 

 The effect of this precedent will be that the rules will be 

regarded as the government's rules to change as they like; that 

the government is the master of the rules . . . 

 

 The effect of this precedent will be that the rules will be 

regarded as the government's rules to change as they like; that 

the government is the master of the rules of this Assembly 

because it is prepared to use its parliamentary majority, no 

doubt with a firm whip and discipline, in order to ensure that 

the majority (controls) . . . the motion. 

 

Well it would be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to hear what that 

member has to say today when he gets the opportunity to stand 

on his feet and defend what he said then as opposed to what 

they're doing today. 

 

Another quote from the same member, May 29, 1989, 

Hansard: 



1384 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

It is a serious backward step, Mr. Speaker, and I don't think I 

exaggerate one bit by putting it in those terms. 

 

A serious backward step, he says. 

 

 It is a very bad precedent.  We should not be doing this. 

 

One of the more credible members of the government today 

was saying this.  Now am I supposed to be told, and supposed 

to believe, that that member now has changed his mind?  To 

me, Mr. Speaker, this sounds very definite.  I'd be interested to 

listen later on when he speaks to this motion. 

 

He goes on to say, still on May 29, 1989, Hansard . . . And, 

Mr. Speaker, in case . . . I've taken these quotes; I have them 

here.  And if you want me to I can go to page and paragraph 

and all that if it's needed. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 The only reason I can think of, Mr. Speaker, is that they want 

to engage in the exercise of a demonstration of power. 

 

A demonstration of power.  Well, Mr. Speaker, he says: 

 

 (We're) going to take this rule change and they're going to 

stuff it up our nose no matter what we do. 

 

That's what he said.  He said, and I want to quote that line 

because . . . 

 

 (We're) going to take this rule change and they're going to 

stuff it up our nose . . . 

 

Well what are they trying to do to us, Mr. Speaker?  Do you 

have another idea where they're trying to stuff it?  Well, Mr. 

Speaker, I say to you, this member, as I said, highly regarded, 

is standing there, and I don't know if he knows what's going on, 

Mr. Speaker.  But it's a little hard for me to believe that he's 

going to stand in his place and defend this motion. 

 

Here's another quote from the same member, and he goes on to 

say: 

 

 You may be the big school-yard bully; you may think that 

you're the big school-yard bully and you're going to push 

around the kid that's been giving you a problem. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe we're the kid.  And he goes on to 

say: 

 

 But this kid, these kids over here are just not going to be 

pushed around like that.  These kids are going to stand up 

here and they're going to make the kinds of arguments that 

I've been trying to make tonight, and they're going to make 

them over and over again, and the people of Saskatchewan 

are going to hear them over and over again. 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, I know you would agree that any fair-minded 

person would agree that it is the obligation of the opposition 

to keep hammering these points home.  And hammer them 

home we will, because the school-yard bully simply doesn't 

have a right to force this kind of a change on us.  The 

school-yard bully does not win in the end, Mr. Speaker, and 

that's literally what we have going here, a school-yard bully . 

. . 

 

Well, I couldn't agree with him more, particularly in the light of 

what's going on today.  He goes on to say: 

 

 . . . a school-yard bully trying to use its strength to enforce its 

will, and to enforce it in a way that is just not acceptable 

having regards to the traditions of this place, not appropriate 

having regard to the traditions of this place. 

 

I want to read that again: 

 

 . . . a school-yard bully trying to use its strength to enforce its 

will, and to enforce it in a way that is just not acceptable 

having regards to the traditions of this place, not appropriate 

having regard . . . 

 

It's not appropriate, he says, not having regard to the traditions 

of this place. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Read it again. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Well the member said, read it again.  I'll pass it 

over to you, sir, and you can read it yourself because it's 

recorded.  As I said before, let it be known to you folks, you 

will be recorded when you stand in your place and try to 

defend this motion that's on the floor, and you will be recorded 

when you make your vote.  When you stand and vote, you will 

be recorded.  And Hansard, Hansard never forgets. 

 

I'll go through some of this and let you know, Hansard does 

never forget. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- For some reason, we forgot to dig Bob's 

up. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- I have Bob's.  I have all of them.  And as your 

own illustrious member said, it's our duty to bring these points 

forward and hammer them and hammer them and hammer 

them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

 Your approach is immature; your approach is inappropriate; 

your approach is antidemocratic . . . 

 

Antidemocratic, what the member from Fairview said.  And, 

Mr. Speaker, let it be known that I'm not saying, I'm not 

quoting this member in derision nor in contempt; I'm quoting 

him verbatim.  And I agree, I agree he makes some points.  

Here's another one, May 29, 1989, Hansard: 

 

 Your approach is immature . . . The pros and cons 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1385 

 ought to be considered with some care.  But what we're doing 

is going to be affecting future generations, not because of the 

ringing of the bells but because of the precedent that we're 

setting in terms of process, and this process is wrong. 

 

I agree with it.  I quote him again: 

 

 I know it; with respect, Mr. Speaker, you know it; and the 

members opposite know it. 

 

Those words are no more wrong today than they were in 1989. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Fairview who, as I said before, 

presented Bill 18 -- and I didn't like it and he knew I didn't like 

it and I said I didn't like it -- and he got the Bill through; we 

didn't walk on his Bill. 

 

And I'm quoting to you, as I said, not necessarily because I 

disagree with the man, but I'm quoting to you, trying to say to 

you, what has changed?  What has changed?  We have been 

co-operative.  We did not ram through Bills that we didn't like, 

without listening.  We changed some of our Bills; we amended 

some of our Bills.  And I'm sure you will too before the 

session's over, hopefully. 

 

Here's another quote from the member from Saskatoon 

Fairview: 

 

 . . . we're seeing a government that has lost control of its 

agenda; (well how true that is today) not even lost control of 

its agenda so much as abandoned control of its agenda.  And 

they've reduced itself to this kind of petty action that we see 

with respect to this motion that's before the House tonight; 

(the bell-ringing motion, rules-change motion) this kind of 

petty action where the motivation is to somehow (somehow) 

teach the opposition a lesson, shove it up their nose, show 

them who's the boss around here, show them who's got the 

most seats in the House, and in so doing break one of the 

longest . . . well one of the invariable traditions of this House, 

namely the way in which we deal with the rules. 

 

Again May 29, 1989 in Hansard, and this quote, Mr. Speaker, 

is speaking about the member from Weyburn, Mr. Hepworth.  

And he says: 

 

 I think he recognizes full well that it is a bad and a dangerous 

precedent for the government to be changing the rules in the 

manner in which it is using (doing) -- a very bad and very 

dangerous precedent. 

 

The member from Fairview, the now Attorney General, who, 

as I said, is probably one of your more credible members.  He 

goes on to say: 

 

 I would certainly like to be convinced and persuaded that 

what we're not doing here is not only an absolute utter waste 

of time, but a very, very dangerous and highly inappropriate 

way for any government to be acting. 

Now I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, I'm not doing justice to the 

presentation that member made because he's very articulate, 

and I apologize to him for that, but what I'm trying to do is 

present to the House what your people said under the very 

same circumstances. 

 

And I'm asking you, particularly those of you who are here, 

what has changed?  Why was it right for you to say these 

words, for you to be incensed at this kind of ramrodding 

through of things because of your majority, but it wasn't right 

for us but it's right for you?  I can't understand that.  And I am 

trying to be fair in my own mind.  I'm trying to see what's 

different.  I don't see any difference.  I don't see any difference. 

 

He goes on to say, he goes on to say again, he's talking about 

one of the government members of the day, and I can name 

him I think, Mr. Speaker, because he's no longer with us in the 

House, and he says, the member from Fairview, and I quote, he 

says: 

 

 . . . no doubt later in this debate we'll see him (Walter 

Johnson) get to his feet and explain to us that he's not a 

school-yard bully; (that) he really is the soul of rationality, 

logic, and intelligence, as he throws aside some 84 years of 

tradition, as far as the rules are concerned, and makes these 

rules of this House the government rules -- (he repeats) the 

government rules. 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 That's a precedent we can't live with and that's a precedent 

that you can't live with . . . 

 

I say the same thing.  We can't live with this precedent and you 

can't live with this precedent.  It's a very dangerous step you're 

trying to take. 

 

(1600) 

 

He goes on to say: 

 

 . . . because some day, my friend, you're going to be in the 

opposition.  (And he repeats that) . . . you're going to be in 

the opposition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 

 

 . . . the point remains that the Conservative Party in 

opposition cannot live with a situation where the government 

feels free to change the rules according to the government's 

own wishes. 

 

This is your member, the member from Saskatoon Fairview.  In 

1989 he's saying these very words.  And I want to repeat to 

you: 

 

 The point remains that the Conservative Party in opposition 

cannot live with a situation where the government feels free 

to change the rules according to the government's own 

wishes. 

 

And that's what you're trying to do. 
 

He goes on to say: 



1386 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

You can't live with; we can't live with that; our children can't 

live with it; (and) future generations can't live with it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members, what's changed?  What's 

changed?  Why can we now live with that?  He says the 

government in opposition can't live with that kind of rule.  Now 

why can we now live with it?  Because you have the majority?  

You are government, and you know it all?  And you now . . . 

now it's you that is the school-yard bully, and not Mr. Walter 

Johnson, as he says in this previous quote. 

 

I want you to get into your place and tell me what has changed.  

Why are you now the school-yard bully?  You didn't like it. 

 

Now I have some more quotes here, Mr. Speaker, and I have 

never found anywhere where any of the opposition members 

got up after the presentation by the member from Fairview and 

contradicted him.  They never got up and said, Mr. Speaker, I 

disagree with the member from Fairview. 

 

So in effect, you must have agreed with him.  I can't find any 

place where you disagreed with him.  So does that mean you 

are now the school-yard bully?  That's something you'll have to 

answer yourself. 

 

As I mentioned, Hansard never forgets; the people will 

eventually.  But you yourself who have a conscience will never 

forget what you're trying to do in this legislature with this 

outrageous Bill, not because of the Bill itself but because the 

motive behind the Bill.  That's what gets me upset. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can stand in my place and I can argue 

and debate a Bill that I feel is honourable and I feel that is 

honest.  And I can do that, Mr. Speaker, trying to be logical and 

trying to be fair.  But when I see something like this, which is 

unfair . . . it's not honourable, and it should never have reached 

the floor of this House in the state that it was brought forward. 

 

It was brought forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . it was flawed 

from the first.  Now in a judgement or a . . . I guess it's a 

judgement, a ruling by the Speaker, which most of us agreed 

with, anyone that was fair in their mind agreed with the 

Speaker when he said, all right, enough is enough.  Let's go 

back to work.  We'll put aside the controversial Bill, and let's 

get on with the work. 

 

As a matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was plaudits, 

pats on the back from us, from your side, from the media, that 

said: Mr. Speaker, although you're on very thin ice and it's a 

precedent that has never been used before, in this instance we 

agree with you.  And we went back to work. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the judgement came down, the 

Speaker suggested that the Rules Committee get together and 

come back with a ruling.  The committee did meet.  But what 

bothers me, what bothers me about that meeting, that it was 

pre-ordained before the meeting ever took place.  That bothers 

me a little bit. 

That's why I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don't like this Bill, but 

I don't like the way it was presented.  It makes me much, much 

more anxious when I see how it was brought forward.  I have 

sat on committees -- all of us have in our time -- and I never 

before, never before saw the report written before the meeting 

was there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of material here.  And I ask for your 

indulgence till I get it kind of lined up. 

 

I want to quote.  I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, about why this 

upsets me a little bit, the way this Bill came to the floor of the 

House, this motion, this rules.  We wonder why the public have 

a low opinion of politicians, elected members.  And I think . . . 

I'm reading from an article by Murray Mandryk in the Leader-

Post.  And I think it kind of gives us all food for thought. 

 

And I'm not going to read the whole thing because I'm sure you 

don't agree with that.  Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to read some 

inserts, and I'm going to pick out ones that I think are fair, 

criticizes both sides.  Mr. Mandryk says, "I suppose if we have 

to pick sides, the title of king of hypocrites of the day . . . 

(goes) to the NDP." 

 

And he goes on, later on, and he's talking about this Bill.  And 

he says: 

 

 Heaven help us if the Tories had tried to pull such a stunt in 

1989! 

 

But he also goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 

 

 . . . there is remarkably little to choose from here. 

 

 About the only thing more obscene than the hypocrisy itself 

has been each party's justification for its own hypocrisy. (I 

think we all have to listen to that.) 

 

 The NDP claims their unlimited bell-ringing in 1989 was 

completely justified because bell-ringing is justifiable when 

"the majority of public opinion is on your side." 

 

And that's what we have on our side today. 

 

Now I can take you back to the results of the poll, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I can ask you again, does two wrongs make a 

right?  If we wrong in '89 and he thinks you're wrong in '92, do 

those two wrongs somehow make a right?  No, I don't think so. 

 

And he goes on to say: 

 

 No way, the PCs argue.  Our bell-ringing was more justified 

because our opposition is based on legal (objectives) . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, an article like that . . . and I know we don't live 

necessarily by the press, but I believe we should, as all 

members should, take a little heat for what we're doing here. 

 

This rules-changing Bill that's before the House today, Mr. 

Speaker, as I said before, I'm not so much opposed to 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1387 

the Bill, although I would be speaking against it, but I am very, 

very upset at what I think is the why and the way it was 

brought in.  Again I say it was unhonourable.  It's not an 

honourable attempt by the government to get on with its 

business. 

 

It's a devious method to shut the opposition down to where they 

don't have a voice, they don't have anything to do.  We might 

just as well, Mr. Speaker, go on holidays as far as being an 

opposition.  If this Bill goes through, there's nothing left, 

there's nothing left for us. 

 

The irony of the whole thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we have 

offered ways to get out of this.  We've asked the Minister of 

Agriculture and his cohort, the minister of Crop Insurance, to 

admit there's a mistake and offer some changes.  That's all it 

would take.  We were ready to go to work on two hours notice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I've been quoting a few things from 1989, and I 

have a few more that I think we should look at.  In 1989 there 

was some prolonged speeches made.  And the member from 

Regina Rosemont felt so strong in the opposition to the motion 

that was on the floor the day that he spoke -- I believe if my 

memory's working -- something like 13 hours.  And he felt so 

strong about it . . . if he felt so strong to last that long, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to quote what he said: what this government 

wants to do is ram through its own political agenda so that it 

can carry on its maniacal course -- and he says again -- and 

everybody on this side of the legislature and now everybody in 

Saskatchewan is saying, shame, shame to that government that 

is more interested in its own narrow partisan political purposes 

than it is in the real problems facing the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

That's what he said.  Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of things I'd like 

to say on this.  I have just barely got into some of the material 

that I have.  But, Mr. Speaker, I know there are others that want 

to speak to this, at least I'm sure they do.  I want to . . . a couple 

of quotes from the member from Saskatoon Broadway. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I chose to quote the member from Saskatoon 

Broadway on this issue because as you, sir, and all of us are 

aware, that member was never hesitant to get on her feet and 

speak her mind, and I give her marks.  She always had her 

materials well researched and she was articulate.  So I quote 

from that member from Saskatoon Broadway, and she said: 

 

 . . . the government's decision to bring forward this motion to 

limit the opposition's ability to ring the bells, if they so 

choose, on controversial issues, is really a change in 

procedure and rules without the agreement of the opposition. 

 

Now that's what we're saying.  That's exactly what we're 

saying.  The government's trying to bring this through without 

the agreement of the opposition.  That was May 29 in Hansard. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

 This government, in my view, Mr. Speaker, will set a 

dangerous precedent if it uses its majority to 

force through the new rule changes.  Never before have the 

rules changed without all-party consent.  A departure now . . . 

And I want to remind the members opposite that a departure 

now will permit, will permit future governments to change 

the rules at will. 

 

That was her concern in 1989.  We listened and we withdrew 

the Bill.  That's our concerns today, sir.  Now that member is in 

the government now and I'll be interested to hear her remarks at 

a later date. 

 

She goes on to say: 

 

 There are times, however, I'd like to remind the government, 

when issues are so important, so extremely important, that it 

requires that the opposition's objections be put forward in an 

exceptionally forceful way. 

 

(1615) 

 

Well I don't know how forceful we are, Mr. Speaker, but that's 

exactly what we're trying to do.  We're trying to put our case 

before the House as forcefully as we can and as fair, as fairly as 

we can. 

 

And I suppose, Mr. Speaker, we are directing our comments to 

those on the opposite side of the House who are not in the inner 

sanctum where the power is.  Because I believe, sir, that some 

of those members over there don't fully appreciate what they're 

trying to do to the traditions and rules of this House. 

 

She goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 Sometimes obstruction, Mr. Speaker, exerts pressure on 

governments to reconsider their position.  Sometimes 

obstruction does that, and it encourages the majority 

government to move slowly and cautiously. 

 

Why do we have to do this so forcefully and so undemocratic?  

Why can't it be more slowly and cautiously? 

 

Mr. Speaker, again I say, I may not have always agreed with 

that member, but I give her full marks for saying what she 

believed.  And I hope she would stand in her place and say the 

same thing on this motion. 

 

She goes on to say, May 29, 1989, Hansard: 

 

 Bell-ringing, Mr. Speaker, can also be used to gain 

legitimacy because of what it accomplishes.  It can be 

successful in forcing a compromise, and it can turn divisive 

legislation into legislation of consensus. 

 

And I think -- That's unquote.  I think what she's saying is what 

we're saying.  We don't have to be at loggerheads here.  We can 

sit down together and reach a consensus on this.  Again, the 

member from Broadway said: 

 

 . . . what I'm trying to say here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 

there are occasions in our history 



1388 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

in this country when oppositions need the right to ring the 

bells.  They need the right to ring the bells.  Oppositions don't 

take that right lightly, or they shouldn't, because they do so at 

their own peril (she repeated that) -- they do so at their own 

peril . . . 

 

I said that, Mr. Speaker, in some of my opening remarks.  We 

do not walk out of this House lightly.  We don't take that right 

lightly.  We do not do that to get even.  We do not say: you did 

it; we'll do it.  Mr. Speaker, I believe this opposition are more 

mature than that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on and quote from Hansard, May 29, 

1989, the same member: 

 

 Now any opposition, any opposition in this province would 

not be doing its job if it failed to use all of the tactics and 

strategies available to it in preventing this government from 

going against its word. 

 

That's what she said.  And I think that's fairly straightforward.  

The member said that.  I believe that's right.  Again, she said: 

 

 It should be a tactic that opposition parties can use in the 

future, that this government wants to put it to us. 

 

I want the members to listen to what she said here: "It should 

be a tactic that opposition parties can use in the future . . ." 

 

What has changed?  Why is not right for us to have that right?  

Your own member said so, your own members.  And I chose 

some of the older members because I think they have some 

credibility.  I mean that in the sense of service, not in generic 

age. 

 

Again, the member went on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 

 

 We have the right to be here; we have the right to speak on 

this motion, and we have the right to oppose.  And we have 

the right, if necessary, to ring bells to draw the attention of 

the people of Saskatchewan, and to the government, that 

they've gone too far.  The members of government have gone 

too far. 

 

There's no difference today than it was when the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway was talking in 1989.  Why, I ask you?  I 

ask you, why?  What's changed? 

 

She goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 This government doesn't want the opposition to be able to 

protect the public from unwarranted attacks by the members 

opposite . . . what this government doesn't want.  They don't 

want an effective opposition. 

 

May 29, 1989, and that's out of Hansard.  As I said to member 

before, Hansard never forgets. 

 

 You want to limit our ability to represent the 

citizens of Saskatchewan, and I'll tell you this: you may get 

away with it, but you will pay dearly, members of the 

government, you will pay dearly in the next election. 

 

That is a quote from the member from Saskatoon Broadway.  

Again I quote the member.  I quote the member again, Mr. 

Speaker: 

 

 And then we're on to the rule changes without the consent of 

the opposition.  And never in the history of our province have 

rules changed without all-party agreement. 

 

Never, 84 years.  Your own members, both of them . . . I 

quoted from the member from Fairview who I say to you, sir, 

not only has the respect of the members over there, but has a 

certain amount of respect from us on this side. 

 

I chose the member from Saskatoon Fairview . . . Broadway, 

sorry, because as I said, I never always agreed with that 

member but I was always prepared to give her the credit that 

she had her material researched.  She knew her topic, and she 

was prepared to stand and defend her opinion.  In other words, 

I'm saying I'm choosing people that I think have credibility in 

your own ranks, to quote.  I'm not choosing some of the more 

radical people you had over there.  She goes on to say, and I 

quote: 

 

 But you people are going to sock it to the opposition, and 

you're going to sock it to the people in the process. 

 

She goes on: 

 

 They're concerned about bell-ringing.  Well what about the 

people of Saskatchewan, and what their hopes and dreams 

and the future?  It's time you people started paying attention 

to the real needs of Saskatchewan people. 

 

May 29, 1989, Hansard. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these excerpts that I've chosen I believe have 

credibility.  I believe that you should listen.  I think the 

members should listen, or at least go and read what you said in 

1989 and try to justify that with what you're trying to do to us 

today with this motion that's on the floor, that I think is a very 

dishonourable motion. 

 

She goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 . . . I just want to remind them again that their decision to 

come forward with this motion without the consensus of the 

members opposite, the members of the opposition, will set, 

and does set, a dangerous precedent in our province.  It sets a 

dangerous precedent that the majority in this province, the 

members of the government, will force its will through the 

new rule change. 

 

 I just want to remind the members opposite that this 

departure from history and procedure, where we've had 

all-party consensus in terms of rule changes, will permit 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1389 

future governments -- and I just want to remind them of this 

-- it will permit future governments to change the rules at 

will. 

 

What's changed?  If you couldn't allow it because of what a 

future government may do, then why is it different now?  

Why?  Are you somehow above the rules?  Are you somehow 

above the democratic process?  Are you somehow better, more 

trustworthy?  I don't believe that.  I don't believe it.  I don't 

think you do either.  I don't think any of you do. 

 

She goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 . . . I want to remind the members opposite that some day you 

will be the official opposition, some day soon. 

 

Well that worked.  That happened.  It happened. 

 

And she goes on to say, and I quote: 

 

 . . . future governments will remember this.  They will 

remember that you forced your will of the majority on the 

minority, and that your departure now will lend to us the very 

arguments that will permit a New Democratic Party 

government to change the rules in (this House) . . . at will. 

 

That's what she said that our Bill would do.  And we withdrew 

that Bill.  We withdrew that Bill.  I'm not suggesting, sir, that it 

was because of this one particular quote, but when you look at 

the material that we have . . . And these are quotes from the 

members opposite in 1989 when we were talking about the rule 

changes.  We withdrew that Bill after listening.  Again I quote 

from Hansard, May 29, 1989, the same member: 

 

 And there may be a time in this province when the New 

Democratic Party is doing something that it shouldn't be 

doing, and you will want to have the right, you will want to 

have the right to use the parliamentary tradition of 

bell-ringing, (she said) and you won't be able to do that. 

 

She said, you will want that right and you won't be able to do 

that. 

 

Well why are we different?  Why is it right for you folks and 

not right for us to have that right?  Are you all powerful?  Are 

you more trustworthy than anyone else?  She goes on to say, 

same Hansard: 

 

 But this government's just going to sock it to us; they're going 

to ram through this rule change to limit bells without dealing 

with other reforms that are necessary in order to make this 

institution truly (un)democratic. 

 

Truly undemocratic.  I couldn't agree with her more, sir.  That's 

why I say it's not necessarily just the Bill that we have there.  

That would have been . . . Had that been presented at the end of 

50 days or at some time after reasonable consultation and some 

meetings and brought to the floor in an honourable way, I may 

have been on my feet arguing against some of what the rule 

changes might have been, but I wouldn't have felt the anger and 

the total frustration that I feel today, because this is not an 

honourable Bill.  And it was not put on the floor for any other 

reason, in my opinion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but to achieve an 

end that was not lawful and is not honourable. 

 

And I know that the members opposite chuckle, laugh, derision 

when I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that I am speaking from a sense 

of honour, honesty, and a sincere belief that this Bill is not fair, 

it's not right, it's not honourable, and it should not be presented 

in this manner or at this time.  As I said, Mr. Speaker, you can 

see all I get is hoots of derision and laughter. 

 

(1630) 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I have spent a little bit of time, and I'm not 

through.  I would like to spend another . . . quite some time on 

this.  But because of reasons that are personal and not happy, I 

have to leave.  Mr. Speaker, to indicate to you, sir, that I am 

sincere when I say to you that this is not the right kind of a Bill, 

that this is a dishonourable Bill, I'm going to take the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton on his word.  And I'm going to 

propose an amendment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I say to you, sir, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

believe there needs to be a compromise on this Bill, on the 

rules of this House. And I'm not going to stand here and 

suggest that there isn't some changes needed.  I have in my 

lifetime very seldom saw any proposal, any deal, if you will, 

any contract that was perfect on the first cut.  There always has 

to be compromise.  There always has to be discussion.  There 

always has to be give and take.  And I suggest to you, sir, that 

this House cannot tolerate unilateral rule changes.  And I say to 

you, sir, it's wrong.  The Government House Leader knows it's 

wrong, and the Premier of Saskatchewan I believe knows it's 

wrong.  With his legal background, Mr. Speaker, how can he 

not know that something like this is not wrong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have been urging the government to come to a 

compromise.  And all we get are asinine replies from the 

Government House Leader who says, public opinion is against 

bell-ringing -- public opinion is against bell-ringing.  We know 

that.  We know that. 

 

They have told us, Mr. Speaker, I don't like the idea of 

bell-ringing but if it's the only weapon you have, use it -- use it 

for the next three years.  I've had comments like that.  I have 

had people, Mr. Speaker, call me from across the street and 

say, I don't like the idea but I know what you're up against.  Do 

it. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, even if that is true, and an hon. member 

would not use it as an excuse to do the wrong thing, for 

example, Mr. Speaker, public opinion could be very rapidly 

marshalled against the constitution package the Premier agreed 

to this month.  That could be done. 

 

We sent our Premier down to speak for us . . . (inaudible 

interjection) . . . And there's a remark made from the opposite 

that he done a good job.  I concur in that.  I haven't seen the 

whole thing.  People could marshal a protest against that.  And 

it would take very little effort, Mr. Speaker, to whip up 

emotion and get a great public opinion backlash against the 

package.  You can do that. 
 

The Premier is an experienced parliamentarian and he is 



1390 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

experienced in the use of that kind of public opinion.  Mr. 

Speaker, that would be wrong.  That would be wrong because 

public opinion might focus on one or two aspects of the rules 

of the country and would not mean the official opposition 

would be morally correct in using that as an excuse to do the 

wrong thing. 

 

But that is a tactic of the Government House Leader when it 

comes to the rules of this Assembly.  Mr. Speaker, he says 

there is room for compromise.  But since he believes he is able 

to focus all public attention only on the bell-ringing aspect, he 

will not bother to even try for a compromise.  And I say again, 

it will go down in history in its own small way.  Hansard never 

forgets; your conscience will never let you forget. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope, very sincerely hope that 

there is some conscience left on the government side.  And I 

suggest we must try to work by compromise and consensus.  

And I want to give the government one more opportunity to 

give back the legislature to its traditions, and to restore true 

legislative democracy. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, to do that I propose the following 

amendment: 

 

 That the report not now be concurred in, but that it be 

referred back to the Special Committee on Rules and 

Procedures for further consideration of the time period over 

which a Bill may be suspended, and for particular 

consideration of a process to trigger public hearings during 

such a suspension of a Bill. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 

 

The Speaker: -- I find the amendment in order and the debate 

will continue concurrently. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It's a pleasure for 

me to rise in the Assembly today to speak to the amendment as 

proposed by the member from Kindersley.  I think one of the 

things that has been talked about a great deal during the course 

of this debate, Mr. Speaker, is the lack thereof of proposals and 

counterproposals that the public can truly analyse and, if you 

will, sink their teeth into. 

 

One of the things that the media have commented on during the 

course of the last few weeks is that they felt, I think, that all 

members of the Assembly were being a a little bit selfish, that 

we weren't taking into consideration some of the things in the 

public interests. 

 

And I think the member from Wilkie today, as he walked 

through a progression of events as he read into the record 

various comments of members from 1989, as he read into the 

record comments from members of the media over the years, 

that clearly that was one of the things that struck me; that the 

public do expect us as elected members, as people who take 

their elections seriously, to talk things out, to propose 

amendments, to propose subamendments, to do whatever is 

necessary to come to an agreement that doesn't appear to 

destroy the traditions and the values that we so have come to 

appreciate.  And I think by doing what the member from 

Wilkie has done 

here, is give this Assembly another opportunity to reassess, to 

re-evaluate, take that second breath, if you will, and allow all 

members of this Assembly to sink their teeth into another 

component of the problem that faces us. 

 

It's been clearly pointed out over and over again in this debate 

by members on this side of the House that most members of the 

previous opposition had a very strong distaste for any rule 

changes in this Assembly occurring unilaterally, a very strong 

distaste for anything that would destroy the fabric of this 

legislature and the way that it governs itself. 

 

It has always been incumbent upon members of this House to 

ultimately come to reasonable solutions on how we conduct 

ourselves.  That the moment that one party or another, be it 

NDP or Tory or Liberal or whoever might form the 

government in this province, takes that power unto themselves 

and unilaterally, for whatever means, whether they be 

short-term political gain or short-term administrative gain or 

short-term monitory gain, that whoever should do that would 

ultimately put the whole system at risk. 

 

So now we have an amendment before the House that clearly 

says, during this process that we've entered into, that we're 

going to give the public an opportunity to be part of a 

controversy.  Both sides in this legislature have claimed the 

public's support; heard many members of the now government 

claim that the public was solidly on their side during the 

SaskEnergy confrontation. 

 

We've had most members of the opposition who've been out 

there talking to farmers and farm families and rural people. 

And indeed if one gives any credence to the survey results at 

all, would show that there are fairly large segments of the 

population on the opposition side in dealing with the farm 

legislation that was potentially before this House. 

 

And we have a much broader issue tied to this particular 

amendment, Mr. Speaker.  And we all know what that issue is.  

I don't need to get into the business of the courts and 

everything else that has led us here.  But clearly when we're 

faced with a situation like that . . . And I say to you, Mr. 

Speaker, that as we as Canadians progress down the road of our 

constitutional maturity, this problem probably will become 

more prevalent than less so. 

 

I can remember that in my time as a member in this House, 

from first being elected and being a member of the legislative 

review committee until the time that my two years in cabinet 

had ended, the preponderance of legal help in committees, the 

legal opinions that are tied to each and every piece of 

legislation that goes before this House, that has all increased. 

 

The constitutional requirements of Canadians today dictate that 

government has to deal with that.  There simply is nothing that 

we as a society will be able to do to sort of turn the clock back, 

and that every progression that we make down that 

constitutional road ever since repatriation in 1982, tells us that 

this problem that we have before this legislature in regards to 

the GRIP Bill will be something that I suspect will occur again 

and again 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1391 

and again.  We will have citizens in our society saying that I, 

according to my rights as a Canadian, expect due process in the 

courts to happen. 

 

And the temptation for government will always be there, 

particularly if legal opinion is split or there's a little bit of 

sloppiness, to sort of get on with the agenda.  And by getting 

on with the agenda we will constantly run up against this 

problem.  So we need another mechanism. 

 

The member from Greystone alluded to it in her remarks very 

briefly, that at some point in this process, and rather than 

political parties and partisanship sort of having to win the day 

on important pieces of legislation, that perhaps a public process 

attached to deliberation to this legislature, in between elections, 

will make more sense than prolonged bell-ringing, than 

prolonged filibustering, than many of the things that we have 

traditionally done in our partisan way. 

 

And I think, Mr. Speaker, it's going to be very important that 

political parties evolve along with our constitution.  

Unfortunately my sense is, is that many people in our society, 

our province, our country are sort of out of step with some of 

the things that are happening in other jurisdictions, that are out 

of step perhaps with the realities of a fast-paced world where 

people they say will change their occupation three times in a 

lifetime. 

 

(1645) 

 

You don't necessarily have all of the comforts in society that 

you used to, nor do you have the political comforts, the time 

honoured solutions.  The time honoured political solutions that 

politicians in this province have relied upon perhaps need to be 

updated the same as our constitution does, that maybe we have 

to rethink our role. 

 

And I go back to the fact, Mr. Speaker, as I've done on other 

occasions, in saying that one of the appeals of protest and 

splinter parties -- of parties such as the Reform Party -- is that 

they're saying to the people, these time honoured political 

traditions that you people are relying upon to solve our 

problems aren't working any more, that you simply are out of 

step with the 1990s and the 21st century. 

 

And one has to take some credence, Mr. Speaker, in the results.  

To see a party in a course of a couple of years grab 15 per cent 

of the attention in a country like Canada, and indeed grab 

attention in our province like it probably hasn't done since the 

1930s when several reform parties were spawned -- the old 

CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) Party, the 

Social Credit Party, the Progressives, and others -- that for one 

reason or another because of times, felt that there had to be a 

change to the status quo in our political make-up. 

 

And I think what the member from Wilkie is proposing to this 

Assembly today is an opportunity to explore sort of the future a 

little bit, that are we as members up to the challenge?  Do we 

have it within ourselves to take the comments from 1989 that 

were made at great length, the arguments made by the member 

from Fairview, the arguments made by the member from 

Saskatoon Broadway, arguments made across the piece on how 

we 

as an Assembly should conduct ourselves as far as rules and 

combine those with members of the present opposition, 

members who have the same basic feelings about how we 

govern ourselves, and say now that we all agree, we all agree in 

this Assembly that we should not have unilateral rule changes 

by one party or another because those rule changes lead to 

expediency, they lead to very narrow political solutions rather 

than something that will stand the test of time, that we should 

be combining those. 

 

And then saying, how do we take that out and allow the public, 

perhaps on another court challenge, perhaps on another 

privatization, perhaps on another nationalization, how do we 

involve the public beyond an election every four or five years 

in some way of allowing a feedback that not necessarily has 

some type of partisan political stripe attached to it. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people out there, 

whether it be GRIP or whether it would be SaskEnergy or 

whether it would be some other contentious issue that quite 

frankly don't give a darn as far as their political stripe.  You 

know, we're finding increasing numbers of Canadians today not 

joining political parties.  Simple fact is that the hard-core party 

base of most registered political parties in this country are 

dropping. 

 

The percentage of people who said, well I'm a Conservative -- 

and you know those same people said, well my dad was a 

Conservative and my grand-dad was a Conservative -- those 

people are becoming less and less, as they are for the Liberal 

Party and I would suggest the New Democrats, and probably as 

other parties come and go, you will find the same thing. 

 

The public is far more volatile.  We have seen election after 

election in this country in the last three or four years with 

massive swings -- massive swings one way or the other.  We 

see one party and one party only in the New Brunswick 

legislature for four years.  We see parties that have virtually 

held a lock on certain legislatures, decimated in one particular 

round. 

 

And that means that the people that used to have those 

traditional political affiliations attached to them no longer feel 

that strongly.  Whether they subscribe to the views of Preston 

Manning who equates politicians with a very low life of catfish 

or whether they simply have grown tired of some of the 

political processes that we have been involved in, they no 

longer subscribe to one party or another. 

 

And I think that's why when you listen to the open lines and 

that type of thing on this particular issue, you see a lot of 

people making the comment, well I really don't care for any of 

their politics; I simply want them to get on with business. 

 

It seems like the public today, one of their major complaints 

with us as an institution is that the British parliamentary system 

as we know it is too slow.  A lot of people are fed up to the 

point they don't understand some of the traditions and the 

intricacies that we as members gradually come to learn as we 

take our seats in here, and 



1392 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 1992 

that we follow those traditions because we know they're 

long-standing and they're well grounded. 

 

But you have a public today that is increasingly on a faster and 

faster treadmill.  And as they get onto that treadmill, they 

expect their political representatives to also move along with it.  

So I guess that's why I don't find the amendment as proposed 

by the member from Wilkie to be terribly out of step with what 

the public is telling me. What I hear on the air waves, what I 

see on TV, is that we have to get back in step and that our 

Rules and Procedures Committee of this legislature needs to 

get back in step. 

 

We have argued the one point now over the last two and a half, 

three years, to the point of a standstill.  You can take every 

member that's been in this House since 1986 and when you 

read the verbatim . . . and as the member from Wilkie says, 

Hansard never goes away.  You're there on the record for ever 

and a day. 

 

And you read those verbatims of all members that have been 

here since 1986, with the exception of some of the new ones 

elected, and you simply have to come to the conclusion that we 

all think that our Rules and Procedures Committee has no other 

option than but to come to some kind of harmonious solution to 

the problem before us.  And that's well documented and on the 

record. 

 

And it was in that light, Mr. Speaker, I guess there's . . . I'd like 

to read one more set of comments into the record, because they 

were . . . the member was involved in the debate today and I 

think it is important that the public, because of his interaction 

in the debate -- and I was glad to see a government member 

rise today and enter this debate -- that I should enter some 

comments in debate just so that the public clearly understands 

where this member has been on this issue during the last three 

years. 

 

And these are all from May 29, 1989, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 

 

 I'm referring specifically to this Bill, this motion before us 

which would limit bell-ringing only at the sort of whim and 

spiteful emotion that's been presented by the government. 

 

Same day: 

 

 I should indicate that this is a very . . . 

 

If they really want to do something about the rules of the 

legislature, and I think that there are times when you should 

have a look at the rules of the legislature and how it functions, 

and weigh it carefully . . . It's an old and established institution.  

Things do change slowly from day to day and from year to year 

and from decade to decade.  And it certainly does need at times 

. . . consideration does need to be put to place. 

 

But the proper way to do it would certainly, Mr. Speaker, be to 

take the suggestions of the government along with the 

suggestions from the opposition in the regular way, in the 

traditional way, to a committee of which Mr. Speaker would be 

the chairperson, of which the Clerk of the Assembly and 

perhaps the staff of the Assembly would act 

as researchers.  The ideas would come, would be debated in 

committee.  The research would be done properly. 

 

It wouldn't be done . . . the legislation wouldn't be brought 

forward as a matter of spite or a matter of revenge.  It wouldn't 

be done in terms of trying to teach somebody a lesson.  And I 

think overall the operation of this legislature could be a better 

place if things were done that way and were continuing to be 

done that way. 

 

Well as I mentioned, however, it is the government's opinion 

that this could be done.  The government instead, however, 

chooses its agenda in a different way, and they are choosing an 

agenda which to my mind is very politically motivated.  It's 

kind of sad thing, Mr. Speaker, to see that the traditions and 

customs of the legislature will be changed unilaterally without 

the co-operation in this case of all of the people who are 

elected by the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And I continue the same day, Mr. Speaker: 

 

 You see, in a democracy we have a series of checks and 

balances.  One of them is this bell-ringing mechanism.  Let 

me just put that into a larger context.  Every four or five 

years, by custom, our electorate goes to the polls and in its 

wisdom elects a majority of government members.  And at 

the same time elects a minority of members which sit on the 

opposite side, the opposition side. 

 

 One of the things that has made democracy work is that you 

give the government members the majority so that they can 

carry on the business of the House and the business of the 

province.  And you give the opposition immunity in the 

legislature so that they can bring forward and say those things 

which need to be said, and also to make sure that there is 

always an alternate, always an alternate voice added in this 

province and in this country. 

 

 Without that alternate voice, Mr. Speaker, we would not have 

a democracy as we know it.  We would have a system of 

government as is known in countries that have dictatorships, 

or in the communist bloc countries where there is just one 

party; there is no opposition.  So our job, our job here in the 

opposition is to make sure that that point of view is heard. 

 

And later that same day: 

 

 Mr. Speaker, if you . . . Or I would ask any member, if they 

have a chance to go and speak to any of their news directors 

in their area, or any editors, and ask them if this method, this 

method of bell-ringing, did actually achieve the objective of 

making sure that the public was more informed, or less 

informed, they will to a person, I'm certain, tell you that 

because of the bell-ringing there were more people that are 

advised of what this government is trying to do.  And that's 

the whole procedure -- that's the whole reason behind it. 

 

And I continue later that same day: 



July 9, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 1393 

Every once in a while, when the government loses touch -- I 

mean the government members lose touch -- it is the duty of 

Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition, sitting on this side, to bring 

them back to reality.  If that bell-ringing process was not 

here, I don't know if that could have been accomplished. 

 

And finally, that same day: 

 

 And it is my contention, Mr. Speaker, that bringing this 

legislation to limit bell-ringing is going in the wrong 

direction. 

 

 . . .I believe that by limiting the bell-ringing we're actually 

doing a disservice to democracy as opposed to opening up 

democracy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the comments are the comments of the member 

from Prince Albert Carlton, the government member who led 

the charge in the Rules and Procedures Committee to bring in 

these rule changes unilaterally. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, those comments that I have just made -- 

directly from May 29, 1989 of Hansard -- are not a whole lot 

different than some of my opening comments.  They're not a 

whole lot different than the member from Wilkie or the 

member from Morse or all the members of the present day 

opposition who say there must be a better way for members of 

this Assembly to resolve this question, that it should not be tied 

to court decision, that the ability of people in our land to seek 

grievance through the courts, to seek grievance against other 

people, against governments, against companies, that question, 

Mr. Speaker, is directly tied to our constitution and what it does 

for our citizenry. 

 

This legislature then must be prepared to cope with that reality.  

It must be able to take the words of the member from Prince 

Albert Carlton, combine them with the words from the member 

from Wilkie, and bring them together in a format that allows 

this Assembly to go step by step down the road, along with the 

public of our province in an acceptable way. 

 

That means surely, Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 

 

Ruling on Procedure of a Bill 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  Before we adjourn for today, I 

would like to make a very short statement. 

 

Today during routine proceedings, a Bill to amend The 

Planning and Development Act, 1983 was given first reading.  

When I asked the question, when shall the Bill be read a second 

time, the Bill was ordered to be read a second time at the next 

session.  The problem here arises from the fact that an order of 

this session cannot apply to a future session. 

 

If it is the intention of the government to withdraw this Bill, 

then such an order must be made by a motion.  In the mean 

time the Bill will remain on the order paper until 

properly disposed of.  Alternately, the Bill could remain on the 

order paper but not be called for second-reading debate. 

 

It now being 5 o'clock, this House stands adjourned until 10 

o'clock tomorrow morning. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 

 

 


