




















































Hansard: August 25, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2983 

 August 25, 1992 

 

The Assembly met at 9 a.m. 

 

Prayers 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: -- Mr. Speaker, it's my understanding I 

need leave to go to Committee of Finance. 

 

The Speaker: -- That's correct. 

 

Leave granted. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the Minister of Highways to please 

introduce his officials. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'm pleased to 

introduce this morning a new deputy minister of Highways.  

This is his first experience here in the House and I'd ask you to 

welcome Mr. Mike Shaw, on my right.  On his right is Bill 

McLaren, assistant deputy minister of policy and programs; on 

my left is Don Metz, assistant deputy minister responsible for 

the infrastructure division; behind Mr. Shaw is Myron 

Herasymuik, the senior assistant deputy minister; and behind 

me is Colleen Laing, director of financial services branch. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I 

would like to say good morning to the minister and to his 

assistants this morning. 

 

Mr. Minister, have just received the package of information 

that goes along with the questions that we have been asking by 

way of delivering to you a written notice of those things that 

we want to know about. 

 

The first thing that we encountered here, and I might as well 

get it straightened up right away.  I'll just read you this one 

little paragraph here on detailed employee position 

information.  It says the remaining information would require a 

lengthy period of time to assemble and verify as it would 

necessitate a page-by-page review of each person's personnel 

file.  The question number is 5.06.1 on the top of the page.  

That's the only identifying mark I have on here. 

 

Other departments apparently have been giving us this detailed 

information.  And if you would commit to giving it to us we 

would be prepared to accept your commitment and carry on.  

Have you found what I'm talking about? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could ask the 

member opposite what all is asked for there, just to clarify it for 

myself.  Is it in relation to a particular question?  Is it question 

5 in the list of pre-circulated questions? 

Mr. Goohsen: -- I don't have any identifying marks on this and 

it's going to take my colleague a minute to find that.  But I'll 

read you the entire paragraph.  Maybe that will give you the 

idea that we need. 

 

Okay, the Department of Highways and Transportation detailed 

employee position information, and it says the remaining 

information would require a lengthy period of time to assemble 

and verify as it would necessitate a page-by-page review of 

each person's personnel file.  The identification of specific 

individuals or a reduction in the amount of information 

required would enable the department to assemble this 

information much more quickly. 

 

And while we agree with that last sentence, the haste with 

which your department gathers this information is of no 

consequence to us and we would appreciate it if you would 

endeavour to give us the entire package. 

 

Did that help you at all? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, Mr. Chairman, the concern of the 

department has to do with the fact that many of these people 

are lifelong civil servants and there are 1,200 of them.  So it's 

information that can be provided and they will do their best.  

But I wonder if it may be appropriate for the department to 

consult with you when they're doing it to just clarify how deep 

the information you want is on that, so your own house doesn't 

get too cluttered with trees. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Well my house still has some room, so just 

carry on and put it all together.  And when it does get full, I'll 

phone and tell you to stop, okay?  So if you can commit to 

trying to deliver that information to us, we could carry on. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- The department will do their best to give 

you the information that you require. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Over the course of 

the last eight or ten months, we've heard a lot about the 

Department of Highways.  And obviously you will be aware of 

some of the concerns that were expressed throughout the 

province, especially with regards to your pavement-to-gravel 

program, which you have since announced that you are not 

going to carry on with. 

 

I want to tell you that I had an awful lot of correspondence, 

both written and of course a lot of telephone calls, with regards 

to that program.  And it is with no small measure of happiness 

that we all in this province heard that you were going to 

reconsider that position. 

 

There were an awful lot of people that were deeply concerned 

about the potential of that program -- not just in terms of the 

roads that would be converted back in certain areas, but in 

terms of the kind of picture that it painted of our province to 

outside people. 

 

The tourist industry, as you will recall, were very concerned 

because it gave the impression that 



2984 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Saskatchewan was sort of falling apart at the seams and that we 

wouldn't be able to sustain any kind of a road network that 

would allow tourists to even travel in our province.  And while 

that was certainly never the case, that image was being painted 

out in the world around us, and we had to have that stop.  And 

we appreciated the fact that you did decide to state that you 

were stopping that program. 

 

And of course my question is: now that you've stopped the 

program, are there any other highways that you will be turning 

back to gravel?  And if so, could you identify them? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I think we need to clarify 

exactly what we did do originally and what we are doing now.  

There was a reduction in the budget for . . . There are in 

Saskatchewan 11,000 kilometres of paved highway, 8,000 

kilometres additional to that of thin asphalt surface, and then I 

think 69,000 kilometres -- mostly municipal -- of gravel-type 

roads. 

 

There was . . . in the last budget, the paved surfaces kept their 

maintenance where they were because those are . . . we have to 

try and maintain them as well as we can with a reduced capital 

budget.  Our capital budget has been reduced by $20 million.  

The maintenance on the thin asphalt surfaces was reduced by 

25 per cent.  And the original proposal was that in order to 

make sure that those most used were protected as well as they 

could be, that 1,000 kilometres would be identified where their 

maintenance would be reduced and eventually there would be 

reversion. 

 

We have not found $5.3 million which is the amount that 

budget was reduced by.  What we have said is that we will try 

to minimize the impact on any specific piece by spreading the 

maintenance dollars across the whole system.  The dilemma is 

we still don't have $5.3 million. 

 

And what we've done this year is said that if within that context 

of a 25 per cent reduction in maintenance on that network, that 

before any reversion is allowed there will be consultation in the 

community, and we hope that there is very little in this year. 

 

But we do need desperately to have the conversations with the 

community in terms of priorities.  Where do we take money 

from in order to do this?  What is of less priority than this?  

Because our next budget cycle still does not have $5.3 million 

that is going to appear magically from somewhere. 

 

(0915) 

 

So what we have suggested is that we're minimizing the impact 

now, but we shouldn't make any doubt about the fact that there 

are still $5.3 million short.  And the question is,  do we want to 

take that from the construction on our paved network; do we 

want to take it from some other source; or do we need to 

discuss with the communities their priorities with respect to 

their local roads? 

 

And I appreciate very much the comments you made about the 

public input.  It's absolutely true.  The public's very concerned 

about that. 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  The next question 

that comes to mind . . . and I think we'll deal with public 

perception first of all, and then get into a little bit of detail after 

that. But public perception again was set into motion a couple 

of weeks back when the Premier was apparently in the 

north-west corner of our province. 

 

And at that time there was, as in the past, there was expressed 

some serious concerns about the No. 11 Highway and the 

Yellowhead Trail, I believe it's called. 

 

The concerns of course are genuine.  There's been a lot of 

accidents on that highway, an awful lot of pain and misery and 

death has occurred on those roads.  And at that point the 

Premier stated that there was a long-term plan being developed 

that would include budgeting in the future to double lane that 

road or at least portions of it in order to make it safer. 

 

Could you elaborate a little on that plan and how it's going to 

work, how you envision that you're going to fund it, and over 

what length of period of time you're planning on bringing that 

program into effect.  And while I'm at it, you might just as well 

expand to the potential of other roads and other highways in the 

province. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, this topic was 

misinterpreted by the press once.  I don't want it to be 

misinterpreted again. 

 

First of all, Highway 11 is not the Yellowhead.  Highway 16 is 

the Yellowhead.  And the concerns that the member opposite 

raised I believe were raised after a serious fatal accident in the 

Rosthern area.  They have also been raised about Highway 16. 

 

On Highway 11, if it is that portion that the member opposite is 

talking about, while there's a very high traffic level there, the 

high traffic level is highest near the city.  So as we look to 

four-laning with limited resources, the first number of 

kilometres out of the city become the first priority because 

that's where the highest traffic volume is. 

 

The average traffic accident rate on that highway is actually 

lower than the provincial average.  It's still tragic when 

accidents happen and lives are lost and so there is no lack of 

concern for that.  But both on Highway 11 and on 16, which is 

the Yellowhead, the accident rate is below the provincial 

average in spite of the fact that there is quite a high traffic 

level.  What the department is doing is looking at specific small 

areas where there is greater risk, and the department will be 

looking at those areas particularly. 

 

The point that I want to make absolutely clear so that there is 

not misinterpretation as there was in the press story around my 

original comments, is that within the provincial Highways 

budget now we have have no capacity to four-lane in the next 

few years. 

 

There is, however, discussion going on between ourselves and 

the federal government with respect to a national highways 

program.  What we are calling on the federal government to do 

is to put forward substantial funds for the construction and 

upgrading of the major 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2985 

traffic networks in Saskatchewan, including 16, 11, 4, 7, and 

others. 

 

And so if in fact that policy . . . if there is an agreement 

between ourselves and the federal government in that regard, 

then there will be some additional funds made available, cost 

shared between the province and the federal government, 

where it will enhance our ability to be able to deal with more 

major upgrading projects on that major network. 

 

There is no sense in this of us saying that the Department of 

Highways is not looking with priority to the places within 

Saskatchewan that where the greatest need is.  It is simply 

saying that they are doing that presently within the amount of 

the budget we have.  And they are identifying the areas of 

greatest need, and those areas are getting attention.  And we 

will be responding to the concerns of the Rosthern community 

with respect to their intersection, making sure that it is as safe 

as it can be, within the provincial context. 

 

But we will not be able to do major stretches of highway 

without the joint participation of the federal government.  

These kinds of agreements have been struck before, and we're 

hopeful that we will be able to strike one again, where jointly 

we can upgrade the major highway network in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. 

Minister.  I just wanted to ask you a question concerning the 

global questions that we had presented to you quite some time 

ago, which I must say we just received the copies of.  I was 

wondering why your department did not supply them in the 

manner similar to your other department, Department of 

Agriculture, where question no. 1 was supplied as question no. 

1 . . . the answer to question no. 1. 

 

If we can receive a commitment from you -- because we 

haven't had time to go through all of them yet -- that your 

responses, if they're not in the manner complete now, that you 

will supply the complete answers as were supplied by 

Agriculture and Rural Development, if we can have that 

commitment, we can move away from those global questions. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I believe that the 

information does follow the questions, if you follow the tabs, 

although I don't know if you received a tab in the fashion that 

ours has tabs with questions 1 to 34.  Okay.  It is indexed at the 

beginning, hopefully, and they do follow the order, although 

there are other page references which do not refer to the 

questions; they refer to an internal departmental reference.  So 

if the department can help clarify exactly how that splits.  But 

they do in fact follow in order from question 1 to 34, it's our 

understanding.  There is another departmental reference in the 

corner. 

 

I think the only area in which . . . other than the staffing area 

that you have already identified, where there has not been the 

complete volume of information provided is with respect to 

in-province travel.  It is the business of the Department of 

Highways to travel in every corner, across the province, and 

the information I have is that there are 9,700 trips of 

individuals working for the department. 

And it can be provided, or if we wanted to use our resources 

differently, we could provide whatever it was that was of 

greatest interest.  And if you could clarify your requirements 

there, the department can provide it.  It's a fair pile of work and 

much of the travel is relatively standard travel with respect to 

observing and managing the highway system. 

 

Mr. D'Autremont: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  We appreciate 

getting the answers with the Department of Agriculture where 

it said question 1(a), we had the answer as question 1(a). 

 

On your commitment for other information, if we can just 

simply have that, then we can look it over and maybe we don't 

need all 9,600 travel things.  But if we can get the commitment 

from you that if we have another question, that you will supply 

the answer. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, and I appreciate the consideration on 

your part in that regard.  When you have observed the 

information that's been provided, any other information that 

you require, we'll certainly provide it at your request, and that 

commitment I do make.  And I'll ask the department to help 

clarify for you exactly the breakdown of the information 

provided relative to the questions answered.  I think it's in order 

but it needs to be clearly identified. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  We'll just go back 

to your earlier statements, Mr. Minister.  I'm glad that you 

cleared up that business about No. 11 Highway being in the 

Yellowhead Trail because I too wondered when it had gotten 

transferred or designated as such.  And I guess the problem that 

the press has is that there have been numerous problems on 

both highways and they just sort of lumped the two together.  

So we'll give them the benefit of the doubt that they were 

probably concerned about the well-being of Saskatchewan 

drivers and other people on the road. 

 

It does raise the question, though, if we're looking at a situation 

where we can't find funding to start to correct these problems 

for a number of years as you've just put it, what do we do in the 

mean time?  Do we allow people to continue to get killed on 

these roads or do we try to find less costly ways of assisting 

traffic flow in those problems areas if we can identify the 

problem areas? 

 

For example, it's been brought to my attention that some 

turn-offs do not have turn-off lanes.  One that has been 

identified that I'm not personally familiar with is the 

Martensville turn-off.  Now you might be more familiar with 

that turn-off, or maybe your officials are.  It would seem to me 

that for what would be a relative few number of dollars in the 

Department of Highways budget, you could maybe build, you 

know, a quarter of a mile of turn-off lane off on the edge so 

that people could get out of the traffic flow when they're going 

to turn off into places like that. 

 

And I have in my mind, the situation of the Mendham turn off 

south of Leader.  Now that's not a road that you may personally 

be familiar with as much as I am but because it's in my 

constituency and I know how it works there -- 



2986 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

we haven't had a serious problem with accidents there -- but we 

do have a situation where accidents have nearly occurred, and 

some have occurred.  Like I say fortunately, we haven't had any 

real serious ones lately. 

 

But the potential is certainly there.  You can see the potential 

when you drive out of Leader and down that road and 

somebody ahead of you all of a sudden puts on his signal light 

and starts to make that turn and then there's traffic coming from 

the other direction.  And there's a natural tendency to think, 

well this guy is slowing down I can somehow squeeze by him 

and keep going. 

 

Fortunately the people in our area are fairly cautious drivers so 

they mostly slow down.  But you can see that natural tendency 

when you travel out there that people might crowd around and 

even if they saw a car coming, they might take that chance to 

get by first.  And a turn-off lane in a situation like that would 

certainly alleviate the potential for an accident. 

 

And I think that if we look ahead and try to alleviate some of 

the potential bad spots . . . And I'll take this one step further to 

passing lanes.  You're familiar with the fact that there are 

passing lanes down on No. 1 Highway.  And I have to admit 

that I was a little disappointed that when you talked about the 

national highway program that you are discussing with the 

federal government you did suggest for highways like 16, 11, 

4, and 7. I wish you would have mentioned No. 1 Highway 

because it is probably one of the more important highways that 

crosses our province. 

 

But these passing lanes to the east of Regina, while they're 

certainly not the best answer to everybody's desire in driving, 

they do alleviate some of the congestion.  And along with 

turn-off lanes, I'm suggesting to you that perhaps we should be 

looking at some passing lanes on highways like No. 16, and of 

course No. 1 as well because of the high traffic flows that we 

get in the summer-time especially to the Manitoba border.  We 

have heavy congestions of traffic on what I think some people 

would consider a relatively narrow highway for that much 

traffic.  If we could get those kinds of improvements made to 

our roads I think we could relieve a lot of the congestion and a 

lot of the temptation of people to take that extra chance to try 

and get out and ahead of some of the slower summer traffic of 

the campers and trailers and things that by their very nature 

can't travel safely at very high speeds.  The high-speed traffic 

of course could pass on these passing lane areas. 

 

(0930) 

 

Now the same situation of course is very predominant from 

Tompkins to past Maple Creek to the Alberta border.  And the 

people there have been concerned for many years about the 

accident rates that go on there.  It's a reality that that too is a 

relatively dangerous road in the summer-time.  And we need to 

take some time I believe to implement some of these less costly 

measures if that's going to be the number one consideration and 

try to get those introduced in such a way that they will assist 

the traffic flow. 

And I just wonder if you have any plans to go ahead with that 

kind of a less costly program. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the department has been 

working in a disciplined way to address the safety concerns on 

an ongoing basis.  Traffic safety is one of their highest 

concerns and I most often have letters . . . or I have often 

received letters from people who are concerned about the 

diligence of the department with respect to policies designed 

for safety but impacting on someone else's access to a property 

or the signs they may have or these kinds of things. 

 

So the department has some very diligent standards to try to 

encourage and improve public safety on the highways, include 

signing policy so that drivers are not distracted, and includes 

restriction on signing policies that clearly restricts how many 

destinations can be identified at a particular spot, so drivers 

don't spend their time being confused by observing signage 

rather than paying attention to the road. 

 

The four-laning is considered on an ongoing basis and special 

laning at intersections is considered on an ongoing basis; 

flashing lights approaching intersections; four-way stops; 

rumble strips, although they have some down sides as well. 

 

The department is spending in excess of a million dollars a year 

now on the kinds of special spot improvements that you're 

discussing, and they continue to monitor the need for those 

kinds of things.  As the amount of money has decreased within 

the department for capital construction, there has been a greater 

emphasis on the spot improvements relative to the overall 

reconstruction of the highway system.  And that has 

implications as well. 

 

But the Saskatchewan safety record is comparable to the 

national safety record.  On the highways you talk about, the 

guideline that the department has used for four-laning has been 

5,000 vehicles per day.  I think the hot spots on 11 exiting 

Saskatoon are now in the vicinity of 4,000.  Some of the 

heavier traffic areas on 16 are about 4,000.  But then there are 

areas that taper off substantially as well. 

 

And I appreciate the fact that in my very quick recitation of the 

highways that came to mind that were in the national highways 

program, that No. 1 was not mentioned, and clearly it is the 

major highway in Saskatchewan or a major highway in 

Saskatchewan.  And we have not had as much public attention 

on it as Highway No. 16, for example.  But clearly 

improvements are sought there as well. 

 

So I simply want to conclude by saying that the department is 

very conscious of those in . . . I think I've probably had 15 or 

20 meetings with communities where those issues have been 

raised, and I appreciate the members opposite raising them.  It's 

the same issues people mention when they visit with me about 

their highway needs.  If you did this at that intersection, it 

would restrict the number of trucks waiting to turn off to an 

elevator and therefore free the traffic flow; it would restrict the 

amount of blockage in a main traffic lane if you extended a 

passing lane from somewhere on a hill to another intersection. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2987 

So those kinds of things are monitored by the highways system, 

and as the priority relative to safety considerations comes 

within the context of what's needed, those improvements are 

done. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- We appreciate, Mr. Minister, that you are on 

an ongoing program to alleviate these problems.  However the 

problem that we have as a general public, I think, is that when 

we become reactive in highway safety, that necessitates that 

before anything is ever done you have to have a certain number 

of accidents.  And it seems to me that if you take a highway 

like No. 1 Highway, it should be clearly obvious that accidents 

can be prevented by putting in passing lanes in certain areas.  

Why should the general public have to wait until they either 

bury their families or have to wait for them to be nursed back 

to health in hospitals before we get enough numbers in order to 

convince us that problems that are clearly obvious should be 

repaired. 

 

And I will refer you to the No. 1 Highway situation because 

you're already aware of 11 and 16.  But the Highway No. 1 has 

seen some terrible accidents over the years, one bus accident I 

recall where several people died in one great explosion.  And 

of course that seemed to prompt reaction at the time, and a few 

miles of that highway was then double laned. 

 

I think the general public is saying we can see those obvious 

kinds of situations developing as well down the road, and we 

would like to have something done about it before we see 

another accident like that.  We don't necessarily want to see 

flames in the news before we can get roads repaired or fixed.  

And so I think what we're saying to you is that we'd like a 

commitment that you will go ahead with some passing lanes 

and turn-off lanes as some of the critical spots and locations 

that are clearly identified by a lot of people in the general 

public.  And I think even the Department of Highway's officials 

must recognize that. 

 

Now we had some of our roads that you had designated might 

be returned to gravel because there wasn't money.  And one of 

those roads in particular that I've been informed of -- you can 

correct me if I'm wrong here, but my information is, and I 

haven't been there -- that we have now a road just a little ways 

out of Saskatoon that's now referred to as the turkey road.  

Apparently it's been repaved, and in particular the concern that 

was expressed to me is that it passes by one of the ministers of 

your government's farms.  And the concern expressed to me 

was that if there's money to repave that particular road, why 

wouldn't there also be some money to fix things like a turn-off 

lane or a double lane on, say, No. 16, No. 11 or No. 1 

Highway. 

 

It's a question of priorities I guess that they raise.  I don't 

suppose that the people that complained to me are really saying 

that the so-called turkey road should never be paved or rebuilt 

or fixed, but they're saying I guess or at least I will say on their 

behalf that you, sir, have to have some priorities in determining 

where this work gets done.  And even though you have 

officials in the Department of Highways that are making these 

determinations and these judgements on an ongoing basis, 

obviously and clearly 

there must be some pressure from the top of administration in 

order for that road to get priority over all of the others in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

And so what we're asking from you is not a defence of your 

minister particularly because the road has already been fixed 

and you won't likely unfix it.  But what we want is a 

commitment from you that you will use your office of 

priority-choosing and the determination of your will to see to it 

that some of these problem areas like passing lanes and turn-off 

lanes will in fact be addressed and given that priority that they 

have to have if we're going to save lives in our province.  And 

if you could give us that commitment, I think we would move 

on to another area. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you very much.  I don't want to 

take too much time, but I appreciate the points you raise, both 

because I share your concerns and it gives me the opportunity 

to clarify something that has desperately been needing to be 

clarified. 

 

With respect to waiting for accidents to happen, the department 

does not wait for accidents to happen.  The department is very 

proactive in looking for standards and measures that determine 

safety.  And it is when intersections are of a certain sort and a 

certain traffic volume both ways that certain kind of measures 

are taken with respect to rumble strips or flashing lights or 

four-way stops. 

 

It is with respect to access to four lanes that the department 

restricts access to and from certain businesses which is a 

difficulty for businesses when highways are reconstructed.  But 

it is in the interest of safety that that is done so that there 

cannot be reverse flow entering a four-lane highway at some 

point.  Signing policies are designed so that signs are clear and 

not distracting, so that they are informative but not distracting 

to the driver.  The measures for highway improvement are 

based on traffic volume.  And so it is clear that the department 

is driven entirely proactively in this regard. 

 

Unfortunately in spite of all of those things accidents do 

happen.  And they happen sometimes because of carelessness 

and sometimes because of other factors of which you are 

aware, but whenever they happen they are tragic.  And I think 

the department then does go examine, after every accident, the 

circumstances under which they occurred so that if there was 

something they missed in their proactive measures with respect 

to safety that they can then clarify those things.  But certainly 

the department has no interest and never has in simply waiting 

for accidents to happen.  It's not their approach.  And our good 

highway safety record speaks for the diligence of the 

department in that regard. 

 

But I wanted to then say with respect to the issue of standards 

and proactivity, in terms of measuring when a road needs to be 

built, it's unfortunate that issues so serious are sometimes 

clouded by the media with information that may have been 

intended to be funny, but is very misleading.  I have 

appreciated my relationship with the media, but I was 

extremely upset when the turkey-road story was done.  First of 

all, it was inaccurate from step 1 to step 10.  There was hardly 

an accurate fact within the story. 



2988 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

First of all, the road was contracted by my predecessor, Mr. 

Sherwin Petersen, in June of 1991.  The road was contracted 

after a history of conflict around it, going back about 10 years.  

The contention that somehow this road led to the door of 

another cabinet minister, equally ludicrous considering that it 

would be not in the interests likely of Mr. Petersen and the 

previous government to have built a road to the Minister of 

Education's door now, who was not then elected, ought to be 

apparent to everyone. 

 

But the other more ludicrous fact is that the road doesn't go 

there.  If one were driving to the farm of the Minister of 

Education, one would turn off of the Saskatoon highway three 

miles before one came to the road described in the story. 

 

So while I appreciate the wish for the media sometimes to tell 

stories when they have nothing else to do, I do not think it 

serves the public interest to tell them so inaccurately. 

 

Now the facts of the story with respect to whether Mr. Petersen 

did it or whether we did it, the Department of Highways in 

their measuring of safety standards, determined when the road 

was to be built.  The road going to Pike Lake had two and a 

half times the average provincial accident rate.  The road going 

to Pike Lake had 2,200 vehicles per day travelling on it, 

because it's a resort road.  The road going to Pike Lake has a 

number of residential cottage properties and residential and 

resort properties along it, providing numerous accesses to a 

road that's very, very busy. 

 

So the department redesigned it with access roads to funnel the 

traffic onto that highway at a restricted number of places.  

There was controversy about that, but demonstrates that the 

department was seeking up front to improve the safety on that 

road by its redesign. 

 

It's an example of what you are asking for, and I appreciate you 

asking the question because the road did meet the kind of 

priority standards that are important when one is looking at 

safety up front.  The accident rate was high, the traffic volume 

was high, and the road would have been built quite a bit sooner 

had it not been for quite a bit of public controversy along it. 

 

(0945) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Just a couple of brief comments, Mr. 

Chairman, with regards to the minister's last statements. 

 

First of all, Minister, your government has adopted a practice 

of whenever getting into a hot spot, trying to blame the past 

administrations for your problems.  It really doesn't matter to 

anybody who the past minister of Highways was or what he 

contracted or didn't contract, you are now 10 months into your 

mandate and the work being done on the highways in 

Saskatchewan are under your jurisdiction and you are the 

minister in charge.  It's your responsibility and you have to 

accept that responsibility. 

 

And if I might be so bold, if I were in your boots I think I 

would defend it on the merits that you outlined so 

adequately rather than to try to point fingers at somebody else 

being at fault because they did it in the past or made some 

reference to it. 

 

It does disturb me though that your criteria for justifying the 

choice of that particular road is that you have 2,200 vehicles a 

day when, in fact, a minute ago you said you have 4 and 5,000 

vehicles a day on some of the other highways where you don't 

have any money to make the improvements to lessen accidents. 

 

Now I'm not saying that we want to see accidents on this 

particular highway down to, I think it's Pike Lake.  We don't 

want that obviously.  But when you have budgets, you make 

choices based on priorities.  And I'm not saying that you made 

the wrong choice.  You may in fact, if you have saved one life, 

then you have made the right choice. 

 

But I am saying that you have to be cautious in how you make 

your choices, and I expect that that's what the media was 

saying when they played the story -- was that you ought to be 

cautious on how you make your choices of where dollars are 

spent, especially if you are going to reduce your budget, as you 

have this year, and say to the general public that we are now 

making more serious choices about where the dollars are being 

spent.  If you're going to do that -- make those serious choices 

-- you also have to be prepared to defend them on their merit 

and on the merit of what you as the minister in charge believe, 

not on past records of some other ministers. 

 

I want to just move on away from that topic because I think we 

have discussed it enough for the general public to get an 

opinion from it.  My colleague pulled a couple of the sheets out 

of the information that you sent over to us and we would like to 

just mention to you the one that's marked 12.06 Department of 

Highways and Transportation, polls and opinion research.  One 

opinion research undertaken since November 1, 1991, total cost 

$3,375, no associated internal cost, no tender, awarded to an 

agricultural specialty research company conducting an 

agricultural omnibus, Dunvegan Group, and a copy of the 

report can be made available, it says.  So my question is, could 

you table that study for us so that we can study it? 

 

And I may as well read the other one to you while I'm on my 

feet so that you can get it as well.  It's referred to here in the 

corner as 5.04, highlights of the department reorganization.  It 

says on February 12, 1992, Transmode Consultants were 

commissioned to conduct an organizational restructuring of the 

Department of Highways and Transportation.  Mr. Adil 

Cubukgil and Mr. Paul Power of Transmode assisted in input 

from department staff carried out on the study.  Now do you 

recognize the material that I'm talking about?  And what we 

want is to have these two studies tabled for us so that we can 

study what's in the studies. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Yes, thank you very much for that series 

of questions.  If I miss one in the response, please remind me.  I 

wanted to come back briefly to the question of Highway 60 to 

Pike Lake simply to say I was placing blame on no one because 

the highway appropriately needed to be reconstructed.  I was 

simply explaining that there was a very inaccurate story about 

the construction of that highway, and I think the public has a 

right to know 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2989 

that.  A number of letters to the editor were sent to explain the 

inaccuracy by individuals in the area who were upset by it.  I 

think the public deserves better from their public media than 

the kind of writing that was done in that case. 

 

The construction with respect to us taking responsibility, I 

assure the member opposite that no one is more willing to take 

responsibility than I. 

 

The construction on that piece of road was though tendered last 

summer and the construction began in October.  So that in 

terms of . . . and I don't quarrel with that because it was 

appropriate construction.  We reviewed that this spring before 

construction continued because of concerns that had been 

expressed, and we carried forward with the construction project 

that was there based on the fact that these are 

engineering-driven projects, that the department does measure 

safety factors and then recommends highway improvements 

based on engineering standards that are there. 

 

With respect to the traffic levels, there are a varying number of 

standards, and I don't want to explain them here, but 

four-laning happens at 5,000 vehicles per day.  And the 

member opposite is correct; I said some of those two-lane 

highways have reached 4,000 vehicles, or approaching 4,000 

vehicles in certain spots. 

 

What is done here is that an improvement in the highway . . . in 

a two-lane highway was called for as a result of the traffic 

volume.  This has not become a four-lane highway; this has 

become an improvement to a two-lane highway in order to 

improve the safety standards on that road.  But the member 

opposite can get further technical and detailed information on 

when these standards cut in. 

 

I might also say -- and it will lead into the last question you 

asked and I hope not to miss the middle one -- that we had a 

consultant work with the department in reviewing the structure 

of the department.  And one of the recommendations of the 

consultant was that we needed to strengthen the policy base in 

the department. 

 

So in the new construction, which is as a result of the 

consultant's report, there are two streams -- there is an 

infrastructure side and a policy side.  And the policy side will 

work with infrastructure to determine hopefully even more 

accurately, when improvements are appropriate, what are the 

best signals. 

 

The department is working on their own internal 

re-examination of those factors.  But I need to say that it has 

been the discipline of the department to always base their 

recommendations with respect to safety on engineering 

standards, and that needs to be clear. 

 

To answer the last question about the consultant's report, there 

are within the consultant's report -- of which I have a copy -- 

sensitive matters with respect to personnel that makes it 

inappropriate to release.  But the members opposite need to 

know that it has basically been a working document from 

which the administration has worked to reconstruct the 

management structure in the department and looking forward 

to an ongoing evolution of a stronger department over time. 

The second question was with respect to a polling study -- a 

Dunvegan Group study.  As the members opposite may know, 

that last winter there was an extensive process of grain 

transportation hearings in the province conducted by the 

federal government.  Some information was distributed by the 

Department of Highways and Transportation broadly in the 

province and that study measures the effectiveness of the 

information that was sent and related kinds of matters.  And 

that study is available . . . can be made available to the 

members opposite. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  I will take that as a 

commitment then to give us the poll opinions research study. 

 

Okay, on the other study, the highlights of department 

reorganization.  You have hedged on giving us that and I'm 

going to try to think through your words here.  My impression 

of what I heard you say is that there are some delicate 

informations in this study that you feel the general public and 

the opposition shouldn't have. 

 

I fail to see what kind of information about employees in the 

Department of Highways would be sensitive to the point that 

the general public who pays these monies shouldn't be allowed 

to have.  And in the view that the general study is not the 

offensive document, that perhaps if there are some rather 

personal information about individuals, for example, if 

somebody had a wart on his nose and you didn't want to make 

that public information for embarrassment purposes . . . and I 

overexaggerate that kind of a point. 

 

That kind of information obviously is of no interest to me and I 

don't think to the public either.  So perhaps if you have that 

kind of personal information about individuals in this study, 

you could black that out or cross it out and give us the general 

study without that particular information that might be 

embarrassing to some individual. 

 

Is that possible, Mr. Minister? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, we will make available the 

working documents that have grown from that study which 

would provide, I think, all the information the member opposite 

would require with respect to a summary that had been 

produced, with respect to an internal organizational process 

that grew from it. 

 

The caution with that as well is that as the department has 

worked from the original documentation in preparing for 

themselves the organizational plan, going from it there has 

been evolution in that as well, as a new management team has 

come into place.  So that with that caution, both the summary 

and a departmental working document that grows from the 

original report could be made available to members opposite. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you for that commitment, Mr. 

Minister.  Having looked at this brief outline of the study, it 

does indicate that the highlights of the study were such that five 

divisions are combined into two and that the number of 

branches was reduced from 21 to 12, even 



2990 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

though the number of districts has remained at six.  Now I 

presume that what this is saying is that the structure throughout 

the province has been consolidated and centralized . . . I 

suppose is the only word I can really think of off the top of my 

head.  Is that, in fact, perception correct?  And how is this 

going to affect the general highway structure in our province? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, thank you to member 

opposite for that question.  It is in fact the reverse that 

occurred.  The consultant met broadly with people in the 

districts and with people in head office, and the result of the 

examination if you . . . the number of districts is the field 

operations, and they have remained the same.  The conclusion 

was that while efficiencies could be pursued within the 

districts, that that structure was effective in the delivery as it 

was structured. 

 

The questions of reducing from five divisions to two and 

branches from 21 to 12 is a matter of head office 

reorganization.  So it in fact is a reconstruction of central 

administration with exactly the opposite goal to the perception 

mentioned by the member opposite. 

 

The goal here is to decentralize, to encourage the participation 

and the circulation of staff between districts, in head office, to 

provide leadership at the head office level but to confer 

responsibility to the districts.  So it is in fact the goal of the 

model that's here to decentralize the operations of the 

department further. 

 

(1000) 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Perhaps you could 

enlighten me then.  As a result of these measures being taken, 

have any people that formerly worked with the Department of 

Highways been unemployed, released, or transferred? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, there were, as a direct 

result of the reorganization, no job losses.  The reorganization 

was an undertaking to more effectively position the department 

to do its business in the '90s in a new structure.  The fact with 

respect to time, however, is that restructuring was happening at 

the same time as budget reductions.  And so there were a 

number of positions lost as a result of the budget reductions, 

and that information I could give you.  But with respect to your 

specific question, there were no job losses directly as a result of 

the reorganization. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Yes, we would like the information on those 

positions that you just mentioned that were lost as a result of 

the budget reductions.  And I had kind of thought maybe they 

might be in that package already, but if they aren't . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Yes, they are. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- They are?  That's good.  We will peruse those 

a little later. 

 

I have one rather large kind of a question here yet that I'd like 

you to address.  The budget so far this year for the Department 

of Highways obviously is being spent on several projects, most 

of which, with the summer coming 

to an end, probably are being completed.  You will have some 

that won't be.  But for those that are now completed, we would 

like to know how many of them have come in over budget and 

how many of them have come in under budget and what those 

figures are. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I just want to make sure 

that the member opposite, that I understand him correctly with 

respect to the reductions, the budget-related reductions, 

whether he is satisfied that he has the information in his book.  

I could outline it, but if he is satisfied he has the information, 

then I will go on to the other question, which is the tendering. 

 

There are two questions here, either one of which may be the 

one you were asking.  One is, have projects, when tendered, 

come in under budget?  That information isn't compiled in its 

totality in a summary fashion.  But I can say from signing all of 

the project tenders that the bidding has been very competitive 

for the projects that the department has undertaken this year.  

And my estimate would be that on average they would have 

come in under the projected costs when the department put 

them to tender. 

 

The other question that you may have intended to ask is, once 

tendered, have they come in according to the tender?  Have 

there been additional departmental costs?  And again that 

information will not be available till the end of the season. 

 

It does happen from time to time that special circumstances in a 

construction project require the department to provide 

additional funding to a contractor for reasons of increased 

project cost beyond the control of the contractor.  And there is, 

I believe, annually some additional provision for that. 

 

The question that can be answered later in the season is 

whether that amount of compensation additional to the tenders 

for special circumstances exceeds budget.  That information 

isn't available now. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Minister.  Having some 

experience at a lower level of government with road building, I 

am aware of the fact, as I'm sure you are by now, that most 

large projects end up having required changes to the original 

tenders because of the necessities of what you run into when 

you're constructing roads and building bridges and putting in 

culverts and that sort of thing.  You may all of a sudden find 

out that the best-laid plan ran amok because you've run into 

some natural barrier or some problem.  You may hit some big 

rocks that you never anticipated to be there and you have to 

hire somebody extra.  And so there usually are some cost 

overruns. 

 

If you would commit to giving us the information on these 

questions as they become available, we would be prepared to 

drop this and move on to a few questions by a couple of my 

colleagues as we wrap this session up. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, the officials inform me that 

more often this kind of information is provided in Public 

Accounts after the fact, as opposed where accounting for the 

record of spending of the department, 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2991 

as opposed to in the Estimates where we are providing the 

outline of what we expect to spend.  The department can make 

those available to you, but I might ask the member to consider 

whether they would possibly want to wait for the possibly more 

appropriate time of Public Accounts to deal with that 

information.  The department's willing to provide the 

information, but it is probably beyond the normal scope of 

Estimates. 
 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

wanted to discuss with you the condition of four highways in 

my constituency.  I'll list them all for you and then we can deal 

with them. 
 

Now the first one is Highway 317, the extension of the 

pavement on that.  We had . . . there was a committee out there 

that was set up to discuss that with you.  They've requested 

meetings with you on a couple of occasions.  So far they 

haven't been granted an opportunity to meet with you and I 

think they would very much like that opportunity -- Highway 

317 that is, at Hoosier. 
 

The second one is Highway 51 at Major.  That highway is in 

very poor condition.  It's a high traffic -- oilfield traffic 

primarily -- road, large trucks, things of that nature.  I think it's 

in need of a serious look at upgrading. 
 

The same applies for Highway 31 at Dodsland, the same sort of 

thing -- high oilfield traffic on that highway, in very poor 

repair.  Almost to the point on both of those, 51 and 31, I think 

that they are almost to the point where they become a safety 

hazard and I think it's important that those two ones be looked 

at. 
 

And then the final one is Highway 21 south of Kindersley.  

That . . . I believe it was 10 kilometres last year were 

completed on that one and it was thought . . . at least that was 

my indication, of the people in the area believed that there was 

supposed to be another 10 kilometres of that highway 

additionally done this year.  The gravel was stockpiled I 

believe last summer and last fall for that extension, or at least 

that's what the people in the area believed was the case, that the 

gravel was stockpiled for the extension and nothing's happened 

on that one since. 
 

(1015) 
 

Actually the second phase of that project, the first phase last 

year, the second phase this year, is probably in poorer 

condition than the first phase was.  It was just because it was 

done in stages as they worked their way south.  I think that 

there's a section in there that goes through a long, dried-up lake 

bed that's in very poor condition, and I think there needs to be 

some serious look at it by your department to see what can be 

done on that stretch particularly.  I think on that stretch 

particularly, if we could look at upgrading the section that goes 

through that long . . . I just can't recall the name of that 

dried-up lake bed, but it's about, oh I would estimate three 

kilometres south of where the extension was completed to last 

year.  There's probably I would guess two kilometres in there.  

If that section could be done I think you'd find that people there 

would be quite a bit more satisfied on those. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate bringing to my 

attention and the attention of the department 

the concerns the member opposite has raised.  I'll ask the 

department to respond to you directly with respect to each of 

those highways and the specific areas of concern you have and 

inform you as soon as they can about their position on the 

priority list that they now have.  Thank you. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I only have one 

brief remark to make to the minister and it concerns also a 

stretch of highway in my constituency, and that being 363 

south-west of Moose Jaw . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- And then down into my constituency. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- And then as the member from Morse says, it 

goes into his constituency. 

 

I don't know if the minister is aware or not, but the section that 

runs immediately south-west of Moose Jaw, during the '80s 

received three separate contracts that handled the section 

through the hills.  That area's had rail line abandonment occur 

in the last few years and has a very heavy volume now of 

trucking coming out of the Courval-Coderre-Shamrock, all the 

way over to Hodgeville almost area, is trucking now into 

particularly the new Wheat Pool terminal in Moose Jaw.  And 

we're seeing a lot of overloading going on. 

 

There's also several major gravel pits located in that area when 

we're seeing  a lot of gravel truck haulage.  And quite frankly 

the road there is under incredible pressure because of these 

various factors.  And even the new sections that had the very 

heavy top put on them are deteriorating rapidly. 

 

And that is the only lifeline to a very large area because Old 

Wives Lake blocks this area from going south and the Coteau 

Range hills to the north block them from going north.  The only 

lifeline sort of out of this area for these people is on this 

highway.  I know you don't have the budget, Mr. Minister, to 

handle reconstruction of the whole thing, but I can tell you that 

it is beat to a pulp right now.  I was out there a week ago to 

look at it and there are holes all over the place. 

 

And the big trucks, I don't know if you put officers out there or 

what you do, but I'd like some assurance that somebody's going 

to at least go out and take a good, hard look at what's going on 

out there. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concerns 

expressed by the member from Thunder Creek.  We've also had 

concerns expressed by other people locally about the same 

concern on overloading and the department instructed their 

enforcement staff to pay greater attention to that area in an 

attempt to maintain the road. 

 

I know from other roads . . . The member from Arm River 

would be interested to know that other roads in his 

constituency as well have been . . . have suffered degradation 

this summer and the department's intent is to have them 

improved to an acceptable standard by fall. 

 

I thank the member for raising his concerns and the 



2992 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

department will see to it that the concerns are answered. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have a question 

that relates to the terminal, the Pool terminal in Hodgeville.  

The No. 19, and as the member from Thunder Creek was 

suggesting, the 363 ends in Hodgeville, and it comes from the 

west and ends in Hodgeville, and then you go south on the No. 

19. 

 

The No. 19 south, it has a very serious winter problem.  We 

initiated a survey for the amount of volume of dirt to be moved 

on that road I think for the first eight miles, and that's the most 

serious part of that for winter driving. 

 

I know that people have . . . one of the schoolteachers in 

Hodgeville lives south of that eight miles, has to go eight miles 

east and then drive around that on the grid road in order to get 

to school.  And there's going to be a lot of traffic going through 

there to fill that elevator.  And it has to have significant work 

done on it.  And I think it would be really an important part of 

your program and planning for the future. 

 

I know that there's been a lot of emphasis placed on the No. 1 

Highway and I appreciate that.  But that's a lot of traffic that 

moves through the province and I think that we should give 

some of that funding out of the Swift Current area into those 

less fortunate areas like that area from Gravelbourg to 

Hodgeville on the No. 19 Highway and the No. 43. 

 

One other point I want to make.  Last fall there was a 

significant problem on the 43 Highway that was caused by a 

contractor moving gravel, and they got stuck on the pavement 

right during all the rain that we had and I think that from that 

there has been significant repair work.  I know that the people 

in the community have been concerned about whether the 

repair is sufficient or not.  And it's made the road in some 

places really rough when you've got to repair sections.  And so 

I . . . just in order of time, I just want to present them to you as 

options that you need to take a serious look at and if you want 

to respond that's fine.  I just bring them to your attention so that 

you're aware of them. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I'll respond 

only briefly in respect to both the last two questions that have 

been raised.  It clearly is a concern for Saskatchewan that as 

there has been a shift to additional trucking, the impact on the 

road system has become very apparent.  And these are the 

issues we've raised in the national discussions with the federal 

government and the other provinces with respect to the national 

transportation policy.  It is clear that we cannot put additional 

truck grain-hauling burden on many of our highways without 

serious impacts on our cost and road structure. 

 

And this becomes a critical discussion that we would 

appreciate your support in as we continue to press the federal 

government to respect the existing structures and the value of 

the rail line in moving these heavy commodities. 

 

With respect to the special issues you raised, I would just say, I 

appreciate you raising them so that the department 

can take note.  As I've identified earlier, they have standards for 

each of these stretches of road that they attempt to maintain 

within their maintenance budget and they will as well do that in 

these cases.  And I thank the members for raising those 

concerns to the attention of the department. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. 

Minister, I have two questions for you.  The first one deals with 

No. 312.  And I don't know if I necessarily need an answer 

today, but maybe perhaps your commitment to fill me in as to 

the status of 312, from the junction of 312 and No. 12 

Highway.   That highway was built about five, six years ago, 

and it still has a very poor topping on it.  I wonder what you 

have in mind with that one up to the Laird corner.  And then 

from Laird to Rosthern, the status of that section.  And from 

Rosthern to the bridge itself, to the South Saskatchewan River, 

what the status of that is.  So I'm asking you to bring me up to 

date, what your plans are, and if you can make a commitment 

to provide that answer to me at some future time, that would be 

sufficient. 

 

The other question then . . . thank you, Mr. Minister, I see you 

nodding approval. 

 

The other question that I have is something that was alluded to 

to our critic of Highways.  He brought up the Martensville 

situation.  And I know that even when we were in government 

and I was the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 

the area, it's a situation that I wouldn't wish really on any 

minister because it's going to be an expensive . . . The ultimate 

solution obviously is four-laning with overpass, clover-leaf.  

And obviously that's a Cadillac solution that we cannot even 

conceive of.  But I would encourage you to keep working with 

the Martensville council to see if we can address that situation 

that is going to prevent fatalities.  I think over the years we've 

been very fortunate that there haven't been fatalities at that 

corner. 

 

Then secondly a concern that I have is the No. 11, that you're 

well aware of.  And I know that over the last three years or so, 

No. 11 has had a rash of accidents -- of fatal accidents.  And I 

know also that you cannot, for the most part, blame the 

highway for those accidents because through inattentiveness or 

lack of sobriety in the case of some drivers and so on . . . And 

you can't legislate that kind of stuff and you can't really 

engineer roads to forestall all of those types of accidents. 

 

But I know, for example, that the overpass, the turn-off into 

Warman, for example, has been remarkably free of accidents.  

And I attribute that mostly to the turn-off situation where 

there's a checkered, separate lane where they turn off and get 

off the mainstream, the flow of traffic.  Osler hasn't got quite 

that kind of a situation but, again, there's a combination of 

events there of curves, high volume of traffic, turn-offs, and all 

of these things that are very complicating. 

 

I know in Hague turn-off, there were fatalities until the two 

steps that were taken -- and there hasn't been a fatality since 

this was done -- that is the speed was reduced to 80 kilometres, 

which I know your officials are reluctant to do because it 

disrupts the flow of traffic. But  



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2993 

that step was taken, plus a flashing light.  And when that was 

done, there have been a few accidents but nothing extremely 

serious. 

 

Then as you're aware, in Rosthern we had a double fatality not 

so long ago which was exactly the cause . . . the cause of which 

was the fact that there was no separate turning lane and the 

vehicle was rear-ended, according to my information.  Mr. 

Minister, I'm not quite sure what you can do there that is within 

the realms of your budgetary restriction.  I'm quite aware of 

that.  But I would be interested in finding out what conclusion 

you've drawn since you have had that accident and your 

officials have restudied it again, whether indeed the widening 

of the road there with a separate turn-off is a possibility, which 

I'm sure would have prevented the accident that occurred.  I'm 

interested in what your commitment is to the future of that 

highway. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concern 

the member has for the safety situations described.  I'm familiar 

with most of them.  I've travelled that road frequently.  The 

department will get back to you about each of those 

circumstances in terms of how they're . . . where those are with 

respect to planning and alternatives.  I know just from a brief 

discussion the deputy and I were having that one of the options 

-- and possibly not the most practical one at the Rosthern 

corner -- is four-laning.  In order to provide four-laning at a 

place like that costs about a half a million dollars per kilometre 

and would require a couple of kilometres. 

 

But I know you've suggested other solutions.  And as you have 

indicated, while there is no turning lane, there is a by-pass lane 

which wasn't used in the case of the accident the other day.  So 

the department will get back to you on the detailed examination 

they've taken and provide you with the update on the 

information on all of those corners including the examination 

they've done on the Rosthern corner since the accident. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- One more question before we move through the 

votings.  Mr. Minister, I'd like to bring up two things.  First of 

all, the entrance into Kenosee Provincial Park, I noticed there 

was a fair bit of construction taking place there.  And I trust 

what that is, is finally putting that second lane in because as 

vehicles come up the hill from the south -- and there's a lot of 

potash traffic there -- there was the turn-off lane and then the 

passing lane would basically turn right into the mainstream of 

traffic to form a single lane right at the main entrance.  I 

noticed about a month ago there was a fair bit of construction 

taking place, and I take it that they're extending that passing 

lane which I hope is taking place. 

 

But the other question I have, Mr. Minister, is regarding 

signage policy.  Now a number of years ago a policy was 

designed regarding signs and assigned corridors.  And that is 

fine, and it works excellent in communities and regarding 

communities. 

 

But one problem crops up every once in a while and that's 

regarding farms and individual farmers advertising the farm 

location.  And I'm wondering if the department could take a 

little bit of flexibility on that because it's a sign here, and then 

maybe it's 20 miles and another sign. 

In a lot of cases what we're asking people to do is put signs 

way back off of the road where they're not even hardly visible 

or down substantially where they must change the sign.  And 

my understanding is -- and you can correct me if I'm wrong -- 

if a person had a sign on their own property or if they had an 

agreement with a neighbour and it was very close to the corner, 

but if it wasn't obstructing a view, I would think it would be 

appropriate to allow those individual producers to leave their 

farm signs in that location, rather than asking them to transport 

and put that sign 250 or 500 metres down the road.  And I'm 

just asking the department to give some thought and some 

flexibility to that policy. 

 

(1030) 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- Mr. Chairman, on the Kenosee turn-off I 

don't have the detailed information on what's going on there, 

but the assistant deputy believes that you're correct in your 

assumption of what's going on there.  And he'll get back to you 

on the detail. 

 

With respect to the signing policy, that is one of the challenges, 

to maintain safety and still not be excessively bureaucratic 

about those kinds of policies.  The guideline that is most 

restrictive is the guideline with respect to sight triangles at 

intersections.  And the higher the speed limit on the piece of 

road -- and I'm not sure -- and possibly traffic levels as well, 

the greater the discipline with respect to the distance leading up 

to the intersection that must be kept clear so that people's sight 

lines are not interfered with. 

 

But I will ask the department to consult with you directly on 

any specific cases -- I know I've sent a number of responses by 

letter to people with particular concerns -- and identify when 

you think the policy may be being either too stringent in its 

design or too stringently enforced. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Minister, I 

want to first of all in all sincerity wish you well and wish you 

good luck in your attempts to achieve federal cost sharing in 

getting some of our highways fixed and rebuilt.  I sincerely 

support you in that philosophy and concept.  I'm not saying that 

the federal government should build all of our roads but 

obviously those that interconnect our nation have some federal 

responsibility to them in my personal philosophy.  And I think 

we share that.  So I do genuinely wish you luck in those 

attempts. 

 

You earlier, I think, made a commitment to my colleague from 

Souris-Cannington that you would deliver to us any 

information that we are missing as a result of the package of 

material that you sent across from our written questions.  And 

if you can extend that commitment to the deliberations that 

followed that throughout this morning's discussion, then I 

would be willing . . . And I see I have a positive response so we 

will take it that we have that commitment. 

 

And with that, I would like to thank your officials for coming 

in and helping in the deliberations this morning, thank them for 

contributing to the sharing of knowledge about our provincial 

highway system.  As the year progresses, obviously we will 

find more questions and 



2994 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

more problems, and we will relate them to you as they happen.  

So we want to thank you.  And that concludes our need for 

questioning this morning. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wiens: -- If there are no further questions, before the 

Estimates are voted I would like to thank the members opposite 

for their understanding with respect to the concerns that they 

raised relative to highways and highway safety for the people 

of Saskatchewan, thank them for their positive approach to the 

discussion today.  I very much enjoyed it. 

 

I want to thank my officials as well for their participation and 

support here both in getting information to you and in 

providing it to us here, and their commitment to forward to you 

other information required.  And I appreciate your co-operation 

with respect to time as our deputy is going to Ottawa this 

afternoon for some consultations with the federal government.  

So thank you very much. 

 

Item 1 agreed to. 

 

Items 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 

Ordinary Expenditure -- Vote 16 

 

Items 1 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 

 

Vote 16 agreed to. 

 

Supplementary Estimates 1992 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Highways and Transportation 

Capital Expenditure -- Vote 17 

 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 

 

Vote 17 agreed to. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

(1045) 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 71 -- An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Medical 

Care Insurance Act 

 

The Chair: -- I would ask the minister to introduce her 

officials. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  I would introduce 

to my left, Mr. Lawrence Krahn who is the executive director 

of MCI (medical care insurance) branch.  And immediately 

behind me on the left, Ms. Diane Neill who's the legislative 

policy analyst in the policy branch.  And immediately behind 

me, Mr. Bryan Middlemis who's the associate executive 

director of MCI.  Thank you. 

 

Clause 1 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Madam 

Minister.  I think what we have before us this morning is a Bill 

that must not pass.  It is a Bill that is diametrically opposed to 

the commitments that you as critic of Health and your leader 

and now Premier of the province made during the election 

when you said quite adamantly that you will be doing more 

with less, that Health would be funded more, and the people of 

the province accepted that commitment on your part. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, we find that this Bill is actually 

de-insuring optometrists, it's de-insuring chiropractors, and 

probably de-insuring the dental program for children as we 

know it.  Now, Madam Minister, that cannot be allowed to 

happen unchallenged, because it flies in the face of what you're 

doing on the other hand.  Because on the other hand you have 

your wellness model, the new direction that you're taking 

health care. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, something that I just cannot for the life 

of me, and many people as well, follow your rationale, follow 

your reasoning.  Where on the one hand you say we must be 

preventative because by being preventative we're going to 

increase the wellness of the people and then the sickness model 

can take a back step as it were to the wellness model and 

therefore we will be saving money because it will be 

cost-effective. 

 

And that, Madam Minister, is what is underlying this MCI Bill 

that you've got before the House right now.  It's what's 

underlying the wellness model that you are propagating 

throughout this province right now.  It's budgetary driven.  It's 

deficit driven. 

 

And, Madam Minister, what I cannot for the life of me see is 

why you would be doing something like this MCI Bill which is 

so counter-productive.  Why would you want to take 

optometrists out of the insured service?  Why would you want 

to take the most cost-effective, the least costly method of 

chiropractic services and de-insure them? 

 

So the counter-productivity, Madam Minister, is there.  But by 

the same token you are also the government and particularly a 

minister who's always proud of talking about the consultative 

approach, the meetings, the direction that you are receiving 

from the people of this province.  And I don't think, Madam 

Minister, that that is the case at all. 

 

We have over the last couple of weeks, almost on a daily basis, 

been presenting petitions to you that categorically say, we don't 

want this, Madam Minister, don't de-insure chiropractors.  Over 

11,000 petitions.  Optomotrists, the same way.  And we could 

get into diabetics or we could get into the other fields where 

they are saying we don't like your plan, Madam Minister -- 

don't do it. 

 

Because I'm suggesting to you that what we're looking at here 

is actually a method and a means of doing what you always 

complain about the federal government -- off-loading.  You are 

off-loading, Madam Minister, your responsibility as a 

government on the backs of the sick.  And you're saying to 

them you pay your own way; we're not going to insure you any 

more because we have a deficit and we have to control that. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2995 

So, Madam Minister, those things don't wash.  Those things 

that don't wash because you don't have a mandate to make 

these changes. 

 

I know in your budget speech you have a glorious statement 

saying in there that your mandate is to make changes because 

that's what you ran the election on.  Madam Minister, this Star-

Phoenix article here: When you voted NDP, did you expect 

medicare user fees?  Madam Minister, that is an article that was 

in the newspaper. 

 

And I could go into that whole business of the lost brochure or 

the missing brochure where, Madam Minister, you as a 

government, would you have been elected had you told the 

people that you were going to be de-insuring chiropractors?  

Would you have been elected if you had told the people that 

you were going to make dramatic changes in Health, in 

Agriculture, all over the place?  Would you have been elected 

then had you told the people the truth?  I don't think you would 

have.  And so therefore, Madam Minister, it's up to me as 

Health critic and the rest of our caucus here, as the opposition 

caucus, to hold you responsible. 

 

And what I'm going to do now, Madam Minister, is give you a 

period of time to reconsider, to reconsider some amendments to 

this Bill if you're going to force it through.  Or better yet, 

maybe you will do as many of your other ministers are doing 

right now, and that is changing their minds, changing their 

minds on the Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  Whoops, we 

thought it was good, but now because people have said they 

don't want those changes we're going to reinstate it even though 

. . . that's not a good example because of the hollowness of the 

restored program. 

 

But you can take the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) program as another example of where the people 

spoke out and your colleagues have listened.  To the credit of 

the Minister of Agriculture -- and goodness knows he needs 

credit and I'm prepared to give it to him -- he did change his 

mind on that. 

 

And in his role and capacity of Minister of Highways he 

decided maybe it was not good to churn up the thin pavement 

throughout the province and reduce them back into gravel.  He 

changed his mind.  He listened to the people. 

 

You say you listen to the people.  Well how many petitions, 

Madam Minister, does it take for you to change your mind?  Is 

the 4,000 on optometric services, is that not a significant 

number of people?  Or the 11,000-plus, and we're still getting 

them in on a daily basis, is that not a significant number -- 

large enough to change your mind?  So I think you have some 

interesting questions that you could peruse over the next while 

and maybe change your mind on these issues. 

 

And so, Mr. Chairman, to give the minister that opportunity 

and to give the minister the time to reconsider her rash action 

here, I'm going to, pursuant to rule 55(1), request that Bill 71, 

the Act that is going to amend The Saskatchewan Medical Care 

Insurance Act, be now suspended for three days. 

The Chair: -- At the request of the official opposition, under 

rule 55(1) proceedings on Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The 

Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Act are hereby 

suspended for three sitting days.  I would advise the members 

the suspension takes effect immediately and continues until the 

same hour three sitting days later. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I believe it's Bill 71, item no. 4. 

 

The Chair: -- My correction.  It's item no. 4, Bill No. 71 is 

hereby suspended. 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to repeal The Health Research Act 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, to clarify some questions 

that I have in my mind, perhaps it would be most useful for you 

to spend a few moments and explain to the Assembly exactly 

what you propose to achieve through this Bill. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Chair.  What is occurring 

in this Bill is of a housekeeping nature.  Earlier in the year . . . 

earlier this year, we established the Health Services Utilization 

Commission which took over the mandate of the Health 

Research Board under The Health Research Act and an 

additional mandate, which was funded by the government, to 

take a look at utilization of health care services in the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

What this Act does is simply housekeeping and transfers the 

rights, obligations, etc., and assets under The Health Research 

Act over to the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission.  So it is a Bill that is completely housekeeping in 

nature. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I guess I have a few concerns, Madam 

Minister, when any Bill presented by your government is just 

simply described as housekeeping:  please take our word, trust 

me, and let's get this thing done. 

 

First of all, Madam Minister, could you explain to me a little 

bit about the make-up of the old board?  That board is now 

defunct, is it?  Would you explain to me then where the 

members that were on the old board are now, how many 

members did the old board have, and specifically what where 

their duties?  And as a matter of fact, Madam Minister, who 

were the members of the old board? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you.  Mr. Chair, I'm waiting for 

the officials to bring in a list of the names of the old members 

on the Health Research Board.  There were 12 members on the 

Health Research Board, as I understand, and there have been 

12 new members appointed to the utilization commission.  The 

old members on the Health Research Board are no longer there.  

But we have in existence both a Health Research Board and a 

utilization commission.  These members are the same.  So 

you've got . . . they're both the 12 members. 

 

And that's why this Bill is housekeeping in nature, because it is 

for the purposes of doing away with the one board, so we only 

have one board left.  Right now we have 



2996 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

two boards, but the one board is really a shell.  And the people 

appointed to the utilization commission are also on the Health 

Research Board. 

 

Now I have the names of the new board, if the member would 

like those names, here.  But I don't have the names of the old 

board as of yet, and I've asked my officials to get it and I can 

provide that to you. 

 

The new board is Dr. Stewart McMillan, who is the chair; and 

Dr. Elizabeth Gibbings, who is the vice-chair, I believe; Jim 

Blackburn from Saskatoon; Alan Boulton -- they're on the 

faculty of the university; Geraldine Dickson -- and I understand 

she's at the faculty of nursing; Dr. Habbick; and Dr. Hindmarsh 

of Meadow Lake; Dr. Dennis Kendel who, as you know, is the 

registrar of the Council of the College of Physicians and 

Surgeons; Judith Martin from Saskatoon, in the health care 

administrative area; Meredith Moore from Air Ronge; Dr. 

Popkin from the university; and Pamela Smith from the 

University of Regina. 

 

And this board was comprised as a result of the very special 

skills they brought to it, and in particular, Dr. McMillan, who 

has very substantial skills in the whole area of utilization and 

accreditation. 

 

And I will undertake to provide you with the names of the 

other members as soon as I get them from my officials. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, what happened to the 

members who were on the previous board, the old?  Are they 

just given a golden handshake? 

 

(1100) 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that they resigned 

and the new board was appointed, and that there had been 

discussions with the Health Research Board prior to the new 

board being appointed and the utilization commission being 

established. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Are any of these new members on the board 

people that were on the old board?  Was there any carry-over? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I am not certain about this, but without us 

having the other list we can't be 100 per cent certain.  But my 

officials advise that Jim Blackburn and Brian Habbick may 

have been on the former board and that Alan Boulton may have 

been on the Health Research Board at another time in an earlier 

occasion, but wasn't a member of the most recent Health 

Research Board. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm kind of surprised, Madam Minister, that . . 

. well first of all, perhaps I should ask you the question: who 

appointed these new members?  And who asked the old 

members to resign? 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It's my understanding that there was 

consultation about the Health Services Utilization Commission, 

it's mandate and what the government was attempting to 

achieve, with the Health Research Board and as a result of that 

consultation, there were resignations from the former Health 

Research Board and a new board was established.  It's my 

understanding that 

there was consultation with the former Health Research Board 

which would have been by the Department of Health and the 

deputy minister of Health.  The appointment would have been 

by order in council through the Exec Council. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm surprised, Madam Minister, that you don't 

seem to be more on top of where a dozen people get appointed.  

When you say it was done by OC, order in council, that's 

Executive Council.  And those appointments are done, Madam 

Minister, on your recommendation as Minister of Health.  So 

I'm having a little bit of difficulty understanding how some of 

these may have been on the old board; they may not have been, 

you're not aware, you're not sure. 

 

Well surely, Madam Minister, you know the rsum of these 

people that you're going to be appointing to an important board 

like this, and it would seem to me that you would be very 

aware of any carry over and of any people who would have 

been . . . the continuity must have been a concern of yours. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, is 

that these individuals come with a certain expertise.  The 

Department of Health in consultation with the university and 

other areas came up with a list of names of people who are 

highly qualified to do this kind of technical work.  That is how 

these people were selected.  They were not hand-picked by the 

Minister of Health.  They were selected on the 

recommendation of the medical community and the university, 

because of their qualifications. 

 

Now if the member opposite wants a list of those 

qualifications, I can undertake to provide them.  If he wants a 

list of names of those on this list who sat on the former board, I 

can also undertake to provide that.  These people are all highly 

qualified and come on the recommendation of the Department 

of Health after consulting extensively with the medical 

community. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I thank you very much, Madam Minister.  

And yes, I would appreciate if you could give me that 

information that you have indicated just now.  Am I led to 

understand that you were not involved personally at all in any 

of this consultation that you have just been referring to?  I'm 

getting the distinct impression that you were not involved at all, 

that this was done by the department only. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I was being consulted as the 

consultations were taking place.  The department did the 

consulting with the university, that's right.  They did the 

consulting with the medical community and advised me of 

what they were determining, and made a recommendation to 

the Minister of Health. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What was the utilization of these board 

members?  How many days a year do you see them sitting and 

what would the per diem and the remuneration be? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, we are getting the information 

with respect to the remuneration.  I am advised by my officials 

that they've been meeting approximately every two or three 

weeks. 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2997 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Every two or three weeks.  One day every two 

or three weeks, Madam Minister, or a full week at a time?  

Give me an idea.  You say they meet every two or three weeks.  

Would that be for one day during that . . . It would.  Okay.  

Thank you. 

 

It's called the Health Services Utilization and Research 

Commission.  Now, Madam Minister, obviously I don't think 

that this committee is going to do actual research other than . . . 

Or does that apply to the research grants and the giving out of 

the money for research grants?  Is that that portion of their 

mandate? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, I can give the member now 

the remuneration with respect to the new members of the 

Health Services Utilization and Research Commission.  If 

they're salaried, they don't get a per diem.  So that means that 

Jim Blackburn gets travel expenses only; Alan Boulton, travel 

expenses only; Geraldine Dickson, travel expenses; Elizabeth 

Gibbings, travel expenses; Brian Habbick, travel expenses.  Dr. 

Hindmarsh gets $325 per day plus expenses; Dr. Kendel, travel 

expenses only; Judith Martin, travel expenses.  Meredith 

Moore gets $325 per day plus expenses.  And Dr. Stewart 

McMillan, who is the chair, gets $425 per day plus expenses, 

plus a $12,000 per year retainer.  Dr. Popkin gets travel 

expenses; Pamela Smith, travel expenses. 

 

Now with respect to funding, as the member opposite asked, 

there is research money for clinical research as was done in the 

past.  There has been no money taken from the research 

funding money that was available.  There's also additional 

money for new utilization research.  And there is a small 

research secretariat attached to the commission with like the 

old health research workers that were there, and I think there 

has been two more workers added. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  Now the other 

side of it is the utilization.  The commission is going to be . . . 

How do you perceive the commission working?  Are they 

going to go to Prince Albert?  Are they going to go to Moose 

Jaw?  How are they going to determine what the usage patterns 

are?  I assume that this is one of the functions of the board, to 

determine usage patterns and then make recommendations.  Is 

that the idea to you as minister as to how to better be more cost 

effective, be more efficient?  What is the aspect of this as far as 

the utilization is concerned? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much.  For the 

information of the member opposite, it isn't intended that the 

utilization commission do institution-specific studies because 

you had mentioned something about going to P.A. (Prince 

Albert) for example or so on.  However that would be their 

choice if they wanted to do that, but that's not the intention.  

The intention is for them to do studies that are really provincial 

in nature. 

 

Now what their methodologies will be, we don't know all the 

details of their methodologies.  That will be up to them to 

determine as scientists in their particular area.  They will be 

using any reported statistics that we have in Saskatchewan for 

health services and from health communities, for example.  

They will also be using 

national and international models and statistics that are 

available to them, and where they cannot get the information 

already in our statistical data banks in Saskatchewan or 

nationally or internationally, then they would undertake 

surveys, I would image, to acquire that information. 

 

(1115) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, thank you.  What do you 

intend to do with the information that this board is going to 

come up with?  Do you view this board as being a research 

board that's going to do your research for you so that you will 

take the . . . Will they be coming up with recommendations for 

you, or will they simply be giving you a statistical analysis and 

then you will be making policy decisions based on what the 

information that this board is coming up with?  Or will the 

board actually be making recommendations to you? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The intention is, is that the findings of the 

commission will be made public.  And they may very well as a 

result of this, have to point to certain directions that may 

improve the quality of health care services for example in 

Saskatchewan.  The information will be directed not only at 

government but also at the health community and at the public 

at large, so that everyone becomes familiar with what their 

findings are and the grounds upon which they base it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'll be quite candid with you, Madam Minister, 

and one of the concerns that I would have is that this board and 

its findings and/or its recommendations not be used as an 

excuse, Madam Minister, for you to make policy decisions that 

are going to affect the many people that we have in 

Saskatchewan, be they urban or be they rural. 

 

I just caution you, Madam Minister, I don't want to see you 

here next spring saying that because of this and because of 

these recommendations by these folks that therefore I'm going 

to now have a legitimate . . . to legitimize what I'm going to do 

anyway.  I caution you very strongly on that, Madam Minister, 

and I'm going to be watching for that. 

 

Secondly, I'm going to express another concern and be very 

candid with you up front.  And that is that when I look over the 

names of this board that you have outlined for me, I see a 

stellar performance-oriented group of individuals by large.  I 

don't know all of the individuals, Madam Minister, but I 

certainly recognize some of the names well-known throughout 

the medical community.  And I would commend you, Madam 

Minister, for getting people like this to basically come up for 

their expenses and put their expertise on the line.  And I think 

that's very commendable. 

 

So I'm not at this point casting aspersions on this particular 

board and certainly not on any of its members.  However, 

Madam Minister, I am dealing with the reality of dealing with a 

government that is known to use the facilities of government to 

its own end.  And again I just want to caution you, Madam 

Minister . . . and perhaps what you could do is just do away 

with any fears that I may have as to the make-up of this board. 



2998 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Now every board that we've taken a look at so far has 

individuals on it that have done well by the NDP (New 

Democratic Party) cause.  I want you to give me the assurance, 

Madam Minister, that there has been no entry level fee or no 

donation required by any board members.  Now I know that 

you're shaking your heads, and that's a terrible thing for me to 

have to bring up when Dr. Hindmarsh and people like this are 

on the board and I recognize that. 

 

But I don't know all of the individuals.  And I just want you to 

give me the assurance that there's nobody on here, for example, 

like the competition I had during the election with Kim 

Dmytryshyn running as the NDP member for your party as my 

opponent.  Yet I find out now in Social Services Estimates, yes, 

she's sitting on the Social Services appeal board.  Now I don't 

know whether it's a hundred dollar donation.  The last that the 

member from Thunder Creek brought up was a $608 donation 

required to get onto one of your boards.  Now I just want your 

assurance that this board is totally free of that.  And if you can 

give me that assurance, then I would rest easy. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The way in which the board was selected, 

Mr. Chair, is as follows, is that first of all advice was sought 

from the Dean of Medicine in Saskatchewan.  Advice was 

sought from the old research board, and there was consultation 

with the old research board.  The research community in 

general was consulted.  And they went . . . The Department of 

Health spoke to community-centred services to look for some 

community-centred representatives.  A list of names . . . 

Nobody asked any questions about what people's political 

involvement was or was not.  This was not raised. 

 

The fact of the matter is, is then a list of names were presented 

to the minister as recommendations from the department, and 

the minister accepted the department's recommendations, they 

having done all the technical work in consulting with the 

technical community in this regard. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  I think we can 

move on then.  I take that, your lack of denial, as the assurance 

that I was seeking for that indeed we will not find any of those 

items or any of those individuals involved that way.  And I 

thank you for that assurance. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 47 -- An Act to repeal The Health Research Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 

read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

Consolidated Fund Expenditure 

Health 

Vote 32 

 

The Chair: -- Would the minister introduce her officials, 

please. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.  

Immediately to my right is Mr. Duane Adams, the deputy 

minister of Health.  And to my left is Ms. Lorraine Hill, the 

senior associate deputy minister.  And immediately behind me, 

straight behind me is Ms. Kathy Langlois who's the executive 

director of finance and administration.  And to my left behind 

me is Mr. Lawrence Krahn whom I introduced earlier this 

morning.  There are other officials at the back as well.  I'm 

assuming that this will be sufficient for now because they're not 

coming forward.  Or did you want me to introduce the officials 

sitting way at the back.  Okay, thank you. 

 

Item 1 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think, 

Madam Minister, as the officials are needed an introduction at 

that time would be quite sufficient. 

 

I think, Madam Minister, that we have arrived at a period of 

time in this session that I've been looking forward to with a 

great deal of anticipation.  And I'm sure many of the people of 

Saskatchewan are also looking forward to getting some 

answers from you in terms of some of the concerns that they 

have, answers as to policy decisions which have resulted in 

particular directions that your government is going. 

 

And I guess we have a couple of roads which we can travel 

down to get to the same destination that we all want to go, 

which is the culmination of the Health Estimates.  One 

obviously is going to be a very rocky road.  It's going to be a 

circuitous path that we can take if that be your decision in 

terms of how well you answer questions, how forthright you 

are and so on.  And of course also it depends on how I behave 

and the political rhetoric that I put into my questions.  So I 

fully realize that it will be, I guess, feeling it out as we go 

along, as it were. 

 

(1130) 

 

But, Madam Minister, I know that a couple of weeks ago -- I'm 

not quite sure at what point -- you were given . . . it was my 

understanding that all ministers were given what we call the 

global questions.  And the global questions that you received 

apparently were not the global questions that some of the other 

ministers received. 

 

And I think that the response that we received from you, where 

the original question sent out as an example for PSC (Public 

Service Commission) I believe, and they were not the final 

version of the questions that we sent out to the other ministers, 

and I think there's a little bit of a mix-up there. 

 

But be that as it may, Madam Minister, there were 33 questions 

that were asked, and those were fairly straightforward 

questions dealing, I believe, with the 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 2999 

bureaucratic aspect of running the Department of Health.  None 

of them, I believe, were policy oriented that should have 

caused you a great deal of concern. 

 

Now I would want from you, Madam Minister . . . I only 

received the answers last night.  Quite frankly, I haven't looked 

at any of them yet.  So I don't know what your responses are.  I 

don't know how full your responses are. 

 

But I would ask you, Madam Minister, to make one 

commitment to me so that we can get this ball rolling, and that 

is that you will undertake to answer your questions as fully as 

your colleagues have answered.  And many of your colleagues 

-- as a matter of fact, most of your colleagues in the different 

departments have already answered those questions to our 

satisfaction. 

 

And if you would make the commitment then to answer those 

questions to the degree that your colleagues have, I would 

accept your confirmation of accomplishing that.  And then we 

can go on to other questions. 
 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, we didn't receive a copy of 

the second list that you're talking about.  But we did get a copy 

of the first list, which is what we have answered, which have 

been answered very substantially.  I don't know how many 

pages, but this is the answers to your questions.  So I don't 

know how much more full these answers can get. 
 

We attempted to answer them as full as we possibly could, and 

it will be up to you, after you take a look at them, to see 

whether or not you require further information.  And then we'll 

attempt to accommodate. 
 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Let me assure you of one thing, Madam 

Minister.  The questions that were asked were not asked as 

busybody, make-work project for the officials.  I know they 

have more things to do than that.  But it was asked in all 

sincerity because, Madam Minister, although you held up a 

wad of answers . . . And I appreciate the effort that the officials 

have gone to in order to come up with, which I am sure will be 

very substantive answers. 
 

But, Madam Minister, I make no apologies for asking those 

questions because your department spends a third of the entire 

budget of this province.  And as I have indicated, those 

questions were not policy questions.  We'll deal with them in 

here.  Those are legitimate questions, bureaucratic questions, if 

you will, that ask about the ways and the means of the 

department. 
 

And as such, I think we are very legitimate in asking those 

questions and you are very legitimate in spending a great deal 

of your officials' time in coming up with the answers to them.  

So, Madam Minister, I thank you for that, and I will peruse 

them with a great deal of anticipation as to their fullness and 

completeness. 
 

Madam Minister, if we could just get off that and get into the 

core of what we want to address.  I have a whole series of 

questions obviously, and many members of our caucus here do 

as well.  But to start things off, I want to take a direct approach, 

I suppose, to some of the policy decisions that your 

government has made -- unpopular decisions, I might add, 

Madam Minister -- with many, 

many people of this province.  And we want to get into one 

specific area that will serve to me at least as an example of 

some of the other impacts that your policy decisions have had 

on the people of this province. 

 

Now quite frankly my first question deals with diabetics.  So if 

your officials can start looking at some of the diabetic 

information that you have . . . Madam Minister, my question to 

you first of all would be: how many diabetics are you aware of 

that are in this province right now with varying degrees of the 

disease? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The statistics show that 14,000 

individuals received one prescription or more for insulin and/or 

testing agents in 1991. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- What kind of age breakdown do you have for 

diabetics, Madam Minister?  I'm particularly interested in the 

number of children that would be classified as being diabetic. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Just with respect to my earlier answer 

when I said there were 14,000 individuals, that has to be 

clarified; it's 14,000 families.  That means there could be one or 

more individuals in a family, and we don't have that specific 

information. 

 

With respect to . . . There is some 7,352 families that are 

non-senior.  Now we don't have the breakdown as to how many 

children within those families would be diabetic or receiving 

some diabetic testing agents, for example, or insulin.  But we 

can get that figure for you if you want it. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- For clarification, Madam Minister, did you 

say there were 1,352 diabetics that were non-senior? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- 7,352. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- 7,352.  Thank you.  So about half are 

non-senior and half are . . . Would it be a fair assessment for 

me to use the term 15,000?  Obviously if one member of a 

family is diabetic, there's probably going to be one or two 

within the family that are suffering from the same disease.  So 

if you're telling me that there are 14,000 families that have 

diabetics, I would assume that 15,000, 16,000 would be a fair 

number to use.  Could you try to define that for me? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Yes, I think that's fairly close. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Madam Minister.  If we use the 

term 15,000 families, is it correct, first of all, that the charge . . 

. or the cost, the increased cost of insulin to a diabetic prior to 

your changes in the program was $1 a vial and that it is 

approximately $24 a vial now?  Is that correct? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- It was $1 a vial in 1975 when the 

program was first brought in, and it remained $1 a vial.  There 

have been negotiations that have been undertaken with the 

pharmaceutical association and others involved in providing 

insulin to diabetics.  And the price I believe is now somewhere 

between 17 to $19 a vial.  There's been a reduction of almost 

one-third in the price of a vial of insulin. 



3000 Saskatchewan Hansard August 25, 1992 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well thank you, Madam Minister.  I thought it 

was somewhere around 23, 24, and if you're saying now it's 

eight bucks off of that, that's obviously good news in a sense.  

What caused the reduction?  You said there were negotiations.  

I mean, if the cost of a vial is $24, it's $24.  What would make 

that company now sell that for 18? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Okay, there's a raw drug price of course, 

and then the price is raised as a result of mark-ups by 

pharmacists and mark-ups by retail centres . . . wholesale 

centres, rather.  And what we did is the Department of Health 

went in and negotiated a reduction in the mark-ups, and as a 

result of that were able to obtain I think it's almost a one-third 

reduction in the cost of insulin. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well when you say negotiate, Madam 

Minister, that means that you have two levels -- one party here 

and one party here and you meet somewhere here.  What 

incentive was there for these companies to have any reduction 

at all?  I can't see why a company that is selling a product for 

$24 would be negotiated down to $18 unless you had some 

kind of a clout over them or you used some of the might of the 

department.  I don't follow that. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- I understand that what happened is 

comparisons were taken with other provinces as to what the 

price of a vial of insulin was and what the mark-ups were, and 

it was discovered that the mark-ups in Saskatchewan were 

higher than they were in some other jurisdictions.  And 

therefore we went to the pharmacists and to the wholesale 

dealers and we negotiated a reduction in those mark-ups.  

Under the present situation of course, they did not want to feel 

as though they were taking advantage of the consumer.  And on 

the basis of that we were able to negotiate a reduction in the 

mark-up so that it brought it more in line with other 

jurisdictions. 

 

(1145) 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Well if that's the only hammer that your 

officials have, I say all the more power to your officials for 

being able to accomplish that.  But, Madam Minister, I have a 

concern here, that I don't think it makes too much difference 

whether it's $20 a vial or 18 or $19 a vial; it still is that much. 

 

Now, Madam Minister, give me an idea, as closely as you can, 

what would be the typical requirement of a diabetic in terms of 

the average number of vials they would use per month? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The exact cost cannot be determined 

because the use of insulin and glucose testing agents varies 

from one individual to another.  However on the average the 

cost for insulin to a non-senior family is approximately $30 on 

the average, and that's insulin plus testing agents, I'm advised. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- That's per month?  So what we're seeing now 

is $30 per month is the average family cost for insulin, and at 

the same time that also includes the cost then of testers and 

syringes and all the cost involved with diabetics.  Is that right?  

That's the average cost for 

everything involved for a diabetic family? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Chair, my officials advise me that it 

costs approximately $20 for the insulin and glucose testing.  

And that's on average.  There is another charge of, they 

estimate at approximately $41 a month which is for syringes 

and some other things, much of which was not covered by the 

government in the past.  And there's another charge for strips 

for testing.  And we don't have an average as to how many 

strips a person would use, but I think it's $50, for how many 

strips?  Fifty strips is $50. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- I'm kind of surprised at the tardiness, I 

suppose, of the answers coming back to some fairly 

fundamental questions here.  At this rate it's going to be well 

into September before we even get half-way through our 

Estimates here, Madam Minister -- some fundamental 

questions. 

 

We're talking now about $20 for the glucose testing and for the 

insulin; $41 for subsidiary costs, the paraphernalia.  But that 

does not yet even include the cost of the testing strips.  So 

we're taking a look at at least a minimum of 61 plus the number 

of . . . $1 per strip for testing.  And some of them, my colleague 

here says, from his experience, some of them have up to four 

test strips per day.  So I mean we're looking at some major, 

major . . . You know, 30 days at four a day, that's $120 in 

addition to the $60 that you've identified.  We're taking a look 

at $180 cost of a diabetic per individual.  And some families 

have more than one diabetic involved in their family. 

 

Madam Minister, you talk a lot about the set up that you have 

in your government now to take care of those that cannot pay 

for such costs.  You talk about the social service recipients; you 

talk about the SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance Plan) people; 

you talk about the SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) people, the 

seniors; you talk about those that are under the FIP (Family 

Income Plan) program as being taken care of. 

 

Now that, Madam Minister, has always been there.  When I 

say, always, I'm talking in the recent past.  And then you talk 

about your program where you are saying to the people of 

Saskatchewan, if you're having difficulty paying for these 

costs, there's a safety net. 

 

Madam Minister, I want you to be quite explicit to me now.  

The $160 that we have identified -- or $180 that we have 

identified as a potential cost per diabetic in this province, what 

safety net have you got in place now that did not exist, that did 

not exist on October 21, '91?  What have you done to increase 

that safety net? 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- First of all, the figures that we gave you 

don't add up to 180 a month, Mr. Chair.  It's 61 plus $50 for 

strips, and we're not sure what the average number is in that 

regard.  So we're not agreeing to the $180 a month.  We're 

talking about averages, Mr. Chair. 
 

Now with respect to the issue about the safety net, let me say 

this.  What the government has set up is a program whereby 

people who cannot afford their drug costs, either because they 

have high drug costs or low income or a combination of both, 

can apply to the government.  And their deductible will be 

waived or their co-payment 



August 25, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 3001 

will be waived, or something will be implemented by the 

government to help them through paying for their drug costs. 

 

The Department of Health is administering this program, as I 

understand, very liberally.  There are application forms at the 

druggist for people to apply if they need to apply for this help.  

We have forwarded a letter, I believe, to the 14,000 diabetic 

families in the province to tell them about the safety program.  

We have also instituted a 24-hour WATS (wide area telephone 

service) line for emergency service.  If there needs to be a 

prescription filled by a person on an emergency basis and they 

can't afford to, the pharmacist can phone the 24-hour WATS 

line and have it filled.  And that service is available to an 

individual once every six months or once every . . . once every 

six months. 

 

So anyone who has high drug costs or low income or a 

combination of both can apply to the Department of Health, 

and the Department of Health will work with them to provide 

them with relief in that regard. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Madam Minister, one quick question here.  

You didn't answer my question.  What have you done 

specifically that was not in place under our government prior to 

October 21, 1991? 

 

I mean these programs that you're talking about were in place 

all the time.  Those options were available to folks even when 

the prescription drug plan existed the way it was suppose to 

exist.  And you've gutted that program, and you're making all 

these comments about the wonderful safety net.  I don't see the 

difference. 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- The Department of Health has expanded 

the criteria of the special assistance program that was there 

before.  And it is being applied in a more liberal fashion than 

what was taking place before. 

 

Also there is a cap on drug costs at . . . there's a cap at $750 a 

year which was not there before, so people with very high drug 

costs have a cap on them and the co-payment is reduced to 10 

per cent.  And the six-month emergency measure was 

implemented with a 24-hour WATS (wide area telephone 

service) line which was not there, as my understanding, 

previously. 

 

The committee reported progress. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


