




















































Hansard: May 11, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 301 

 May 11, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the Assembly resolve 

itself into the Committee of Finance. 

 

Mr. Goohsen: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  It is indeed a 

pleasure for me to stand here tonight to debate the budget for 

this year and to finally get a chance, Mr. Speaker, to talk to the 

people of Saskatchewan, and through you to the people of this 

Assembly, for a few minutes about a government that is finally 

after many, many months of being in government, finally 

having the courage to come forward and show what they really 

think should be happening and show the people what they are 

going to do to the future of this province through their 

philosophy and through their direction as government. 

 

We have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that a long time back we 

started to contemplate that we would likely be getting some 

pretty heavy hits in this budget, but I don't think anybody ever 

really seriously contemplated the blow that Saskatchewan has 

taken.  It's the most amazing thing that we could have so many 

things forgotten or put by the wayside in such a short time. 

 

All through the last election we heard people talking about axe 

the tax; 4.5 billion is enough for a province this size; we 

wouldn't need any more; we wouldn't have to tax any more.  

All we would have to do is clean up the management, fire a 

few folks, replace them with a few of our friends and 

everything would be hunky-dory. 

 

Well they didn't axe the tax and they didn't stick within the 4.5.  

And the whole thing has become a ridiculous joke, a ridiculous 

joke that's being played on the people of this province, the 

taxpayers of this province, and the young people of this 

province who used to think, I think, in terms that maybe they 

would find a future in this province but who now have to look 

very seriously at taking the advice of those that say, go west 

young man and young woman; head for Alberta as fast as your 

feet will take you. 

 

And that almost has to be the kind of thing that we would tell 

them, except that we know that that wouldn't really solve the 

problem for those of us that have to stay.  But just because 

things are difficult for us, have we the right to ask them to 

remain in a province that is doomed to the grey days ahead?  

And I seriously think not.  I seriously think not.  I think the 

faster they get out of this province, the better for all, because at 

least they can save themselves.  The young folks of this 

province have very little future in this province any more. 

 

Four years of misery is all they can look forward to.  For 

example, Mr. Speaker, I'll take you to a few of the specifics of 

not only those things that are included in the 

budget, but also some of the things that should have been there.  

But coming from the budget we now see some flyers coming 

past our desks about individual programs. 

 

Programs, for example, like the Highways program; a decrease 

in spending predicted.  After all of the rhetoric we heard last 

year about the pot-holes and the mismanagement in the 

highways, and not having the highways built and reconstructed, 

now we have a decrease in spending.  When the rest of the 

budget is expanded to almost 500 . . . over $500 billion, the 

Department of Highways is being given even less money than 

it had last year when the NDP (New Democratic Party) 

criticized the programs that were being done there. 

 

Will this become the minister of pot-holes?  I don't know.  

Probably it will.  Or will he become the minister of gravel 

roads?  Because now we have a flyer going past our desk today 

from that very minister's office that tells us he's going to be 

going back to tearing up the hard-surfaced roads and putting 

them to gravel.  Many of the highways in our province, they 

say, aren't used enough, the numbers aren't high enough to 

warrant using them as oil-surfaced or hard-surfaced roads.  So 

we're going to tear them back up. 

 

Now I have to admit, sir, that if you have to do some things to 

save money, you may have to do things.  But to say in one 

breath that you're going to do it one way and in the next six 

months turn totally around, completely flip-flop, is an 

inexcusable way to treat the whole situation. 

 

The budget increases by over $100 million, and the minister of 

pot-holes hasn't got the courage to stand up to his colleagues 

and argue for a little money to build some new highways and to 

put our contractors to work.  Not only don't we put our 

contractors to work, we don't put our young people to work. 

 

How many jobs are created every year, Mr. Speaker, by the 

Department of Highways when they put on some construction 

projects?  Many, many jobs are created and these are the jobs 

that our young people in the universities and the high schools 

can quite easily take in that seasonal type of employment. 

 

Those are the kind of jobs that are not going to be there for 

them this year and won't be there in the future with this 

government, because they have no plan for young people and 

they have no plan to provide jobs that young folks can make a 

few dollars so that they can go back to school, to go back to 

university, or to go back to whatever they do in fall.  They may 

as well go to Alberta and get their summer job over there, 

because at least over there they have some plans and projects 

going. 

 

We talk about health and we've got a situation, Mr. Speaker, on 

our hands right now where I understand 17 hospitals and 

related types of hospital care facilities have received written 

notice that they're either going to be shut down or terminated as 

of the last few days.  Health care projects that had already been 

started are going to be put on hold. 



302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

And where are these health care facilities?  Well, sir, we 

haven't quite been able to find out for sure what the whole list 

is yet but the few that we found seems to direct us in the 

direction of an attack on rural hospitals and rural health care.  

And that concerns us deeply, Mr. Speaker, because of course 

the rural people have a hard time getting to hospitals in some 

areas.  You take the area south of my constituency, and I'm 

going to talk about the Shaunavon constituency for a minute 

even though I'm not the elected member there. 

 

But you take a hospital system in a town like Eastend, 

Saskatchewan.  The town is probably, oh, I'll have to guess at 

about 75 miles from the Alberta border and likely about 40 

miles from the American border.  And it sits right in an area of 

the province then that has no hospital care around it until you 

go to Shaunavon or to Swift Current or to Gull Lake or to 

Maple Creek. 

 

That leaves a square down there probably just about 100 miles 

square with only one hospital facility in the centre of it and that 

would be in Eastend, Saskatchewan. 

 

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, being a young man bucked off 

a bronc at the Alberta border down at Consul, Saskatchewan 

and having your leg broken, the trip you'll have now when you 

can't stop at Eastend if this hospital happens to be closed down 

and shut up? 

 

Suppose there's no longer a health care facility there?  A trip to 

Shaunavon where you will find reasonably good health care, I 

can assure you of that . . . but many times we do find that in 

those small towns people have to be loaded into ambulances 

and taken on further. 

 

If for example the bone happened to go through the leg, as I 

have heard on occasion these things happen, then you're going 

to be faced with a situation where it's after a hundred-mile trip 

in the back of a half-ton or somebody's van, if you're lucky 

enough to have a neighbour that has one of those.  You'll then 

be chucked into an ambulance and taken off to Regina or 

Saskatoon if you happen to be lucky enough to still be alive. 

 

This is a very major problem, Mr. Speaker, for the people out 

in our area and I think probably we echo the sentiments of a lot 

of rural folks.  The reality is there's a lot of places in 

Saskatchewan where you drive for miles and miles just to see 

some more miles and miles. 

 

But there are some folks out there and they're extremely 

important to the province and they're extremely important to 

the welfare of the rural fabric and the production of the goods 

and services that keep this whole machine of Saskatchewan 

running. 

 

The whole economic machine of Saskatchewan is based on a 

couple of key industries.  Unfortunately for those folks in this 

government, agriculture still happens to be one of them.  But 

they've pulled the pin on agriculture.  What do you see in this 

whole budget for agriculture except cut-backs and withdrawals, 

and attacks on the health system in rural Saskatchewan, and 

attacks on the highway system for outlying areas because they 

don't happen to have enough vehicles to keep the road travelled 

enough to warrant maybe staying with the hard 

surfacing? 

 

It's just an amazing thing what this budget has done to the rural 

people of this province and the things that it predictably will do 

if we don't have someone in this government sit back and take 

an honest-to-goodness look at what they're doing to the people 

in this province.  We have got to somehow jog their minds and 

jog their souls and jog their consciences because we have no 

other recourse with a government that has a mandate for 

another four years.  We must somehow get through to them the 

need of rural people and the need for people that live a long 

ways from facilities and from services. 

 

We can see a situation developing, Mr. Speaker, where not 

only will we see a loss of those facilities out in the rural areas, 

but now we've lost the FeedGAP (feed grain adjustment 

program) program, just as an example.  The FeedGAP program 

being cancelled means that a lot of people that fed a few head 

of cattle before will no longer be able to justify keeping those 

animals.  The economics is so narrow in the cattle business 

today that you're going to see a situation where folks that are 

on a very marginal position of economics will just simply quit.  

They won't raise those animals any more. 

 

Now talk about the cattle business being tough in what some 

folks have referred to earlier today as being reasonably good 

times.  What about people that are right on the line like the 

pork producers?  Pork producers have a habit of running on the 

economic line closer than anybody that I know of in 

agriculture.  I have nothing but admiration for the folks in that 

industry because they really do have to have an economic plan 

that works, and a calculator with a new battery. 

 

And when you throw something at them like $13 a tonne loss 

on their feed, you automatically put the entire industry into a 

tail-spin. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is going to have devastating effects all 

through the industry.  And it won't stop on the farms and the 

ranches and the feedlots and the piggeries.  It's going to stop 

right on the doorstep of Moose Jaw and Saskatoon because 

you're going to end up having no animals produced enough to 

keep your packing plants open. 

 

Where are the jobs, I ask you?  Where are the jobs for the 

people of this province and the people of this great rural area?  

Where are the building and the economic plans that were 

supposed to be built into this first budget as we heard all 

through last fall's election, and for the two or three years 

before?  How can you promise people jobs when you kill the 

basic fundamental industries out there that are going to 

eventually create the jobs? 

 

If you don't want to talk about pigs and cows and 

slaughterhouses and things like that, think for a minute about 

the petroleum industry.  You've increased the tax on royalties 

and it doesn't sound like much. You've gone from 2 per cent to 

3 per cent and it sounds really quick.  But if you think for a 

minute, that's a 50 per cent increase in the taxes that these folks 

are paying. 

 

Already we've got a situation south of Leader where 56 wells 

have been cemented off and capped this spring 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 303 

alone.  We can't for sure identify that the people who were 

doing this are identifying it with the government, their need to 

close these wells down.  We can't for sure say that this budget 

is the contributing factor.  I would rather say, Mr. Speaker, 

from what we understand of the owners, it's a little bit like the 

straws that go on a camel's back in the old story - 

_ one more straw after one more straw until the poor camel's 

back will break. 

 

And in the petroleum patch you've got a situation where the 

economy is so fragile these days, that only one little bit more 

tax is going to kill the whole industry.  Just as a little bit of a 

FeedGAP program may destroy the agricultural feeding 

industry, you now may destroy the petroleum industry in this 

province. 

 

And you will say, well that's okay because these guys are all a 

bunch of rich guys that came in here, shouldn't have been 

taking all our natural resources and making all that money 

anyway.  But where's the economy to that?  Where is the 

thinking to the future of what that creates, what that wealth 

does for us?  Where do the jobs come from? 

 

Again, Mr. Speaker, I point to the rural areas where an awful 

lot of rural people, especially in my area, have gotten jobs over 

the years.  They work on the farms, and when the farms can't 

make their money the best diversification you could have was 

to get another job on the side.  Those jobs from the petroleum 

industry are the jobs that were available, in many cases.  And 

they've been the cash flow, the cash money that have kept those 

farms running, have kept those farm families in rural 

Saskatchewan.  And some of those jobs are still going to be 

there with companies like Saskoil. 

 

But if you don't encourage and in fact, through your budgeting, 

discourage further expansion of the industry, if you kill the 

goose that laid the golden egg, you're not going to get the 

golden egg.  You're doing it here with agriculture; you're doing 

it with petroleum.  You're destroying two basic, fundamental 

industries that could create jobs down the road in the future. 

 

This is not a one-step process.  It takes time to build an 

industry that will generate jobs over the long haul.  And so 

when you see people evacuating from an industry, or leaving 

the province in fear of whatever it is, whether it be the tax base, 

whether it be the philosophy, no matter what the reason, if 

they're gone, they're gone, and you lose those jobs and you lose 

that fundamental base. 

 

You can talk about things, Mr. Speaker, like rural development.  

And here again, you talk about a government going totally 

wish-wash on what they've been saying and flip-flopping on 

what they've advocated.  And they talk about figures like 7.4 

per cent reduction to the rural areas, and you hear all kinds of 

panic stories that have people not sleeping at night about how 

they might be going to lose their job next, and all kinds of 

fearmongering going on out there.  And the NDP have been 

doing that since the last election and they can't even get over it 

now that they're in government. 

 

(1915) 

 

And so then they come up with a figure like 7, 4 point per 

cent . . . 4 per cent.  And the other day in question period the 

minister admits that it's not 7.4 per cent; it's a floating rate.  

We've been trying to find out for sure what a floating rate 

means, and we still haven't really been able to find out.  He 

says anybody can get access to this information, Mr. Speaker, 

but I still haven't been able to find it.  And I've asked for that 

information to be delivered here, and I'm waiting to see it.  And 

I'm sure that sometime we will get it.  But the reality is that we 

have municipalities reporting to us that anything from a 20 per 

cent to a 44 per cent reduction in the money that they have to 

use. 

 

Now talk about down-loading, and talk about the criminalness 

of people down-loading their tax burdens.  And we hear people 

talking to us in this Assembly about how upset they are with 

Ottawa for down-loading.  And here they turn right around and 

do it to the municipalities. 

 

And property taxes in rural Saskatchewan will have to go up 

not only to provide the services for rural municipalities, but 

what happens with our hospital systems and our school 

systems?  As all of this down-loading comes into play, Mr. 

Speaker, these monies now have to be transferred to the local 

property owners in our communities. 

 

How long can they stand that before they go broke, throw up 

their hands, and also leave the province?  How many motor 

graders will have to be parked in the next year or two with this 

kind of reduction in funding to the municipalities?  How many 

jobs there are going to be gone because the rural people are 

going to say -- just like the Department of Highways said up at 

the top of my page -- we're going to now have to start cutting 

back and tearing up the hard-surfaced roads and putting them 

back to gravel.  In the countryside they may say those back 

roads won't be graded any more and then somebody else has 

lost his job because that machine will be parked. 

 

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, what about the fellow that sells that 

very motor grader?  What happens to his business when 

nobody needs to buy one any more because they're not grading 

the roads? 

 

You've killed the incentive of the whole economy.  The 

economic base of this province is being destroyed.  Every time 

you destroy a fundamental job in society, there are some 

formulas.  And I can't quote all the exact figures, but I think all 

of the people have heard them before.  You have this spin-off.  

For every real job you create there is either 7 or 10 other jobs 

that are created around it through the system of our economy.  

That especially holds true in towns and cities.  Once you create 

a job in the oil patch, for example, you may create six more 

jobs in the town or the city as a spin-off from that economic 

benefit. 

 

We've talked, Mr. Speaker, about all of these things that are 

going to hurt us.  And then we come around to the very basic 

thing that nobody in this province, I think, ever dreamt that 

even this government would have the nerve to destroy and take 

away from the common people, and that of course has to be our 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan.  And I couldn't stand here tonight 

and speak to you, sir, or to anyone else without taking a few 

minutes to talk about the great tragedy involved in losing this 

plan. 



304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

One person I talked to suggested to me that on the basis of this 

plan we should do several things.  We should amass class 

actions against the government.  He suggested we should walk 

out and ring the bells for 18 or 20 days.  This is how seriously 

these people take this matter. 

 

Eighty per cent of the people in the plan were women in this 

province -- the very people who this government claims to 

champion; the people who are poor and don't have access to 

rich plans, good plans, big funded programs; the very people 

who have no other recourse than to depend on a small program 

set up within their own province, set up in such a way that it 

was funded and did cost some money to the government.  But 

also a program, Mr. Speaker, that could quite easily have been 

modified without those expenditures being guaranteed every 

year.  You could have reduced the amount of the matching 

grants.  You could have consulted with the folks out there.  

You could have talked to the farm wives and to the people who 

were mostly involved in this program -- small-town folks with 

small businesses.  Single parents, in many cases, were the 

people who were depending on this program. 

 

I know of many people -- and quite a few of them have called 

me -- and they're very upset and very disturbed, Mr. Speaker.  

And I am upset and disturbed for them, because in reality, here 

was a program that gave them a chance to build a little 

something that they could call their own for their retirement 

and their old-age days; something they could take some pride 

in and say that, we built this ourselves with the help of the 

government. We didn't just go out and ask for an assistance 

package; we didn't just go out and ask for welfare.  We actually 

did some planning and some working with it and we helped 

ourselves to build a future, something for those days of 

retirement ahead of us.  And they could take pride along with 

all of those folks that happen to be fortunate enough to live in a 

big city and work for the government and have their big 

pensions put away by some big organization like that. 

 

And it just isn't happening out there, Mr. Speaker.  And what 

happens now when you take this program away?  Well you've 

got some very real and fundamental things that are going to 

happen right at the outset.  You're going to lose, of course, the 

16 or 17 jobs that were immediately affected and of course 

that's got to put some problems on to at least one town.  And of 

course it sends a message to everyone else that works in the 

government sector and that is, maybe you're next.  Who knows 

whose job the hammer will fall on next when these sort of 

things can happen? 

 

And of course you've got the spin-off effect of not having 

people any longer taking pride in themselves and if they do 

they may start to look wonderingly at other options.  And of 

course, here again, we may see people simply say, it's time to 

move; maybe we have to leave this province and go 

somewhere else.  Is that the message, Mr. Speaker, that we 

really want to send to Saskatchewan people?  I seriously doubt 

it.  I seriously doubt that this government really thought 

through what they were doing when they decided to put in all 

of these programs in this budget that so seriously destroy the 

chances for people to stay in this province or to justify any 

argument to stay here. 

We have got in the past few days a whole lot of things that 

people are worried about, and it's little wonder.  We have got 

everything from farmers having problems with the GRIP (gross 

revenue insurance program) program being torn apart to the 

fact that we can't get tourists in. 

 

I want to talk just a minute, Mr. Speaker, about the comments 

that were made the other day in this House with regard to how 

Rural Development, through Rural Development -- not Rural 

Development -- the Parks and Renewable Resources was going 

to having a turnaround in this province.  They suggested that 

day that we were going to have a turnaround because they were 

going to get rid of the PST (provincial sales tax) from last year, 

and this year it wouldn't be on, so now the tourists would be 

coming to Saskatchewan.  That was, I recall, one speaker in 

particular, that dwelt for quite some time on the very fact that 

now that we had that gone, we would suddenly see a 

turnaround in our tourist industry.  Well I hope it happens.  But 

now that you have got an 8 per cent tax instead of a 7 per cent 

tax, I rather seriously doubt that I see where the attraction is for 

anybody to come a-hustling right on over here to spend 8 per 

cent on everything that they buy, instead of the 7. 

 

We have got at least a couple of things that are positive.  

There's talk about spending some money to grow some trees, 

seedlings, and to replant them out in the areas that have been 

harvested.  And that is good news.  We will admit that there are 

some good things even come out of this budget, and if that 

happens that will be good.  But let's take a look, Mr. Speaker, a 

little closer, at Parks and Renewable Resources and the job that 

they can or can't do in this budget.  The job that they can't do, 

of course, is to attract real numbers of people.  And without 

real numbers of people, what have we missed here, Mr. 

Speaker?  Again, we've missed the golden opportunity as a 

seasonal employment for our young people. 

 

In this province we have a long history and tradition of 

employing young people through our parks systems.  We find 

them jobs in that seasonal work and it helps them to 

supplement their incomes so that they can go back to schools 

and universities in the fall. 

 

We don't have 5 cents showing in this budget for extra things 

that might help.  For example, I myself have suggested to the 

minister in charge that in parks like the Cypress Hills 

Provincial Park, if they would plant a few more fish, and we've 

even offered to find them supplies of those very fish . . . He 

hasn't even had the courtesy to go out there and find out how 

many fish could be put in there or what job opportunities could 

be spun off as a result of bringing old men and their grandsons 

to the park for the weekend or for the summer to do a little bit 

of fishing. 

 

We can't get these fellows, Mr. Speaker, to take us seriously 

when we talk to them about reducing entrance fees to the parks 

or coming up with some kind of an organized sports program 

or some kind of a thinking approach to how to run our parks so 

that we can actually attract tourism into our province. 

 

All we can hear is 8 per cent instead of 7 per cent is better than 

the PST.  And that doesn't make a rational argument, 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 305 

in my way of thinking, to try to attract people to our province 

for tourism and the tourism season ahead. 

 

I suppose we may see some fancy, glitzy advertising that'll cost 

a small fortune, but the real, basic, fundamental things that 

would attract people are the things that spend the dollars 

providing some jobs in the park for young people where they'd 

cut some grass, keep the golf courses in good trim, and attract 

people by having a real attraction, something that the people 

can be proud of, and proud to spend their time and their 

summer holidays on. 

 

That in fact brings me back to the idea that was mentioned the 

other day.  And I was absolutely astounded that someone in 

this Assembly would suggest that people shouldn't golf in 

Saskatchewan any more, that helping to build golf courses was 

entirely a waste of money.  Now my father might agree with 

that line of thinking because he didn't see any sense in chasing 

little white balls around. 

 

But a lot of folks these days don't have to work as hard 

physically as he did.  And the fact of the matter is that if you 

don't have to work physically hard at your job, you have to 

have a place where you actually get out and follow a little 

white ball or something else, just as a good excuse to keep your 

health in order, to get a little exercise.  So I think we have to 

take a look at building some of these programs, doing some of 

these things, and we have to have a new thinking on this budget 

and the approach. 

 

Now I'm not saying, Mr. Speaker, that that can't still be done, 

because there's a lot in this budget that leaves room for specific 

identification.  For example, there are large blocks of money 

being spent in here that are not clearly identified as to where 

they are going, and we will be searching hard to find out where 

that is and we'll try to encourage the ministers opposite to 

spend some of the money on those fundamental things that we 

need. 

 

It's going to be a long summer though, trying to figure out 

where everything is going in this budget.  The reality being, 

again as I said before, close to $5 billion worth of money being 

taken in and claiming, of course, that they're doing so well by 

taxing us extra hard.  And then we find here $517 million as a 

deficit still showing at the end of the day, at the end of the 

books. 

 

And isn't that the most astounding thing you ever heard, Mr. 

Speaker?  From a government that said they were going to 

balance the budgets, who spent the last seven months, or six 

months, absolutely doing nothing else except criticizing the 

former administration for having deficits, and saying how good 

they were going to do it and how great they were going to be at 

solving this problem, and they've come up with a bigger deficit 

even than what the last administration had, after taxing 

everybody right to the hilt. 

 

And I mean this is a tax grab.  This is the most unbelievable tax 

grab that I've ever seen in my life and I've been around here for 

a couple of years -- paid a few taxes too in my time. 

 

Well the other day, Mr. Speaker -- just to wander a bit 

into a bit of a different subject for a minute so that folks don't 

get totally bored with what's going on here -- we talked about . 

. . the other day about Mr. Bourassa's visit here.  And that of 

course is important to us, because the whole economy of this 

budget isn't going to be worth a dime or anything else if we 

don't have a country left.  So I think we should talk for a 

minute about Mr. Bourassa's visit to Saskatchewan and the 

importance of it.  Our Premier, of course, certainly did place 

some importance on it.  He took the time out of his day to visit 

with Mr. Bourassa. 

 

But it makes me wonder, Mr. Speaker, now that we've placed 

some importance, and we've seen this government actually 

placing enough importance to spend the day with the Premier 

from Quebec, it makes me wonder, sir, if we are now going to 

see that action from the plebiscite that we voted on last fall. 

 

We had a plebiscite that asked whether or not the people of this 

province wanted to voice their opinions through a vote on the 

constitutional issue.  And it was very much heavily in favour, 

that vote.  And I think it is now incumbent upon this 

government to bring that matter before the people of 

Saskatchewan, within the next few months, as this particular 

issue unfolds.  Open and honest government would dictate to 

me, Mr. Speaker, that that's what you would have to do.  You 

would have to have the courage now to go to the people and 

put it to a vote and ask them before you make a final decision. 

 

And I say with all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, that all three of those 

plebiscites that were taken last fall are extremely important to 

the people of this province.  And all three of them should be 

dealt with with a considerable amount of concentration and 

effort at achieving the goals that the people have pointed out 

that they want to have achieved in the direction of our 

government and of our province. 

 

(1930) 

 

With constitutional issues, we're going to be talking about 

many things that will affect our province.  The native land 

claim settlements that we've been talking about for the last little 

while are obviously going to be necessary to be dealt with, but 

what we're going to have to consider is that it's going to cost 

some money.  We're going to have to consider this, Mr. 

Speaker, and it's going to have to be dealt with in our budget.  

We've got to know, as a taxpaying public, what kind of plans 

the government really has for spending our money in these 

areas.  If we don't find those things out, how are we to know 

where this money is all going to go, and how are we to trust the 

government to stay within its $517 million deficit that it's 

predicting for this upcoming year?  Maybe that will go up to a 

billion or two. 

 

We've got to have some answers, and clear answers, as to what 

our direction is and where we're going to be going in the 

constitutional talks and those areas in those talks that will 

eventually, inevitably cost the taxpayers of this province a lot 

of money. 

 

Talking about a government saying something that makes them 

responsible to what their policies are and to what their budget 

is going to be, we listened, Mr. Speaker, with 



306 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

some interest to all of the rhetoric that went on about the 

number of program cuts that we were going to see and all the 

dollars that they were going to save.  And I guess we had to 

admit that the reality would be that if you're going to make $4.5 

billion enough to run the province, you'd have to cut back 

somewhere.  You'd have to take some programs out. 

 

So let me just run down a little quick list here of the programs 

that have been cut.  And I've got a bottom line that makes this a 

punch line here, and I want you to watch for this.  We got the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan right off the start.  And we're going 

to save, according to the Leader-Post, program cuts -- and it's 

published right in their paper on May 8 -- $11.6 million; the 

mortgage protection plan is going to save $2 million.  I was 

surprised that it was that high because mortgage rates have 

been going down, and that plan hasn't been as important in the 

last few months as it used to be when interest rates were 15 and 

18 and 13 per cent and all those other wild figures that we went 

through in the '80s. 

 

We've got the optometric service program, now that's down 

here for 4.6 million.  We've got the Law Reform Commission's 

grant is $55,000.  We've got the Crimes Compensation Board is 

$874,000, and the Indian heritage trust fund is $167,000 -- 

that's supposed to save.  And we've got one here that's 

unknown, Saskatchewan Diversification Corporation.  Special 

economic diversification projects are supposed to now be 

cancelled and save us $279,000.  Counselling and assistance 

for farmers is going to save us $1.8 million. 

 

Why, you would have never thought that awhile ago, would 

you, when they were talking about how expensive this program 

was supposed to be -- the program that used to go out and 

guarantee farmers operating loans so that they could continue 

to operate their farms when the banks would no longer fund 

them.  A courageous act by a courageous government and 

taken away under the guise of the GRIP program supposedly 

going to protect it and bring some banking . . . bankability to 

the program and then they take away that program as well.  But 

anyway they've gotten rid of an expense of $1.8 million. 

 

We've lost the FeedGAP program, which incidentally only cost 

$2.8 million to keep our feeding industry going in this 

province.  You would have thought it would at least have been 

a billion dollars the way they hollered about how expensive it 

was. 

 

Farm purchase subsidies, $3.5 million; grants to farmers' 

markets, $75,000.  Now wouldn't you know that they'd have to 

pick on the little old grandmothers that might go to town and 

try to sell a cabbage or a dozen eggs?  Then they take that 

program away from farmers as well.  This is just about the 

most unbelievable thing you ever saw. 

 

Municipal economic development capital grants, $2.6 million 

going to be saved there.  Agricultural-horticultural society 

grants, they're going to save $271,000 by taking that program 

away.  Purchase of bulls for breeding in community pastures is 

unknown but the program has been scratched.  The local 

government innovations program is unknown.  The 

Saskatchewan fossil fuel and energy research program is 

$97,000.  University research 

grant is $4,000.  Random information support survey, $20,000 

will be saved there.  Abandoned mines, remedial action -- 

whatever that means -- is going to save us $66,000.  Ecological 

reserve program, they're going to save $57,000 on that one.  

Operation quickstart, that was a program to start people up, 

that's $200,000 going to be saved there.  Assessment and 

placement centre at Kelsey, $100,000 is going to be saved 

there.  University of Regina credit conversion is $250,000 

saved, and the seniors' heritage program is going to save $10.9 

billion. 

 

Now if you were adding this up, you will find out that we've 

now got a grand total of $42.5 million of which almost 11 

million came out of the seniors' heritage program alone. And 

that's a lot of money, no question about that. 

 

But here we are with a government that said they're going to 

make . . . $4.5 billion is enough to run the province on.  They're 

going to make the necessary cuts; they're going to save the 

management.  They're going to do everything right.  They're 

going to cut out the waste.  And they've managed to come up 

with $42.5 million.  And imagine that, they had to have another 

$100 million worth of taxes on top in order to come with the 

$517 million deficit.  And that was supposed to solve the 

problem.  Mr. Speaker, I don't know where these guys bought 

their calculators.  There is something wrong with the plan in 

this process. 

 

This budget would cause all this hurt to all of these people and 

save $42 million that we can identify.  And we haven't done 

anything, Mr. Speaker, except to take a few people out of their 

jobs.  We haven't really contributed to the deficit problem.  In 

fact, we've increased the deficit problem.  We've . . . two years 

ago, the deficit was 365 million somebody said.  Now it's 517 

million.  And this is supposed to be again a great big bonus for 

Saskatchewan people, something to make them feel good about 

paying their taxes over. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, my colleague alluded a little earlier today to 

the real attack in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, for example, 

as being the number one on that list, the real people being hurt 

there were the women. 

 

And I refer you to the Star-Phoenix, which I never before read 

very much because I don't come from that part of the province 

and haven't had access to it.  But it's quite interesting to see 

how papers in the rest of the province refer to things.  And in 

the Star-Phoenix on May 11, 1992, here's the headline: 

"Women Losers." 

 

"The Issue: End of Saskatchewan Pension Plan," and "The 

Solution: (it says) Should have been salvaged." 

 

Now the demise of the Saskatchewan Pension Plan and the loss 

of 16 jobs is certainly a serious blow. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, even in the Star-Phoenix, which has not 

been given a lot of credit a lot of times for seeing the things 

that happen out in rural Saskatchewan, even in that paper they 

see the reality that women are going to be the losers because 80 

per cent of that program was bought, purchased, owned by the 

women of this province. 
 

We have other papers that allude to the tragedy of just this 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 307 

one program.  And I think it's important that we dwell here 

because we're setting a trend with this government of what 

they're going to do in our province.  After all, this is their first 

budget. 

 

As they go now, beware, they will go further later.  I absolutely 

assure you that the trend of the future of this province is being 

set and we will have a future in this province.  It will be an 

NDP future, and it's not going to be a very bright one. 

 

We've got people like Don Curren here, the provincial editor of 

the Leader-Post talking about lay-offs.  And in his 

commentaries he refers to Mr. Johnson.  He says that the 

employers were stunned by the announcement.  That's pretty 

heavy stuff to be putting in a newspaper in an editorial. 

 

 "Angry.  They were disappointed and angry," he said.  

"They've only been employees for a year and a half, so they 

felt betrayed." 

 

 Kindersley Mayor Darla Dorsett said the closure would be 

devastating for the community. 

 

This is a small community town of about 5,000 people -- 

absolutely devastated. 

 

 "I can't think of anything worse that could have happened 

today," (she quotes) Dorsett said.  "In fact, we're outraged 

and actually shocked." 

 

The plan office had an annual payroll of $550,000 for that 

small community.  What a tragic loss for a rural community to 

lose that kind of economic base. 

 

 . . . citing a Dec. 9, 1991 exchange in the legislature when 

Community Services Minister Carol Carson said the 

government did "not intend (and I quote) to move the pension 

plan out of Kindersley." 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, if the papers are going to print that kind 

rebuke, then surely we must discuss it in this Legislative 

Assembly.  Surely the members opposite will agree that if all 

of the people who print our media, and who participate in it, 

are shocked and dismayed and worried, then those of us who 

are elected and paid good wages to be here, ought to take the 

time to discuss the problem, ought to take it seriously.  And 

perhaps ought to admit that some things aren't always done 

exactly right, and maybe some people should even consider 

eating crow and backtrack a little. 

 

We talk about the attack on rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  

It not only comes through the budget highlights, but it comes 

through all kinds of other things.  And I want to emphasize the 

list from May 7, another Leader-Post list.  And I'm sure the 

members opposite will be interested to know how the media 

handled their budget.  It says, quite simply: 

 

 TAXES 

 10% increase in personal income tax 

 Education & Health Tax (sales tax) rise to 8% from 7% 

And you could go through this so quick it wouldn't even sound 

like it mattered much.  But here's the next one: 

 

 Gasoline and diesel tax increases by 3¢/litre 

 

I don't know if that's the biggest tax grab on gas there ever has 

been but it must be one of the highest I've ever seen.  After all, 

we used to buy our gas by the gallon and now it's by the litre 

and we're going 3 cents a crack at that.  It used to be 3 cents on 

the gallon and we'd almost have an uprising in the province.  

Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, what that's going to do to the 

bottom line of the farm community?  Let's just discuss that for 

a couple of seconds. 

 

You now have a new plan again, and I think farmers must be 

just about fed up with plans and programs any more.  But here 

we got another one.  Now you can get $900 back for a whole 

year, but that's a maximum, a cap.  Six hundred dollars for the 

balance of this year, I think, is the way the thing is written up. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm afraid there just aren't very many 

farmers that are going to be able to do their harvest without 

hitting the cap in that one season alone, because the fuel 

consumptions are pretty high at that time of year.  So that does 

in fact mean that most likely there's an economic loss directly 

to just about every farmer in this province, in this budget, with 

this one program alone. 

 

Agriculture has never seen a hit like this from a government as 

long as I can remember.  And we had people that actually 

campaigned for this government, claiming that they were going 

to do better for agriculture.  They were not only going to get 

more out of Ottawa, but they were going to do more for the 

people here themselves. 

 

What have they done, Mr. Speaker?  They've hit them with 

higher taxes.  I'll go on down this list just for an example.  

We've got a tax on cigarette increase by 77 cents a pack.  Now 

for me I don't care about that because I don't smoke but for 

those folks that do, that has to come as quite a shock.  In fact I 

wouldn't be surprised that a lot of them would likely consider 

quitting and I kind of hope they do because then we'll save 

some money in the health care area.  But it is a tax, Mr. 

Speaker, that encourages so many things to happen. 

 

We worry about cross-border shopping.  We talked about that 

at all kinds of lengths last fall.  It was a major issue all last 

summer.  What's going to encourage people more to go to 

Manitoba and Alberta or to the United States to shop for 

cigarettes and alcohol and all those other things that people 

naturally go to buy in other places?  When you stick an extra 

77 cents a pack on to cigarettes at one crack, you almost 

guarantee that people are going to flood out of the province to 

do their shopping.  What would keep them here?  Where would 

be the incentive for folks to shop at home in a budget like this, 

from a government that just a short time ago said they were 

going to solve the problem of cross-border shopping?  Well 

they've really solved the problem, haven't they? 

 

I could make a suggestion, Mr. Speaker, at how they 



308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

probably will solve the problem but I don't think that would be 

very parliamentary.  So I am going to go on to the health plans.  

Just take a look at what this government, the defenders of 

health, are doing. 

 

The prescription drug plan -- the cost is to increase for most 

residents.  Well in this particular itemized statement by the 

Leader-Post, that's a pretty polite way of putting it because the 

reality is that it goes up to $380 per person.  Now, in fact, I 

don't think that most people take that many dollars worth of 

drugs each year.  In fact, I rather doubt that there will hardly be 

anybody left that will in fact use the drug plan.  It's almost an 

elimination of the whole project, the whole plan. 

 

We came up with a sophisticated plan that we had working 

well with pharmacists using health cards used for 

identification, for drug control all through this province, and 

the whole plan is being dashed into the rocks, destroyed in one 

fell swoop by one greedy government. 

 

(1945) 

 

The eye examination charge for all but low income families, 

Mr. Speaker, and seniors and children under 18.  Can you 

imagine, Mr. Speaker, what happens to folks who are 

misfortunate enough or have the problem of contracting a 

disease like diabetes -- a disease that affects certain parts of the 

body, the eyes for example.  These folks have to have their 

eyes checked once or twice a year I understand.  Isn't it 

amazing that the champions of health care would force the sick 

into the highest cost categories of all of our province.  Taxing 

the sick and the needy seems to be the new call word for this 

government. 

 

The fees are increased, it says here, for chiropractic services.  

Now I've heard a lot of debates, Mr. Speaker, about whether or 

not chiropractic services are good for some people or not good 

for other people.  But they have been recognized as being good 

health approach.  And I have to tell you that I've used the 

services myself and I honestly believe that they helped.  I think 

it was good for my health.  And yes, my colleague says that's a 

wellness model because you went in and got your body sort of 

tuned up so that it would function better. 

 

But not only that, we got a good bit of advice from that 

chiropractor at the same time.  They talk about good diets and 

good approaches to health.  They talk . . . In fact my 

chiropractor talked to me about the chair I sit in in this very 

Assembly.  And he said to me that if we don't sit with a proper 

chair, when you sit for very extended periods of time you will 

experience back problems.  And he said you've got to be 

careful about this sort of thing.  Not only having the 

chiropractic treatment to help you is important, but it's also 

important that you use the proper chairs, that you use the 

proper diets. 

 

These folks provide an excellent service in counselling in a 

wellness model.  And this very service is now going to be 

discouraged, not eliminated because the folks are still there 

providing the service, but people are actually discouraged from 

using it because it's taken out of the plan. 

And it's our job, Mr. Speaker, to point out for the members of 

the government the things that are wrong in the budget.  And 

even though we know that balanced budgets are important and 

that good fiscal management's great, and you have to have that 

all, you've also got to point out the drawbacks that are going to 

be caused when you take some of these things away.  When 

you start out by saving $42 million out of a 4.5, now gone to $5 

billion budget, and call that your waste and mismanagement 

control, coming up with a $517 million, at the end of the day, 

deficit, and you say that all this is the good stuff, then we have 

to have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to stand in this Assembly 

and talk to you about why things like chiropractors are 

important, why it's important to have your eyes checked. 

 

Now this particular article is fair.  It does go into some of the 

benefits and I think that's important.  And some of the benefits 

they list out of this budget is a 35 per cent increase in funding 

for child hunger programs.  And I couldn't agree more, Mr. 

Speaker, with a program.  It's unfortunate though how figures 

can be twisted to make them look really big and impressive and 

important, because 35 per cent of a whole big pile would be a 

whole big bunch of help.  But in reality, if you have 30 per cent 

of nothing, you've still got nothing.  And you've taken 35 per 

cent and used that figure to make a small increase in help for 

these folks that are hungry, these child hunger programs, 

you've tried to blow it up into a great, big-looking help 

package, when in reality it's not very much money. 

 

But we're happy, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the government 

for at least doing this much in this important area.  And we 

would encourage you to try your very best to continue along 

the line of searching out the hungry children and actually 

helping them in more than just feeding them.  We also have the 

child tax reduction for low income families increased to $250 

from $200 and while I don't suppose $50 buys much, it's 

certainly got to be better than nothing. 

 

And I applaud the government also for doing that.  And I'm 

happy that they're doing that.  These folks that find themselves 

in misfortunate situations do need a little extra help sometimes, 

and this is an excellent way to do it through the tax system. 

 

Twenty-one per cent increase in grants to child care centres.  

We haven't, Mr. Speaker, been able to find out yet where 

exactly that money will be spent or how, but I am sure that it 

will help some folks and we're glad to hear that somebody's 

getting some benefit out of this budget because it sure won't be 

the farmers or the rural people of this province. 

 

Benefits increased to low-income seniors, plus 20 per cent 

increase in home care funding.  Now I suppose that might be an 

offset for the senior's heritage program or something like that, 

but certainly this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, would never 

say anything against our seniors and we certainly hope that the 

government has done some research. 

 

And we will be pressing them to show us where the research 

has gone, to show that this money for seniors is 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 309 

being spent where it actually will come to them, and not be 

eaten up by the bureaucracy that was supposed to deliver the 

money to them. 

 

We find so many of these programs, Mr. Speaker, over the 

years, eaten up by bureaucracy, eaten up by middlemen.  It's 

the same old thing, when a farmer like myself talks about these 

things, I always think back to the farmer that sells a cow, and 

he only gets maybe $500 for the animal.  And yet the guy goes 

to the butcher shop, pays $1,000 for the meat.  And, of course, 

where did the money go, and everybody always talks about that 

-- the middlemen get it. 

 

Well, here again, we have that problem in government 

spending.  The bureaucracy seems to eat it up, so I really, truly 

hope, Mr. Speaker, that the seniors of this province will in fact 

find the use and the benefit of this money coming directly to 

them where they most need it.  And when we find out where 

that is, we're going to share that information with the folks as 

best we can. 

 

We're going to have increased allowances and transit assistance 

improvements for the disabled.  And I think that's great.  In fact 

I was, Mr. Speaker, speaking to a gentleman right here in the 

city of Regina one day, who works in one of the local stores, 

and I'm not going to mention which one, but he happens to 

have a child that's disabled and he said that it was a real tragedy 

that they were about to lose their bus service that was going to 

transport this child and others like that around the city to be 

able to get to and from different places to try to break the 

monotony that goes into their lives when they can't find 

transportation that will accommodate their wheelchairs and that 

sort of thing.  So another thing that I'm happy to see in here is 

that particular approach and that particular plan. 

 

The northern food allowance has doubled to $50 a month, and 

I'll have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that I'm not just too sure how 

that program works either, but I'm sure that if it helps people, 

that we will support it when we find out the details of the 

bottom line of how that program is going to work. 

 

So long as the people that are supposed to get the money 

eventually get it, that's all we say that we want to be sure of in 

those areas. 

 

Then the budget highlight on this sheet goes on to agriculture, 

Mr. Speaker.  And they talk here about the farm fuel tax 

exemption replaced by the annual rebate which I discussed 

with you a few minutes ago.  And they see that just as a 

comment in passing, when in reality it's going to cost the 

agricultural industry in this province millions of dollars this 

year and next year.  And on it goes, along with the loss of the 

FeedGAP and all these other things.  They then mention the 

feed grain adjustment program being eliminated, and I have 

alluded to that as well. 

 

The deficit for 1992-93, operating deficit of $517 million.  

Now isn't that an amazing figure?  From a government that said 

they were going to balance the budget, bring in higher taxes, 

clean up the mess and do it all, and here they have got this 

massive deficit on their hands.  Well we've 

got some more figures here that allude to how the spending is 

going to be done compared to the 4.9 billion of 1991, and now 

it's 5 billion.  We've talked about those figures so I think I will 

go on. 

 

But it does say one other thing and that is the question of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds.  And I have to say that in 

fairness, Mr. Speaker, I think that's probably a good idea too.  I 

think the reason I would think it would be good might differ 

somewhat to the reason why the government finds itself 

bringing the program, but nevertheless I suppose the result is 

the important part. 

 

Myself, I see this is an intelligent approach to strategy, to sell 

bonds within your own province and keep the interest money in 

your province to the people who invest from within your 

province.  Obviously some of the seniors have put away some 

money for their retirement.  They are investing that money and 

that's a good thing.  If they can invest it at home, draw the 

interest and the interest money stays here, it sort of revolves 

around in a circle and keeps coming back into our provincial 

economy.  Some of that money will be taxed back away from 

them as income, and it all helps. 

 

I suspect perhaps though that the fact that the government had 

to go to New York with hat in hand and beg somebody to 

borrow them some money to keep the things going at home 

here through special warrants, because they didn't have the 

courage to bring in their first budget, and those kind of things, 

might have had more to do with the decision why the 

government of the day has come up with this plan. 

 

But like I said earlier, I suppose the end result is more 

important than the motives that forced them into doing it 

because it is a good program and I hope that they will be fair 

about it.  I know, of course, that economies only work if they 

do work this kind of program right.  If they don't offer the right 

amount of interest, obviously the people won't buy the 

program. 

 

I seriously hope, Mr. Speaker, though that at the end of the day 

that we do have enough people left to have a tax base in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I've gone through all of these budgetary highlights and in order 

to get a grip on the situation then you have to take a more 

detailed look at how things are going to work.  And the more 

you study the situation, Mr. Speaker, the more I'm convinced 

that there won't be a tax base left in Saskatchewan for very 

much longer. 

 

There is in this budget one thing very important that is missing, 

and that is a development of an economic base.  There is no 

plan in this budget to develop an economic base of taxpayers.  

The agricultural sector has been going downhill for the last 

number of years.  We've had the need in our society to develop 

safety net programs to save agriculture as an industry.  The 

recession world-wide can't be blamed on Saskatchewan and I 

don't blame the recession on the NDP any more than they 

would blame it on me, but it's a reality and it's brought down 

our tax base, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the rural people with no taxable income, of course, 



310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

are not now paying the taxes necessary to contribute to the load 

of providing the services that a provincial government 

provides.  We then set up safety net programs.  The federal 

government and the provincial government got together and it's 

unfortunate that we come to that point in our society where we 

need that kind of thing. 

 

We should in fact, Mr. Speaker, be getting a fair price for the 

product that we grow and sell as agricultural producers.  The 

people that eat food to live should pay a fair price to the 

producer, but that hasn't been working in our system so we've 

set up these programs.  And none of these programs is going to 

work totally or 100 per cent, but we have to at least admit that 

we need them and be grateful for getting them. 

 

And as I said before in this very Assembly a few days ago, no 

matter how much money you get it's never enough.  But the 

reality is that we are getting some, and as a farm community 

we have to be grateful to those folks that have done something 

to save our industry. 

 

We have a GRIP program that was somewhat less than perfect 

I'm told.  I never had occasion to collect very much from it so I 

didn't get a chance to put it to the test.  Having grown a bumper 

crop last year eliminated the need for that. 

 

This year we found people, though, saying that with the new 

program delivered, and I don't happen to be one of them so I 

happen to have to go out and talk to the folks that this really 

affects, a lot of people have had to go out and get operating 

loans based on their GRIP program that they signed up for.  

Those operating loans, Mr. Speaker, were called in for 

reassessment when the old program was scrapped by the new 

administration. 

 

I've had farmers come up to me and actually tell me this is a 

fact.  I've talked to bankers who have said, yes we did call 

those people back because the new program does not guarantee 

the same amount of dollars available to the farmer at the end of 

the year.  Without that guarantee, Mr. Speaker, the banks will 

not guarantee as high a loan.  Nobody said that they wouldn't 

guarantee any loan; they won't guarantee the same amount of a 

loan. 

 

In many cases, the amount of money that they will now 

guarantee is not enough to run the farm operation.  And therein 

comes the crunch because if you haven't got enough money 

available to finish the year's work, why would you be foolish 

enough to seed a crop that you will never have enough money 

to be able to get harvested?  And the banks won't go with that.  

They simply say that's it; you're shut down.  And so they've 

called in these loans and they have reassessed them, and 

they've talked to these people and many of them have delayed 

their seeding.  Some of them haven't even bothered to go out 

and seed a crop yet this spring because they're waiting to try to 

find out where they can get the security for their loan. 

 

The counselling and assistance for farmers program is gone.  

The '91 GRIP program that was supposed to replace that 

program is gone.  We now have a program that banks say they 

can't give as much money on, so the 

bottom line is that there isn't enough dollars available for some 

farmers to exist. 

 

(2000) 

 

And yet we have the Minister of Agriculture refusing to tell us 

how many people are being foreclosed on over the last few 

months.  Or was he embarrassed perhaps, Mr. Speaker, to let us 

know a figure that we'd already found out for ourselves. 

 

Well, we've got a lot of problems here, Mr. Speaker.  Now 

we've got the government saying that we're going to bring back 

a dental program for our schools.  And I just heard that 

yesterday and today, and it's interesting because it poses some 

very interesting questions.  In our budget do we see anything 

that refers to this directly and how it's going to operate?  No, 

it's handled in a very loose and evasive way.  We don't know if 

this is going to be funded from this budget or if it's going to be 

down-loaded on the school taxes. 

 

Will the schools simply be deemed to have agreed through 

legislation to take on the fiscal responsibility of providing this 

program?  Perhaps they will be deemed to provide a dental 

program, and the taxes on farm land and businesses will have 

to go up, of course, to pay for that.  If this money is not 

accounted for in the budget, Mr. Speaker, who is going to pay 

the bill?  Somebody is going to have to pay for this program.  

And I wonder who exactly that's going to be? 

 

We talked a little bit about AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada 

Ltd.) the other day, Mr. Speaker, and the members of this 

government became rather excited.  I don't blame them.  I 

guess if somebody kept reminding me of the biggest boob I'd 

ever made I'd probably be a little excited too.  The loss again of 

thousands of jobs down the road. 

 

If you recall as I started to speak earlier this evening, Mr. 

Speaker, I alluded to the general trend that this government is 

taking us in the province and in the future in this province -- 

the general trend of not providing a tax base, a general trend of 

providing no jobs for young people with no economic plan and 

no job creation plan.  I believe that the Minister of Finance, in 

fact, alluded to the fact that this budget would loose 2,000 jobs 

he estimated . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Something to that 

affect. 

 

Now if he, by his own admission, has drafted a budget that will 

cost jobs, and we throw away programs like the AECL that 

could have provided hundreds of jobs predicted, perhaps 

thousands down the road as you generate this thing further, 

what are we saying to our young people, Mr. Speaker?  One of 

the members opposite said the other day, well if we need the 

power, we got lots now; we'll build something when we need 

the power.  Well has anybody ever stopped to consider how 

long it takes to put a power project into place, something that 

will in fact produce power? 

 

Do you think, Mr. Speaker, have they considered for a minute 

that even if you build a nuclear power plant and you had it 

producing power that you didn't need, that it would be all that 

hard to sell the power to the Americans 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 311 

until you needed it?  Whatever happened to the idea of 

preparing ahead for the problems of the future?  Whatever 

happened to the old philosophy of seven good years and seven 

bad years, and in the good years you prepare for the bad years?  

What are we going to say some day when we suddenly find 

ourselves alone in the dark?  We're going to say, well we'll 

hook up a wind charger some place or we'll burn a little more 

coal. But if you haven't had the planning and the project built, I 

don't think it's going to work. 

 

There's lots of room for a lot of these other programs, Mr. 

Speaker.  I wouldn't want to down-play, seriously, the approach 

to seeking out wind generation and coal powering and all of 

those things that go along with water generation. But the reality 

is that we live in a world that does have nuclear energy.  We 

live in a world that has hundreds of plants around the world 

and we also live in a world where if one of those plants in the 

right place happens to blow up, we will be just as seriously 

affected by that as if we had one in Saskatchewan.  If the plants 

in Ontario blow up, will that not affect the economy of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

I ask you the question, Mr. Speaker: if you have these all 

around the world and we're the only ones without it, then are 

we not perhaps sleeping through the best game in town?  We've 

got a chance here to build and create jobs for the future for our 

young people, to build the economy base of this province.  And 

remember I spoke to you earlier about the need to build an 

economic base, because without an economic base you have no 

taxation base.  Just simply taxing people more and more and 

more is not the way to generate wealth. 

 

The way to generate wealth is to expand your tax base and take 

less taxes from each segment of society and allow those 

segments to grow.  And that is the direction this government 

has to go if we want to save this province from a total 

evacuation of all of our people.  Everyone in this province that 

I talk to talks about going to Alberta for a job.  I've heard 

people say, if I didn't have my house paid for, and if there was 

a market, I'd sell it.  You surely, Mr. Speaker, have to know 

there's a lot of farmers that would be ready to sell out if 

anybody had any money. 

 

I've even had one of my colleagues suggest that we could tow 

the farms to Alberta, and another one suggested to me that we 

should slide the border over.  It would be easier, maybe, to 

slide the border over.  But somehow, Mr. Speaker, when we 

talk about this budget, we have got to convince this 

government that a big tax grab is not the only way to solve the 

problem. 

 

I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to an example that shows you how 

you can work to develop an economy without increasing taxes.  

In a municipality, if you have an oil well dug under the rules of 

the past administration . . . and Lord only knows where it's 

going to go with this new administration, so I won't allude to 

that.  But with the past administration, and the rules that were 

there, if an oil company dug an oil well in your municipality, 

the revenue generated from the taxation on that well -- the 

assessed value being set, and the revenue -- equalled the 

amount of taxes from one quarter section of land.  So in effect, 

every time that you encouraged a petroleum 

company to dig an oil well and bring it into production, you 

increased the tax base of that municipality by one quarter 

section of land, in kind.  That's important, because that's the 

development of an economy. 

 

Those municipalities that are fortunate enough to have the oil 

revenues and the oil patch in them found their economic base 

growing.  As a result -- and this is purely simple economics -- 

those municipalities, even in spite of inflation, could keep up 

the same amount of services without increasing taxation.  They 

could leave their mill rate the same for their people, not 

increase their taxes, and yet generate enough income to 

overcome the effects of inflation and still provide the same 

services. 

 

Think about that, Mr. Speaker.  Can that kind of philosophy, 

that kind of system of economic developing a base, a bigger tax 

base, can that not work for a provincial government in the same 

way?  All you do is magnify it, make it bigger, do it on a larger 

scale.  Instead of bringing one oil well into the province, bring 

2,000 in.  Instead of bringing in a couple of generators, you 

build a nuclear power plant.  Can you image the taxation that 

would come from a project like that?  Imagine the wealth.  And 

the risk, Mr. Speaker, can't be any more here than it is any 

place else in the world. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we've talked a little bit about how we used 

to think about things being so much better in Alberta, and 

we've talked to people who said, if things are so good in 

Alberta, why don't we just do it that way?  And I'm sure they 

have some problems over there, but the best advice that people 

can get now, it would seem, Mr. Speaker, is to advise people to 

follow their friends and go to Alberta.  Unless we see this 

government make some major turnarounds in the very, very 

near future, that will happen; that will happen. 

 

It's amazing what you see in our local media these days, Mr. 

Speaker.  We've got another one here and it says, now a tax on 

a tax on a tax.  And just after we heard, axe the tax, and 4.5 

billion is enough, and the deficit can be controlled by 

alleviating a few of the mismanagement problems, and now 

we've got a budget with $517 million predicted deficit after the 

biggest tax grab in the history of this province to fund it up to 

$5 billion.  And I wonder what we're going to be saying about 

waste and mismanagement when we find out where this money 

really is going to be spent, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Because the budget does not detail where a lot of these dollars 

go.  We do have an allusion here, or the plan that alludes to the 

fact that we're going to provide $28 million in additional 

funding for the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan, of course, and it 

says it's going to be increased to $28 million . . . increase by 28 

. . . up to 230 million. That's a 14 per cent increase.  So there's 

one thing at least where it's identified. 

 

And we're happy, Mr. Speaker, to see that identification.  And 

we want this government to identify more carefully many and 

all of the other things that are related in here. 

 

I want to allude to the things in agriculture, and there's one 

little thing at the bottom here that makes me wonder.  And it 

says, "examine alternate forms of financing such as 



312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

community-based land trusts."  Well it smells an awful lot like 

land bank to me.  But I suppose we'll come up with a new, 

fancy word for that one. 

 

But I would wonder, Mr. Speaker, if the ranchers and farmers 

of this province might not watch very carefully when that line 

is interpreted into whatever it's supposed to mean, because it 

certainly starts to smell like land bank to me. 

 

We're establishing a six-year lease-back program for farmers to 

transfer land from lenders and settlement of debt -- who 

transferred their land to lenders. These people will now will get 

six years to lease it back.  And I'm not sure if that's going to 

help or not.  I guess we'll have to wait and see.  The 

unfortunate part is, Mr. Speaker, that if a program like this, 

replacing all of the other programs, happens to fail in the end, 

then six years down the road we have gone so far that there's no 

turning back, and those people that are in economic trouble will 

truly have lost everything. 

 

It is not a plan to save farms.  It does not address the 

fundamental problem of the debt out there that needs to be paid 

off.  In fact, they go so far as to say that they're going to even 

develop the voluntary farm debt mediation process that allows 

lenders and farmers to resolve financial difficulties at an earlier 

stage.  Well I say to you, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect, that 

the early stages of a debt crisis in agriculture went by two or 

three years ago.  We're a little late for early stages in this 

problem.  There are no early stages left. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that you have gotten a pretty good 

idea of the reasons why I'm not going to support this budget.  I 

think you realize that there are many shortcomings in it.  And I 

think if I've done that I've made my point.  And I thank you, 

sir. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and fellow 

members of the legislature.  It gives me great pleasure to stand 

here today in my address to the budget speech. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when the voters of Saskatchewan gave us a 

mandate last fall, it was a mandate for change.  There was a 

message that was being sent loud and clear.  And that was that 

they wanted a different direction for government.  They wanted 

a government that was going to be fiscally responsible and start 

to put the house in order -- honest.  Mr. Speaker, that's what we 

are attempting to do.  And the budget is a step in that direction. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we have to get this deficit under 

control.  It's a must.  It's a monster that must be taken down and 

wrestled to the ground, Mr. Speaker.  The interest on that 

deficit is $760 million, Mr. Speaker.  And that is the third 

largest expenditure in the budget.  And if it's allowed to 

continue it's going to escalate right out of control.  It's 

something that we must do right now -- take control. 

Mr. Speaker, there are many commendable ideas and measures 

in the budget that I would like to address.  But two in particular 

are important, I believe important and connected.  As part of 

our mandate for change, the budget speech announces that this 

government will restore the Saskatchewan spirit of community 

and co-operation. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2015) 

 

Mr. Roy: -- And it will use this spirit to help in it's aim of 

bringing about economic recovery.  The budget shows in detail 

how we will together rebuild Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I applaud the idea of co-operation as 

outlined in the Premier's Economic Action Committee.  I'm in 

favour of streamlining the myriad economic development 

programs left over from the Tories into one Economic 

Development bank. 

 

I'm relieved to see The Community Bonds Act amended to 

avoid further fiascos like Trinitel, and I too . . . 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- And I too am encouraged by the efforts being 

made to attract business and industry to our province -- efforts 

like Piper.  I'm encouraged that 700 companies are thinking of 

relocating or expanding their business in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker.  I think this demonstrates quite clearly that this 

government is creating an atmosphere positive to enticing 

business to come to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- But Mr. Speaker, as we all know, real economic 

recovery and real community co-operation will be spearheaded 

by our small-business sector -- the sector that has created 80 

per cent of all new jobs since 1982; the sector that most 

directly mirrors the ups and downs of our economic life; the 

sector that asks for the least from government and, over the 

past 10 years, the sector that has been most overlooked by the 

previous administration. 

 

If economic recovery happens, and I'm confident it will, then 

once again our small-business people will lead the way, quietly 

and efficiently. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- I'm therefore delighted to see this budget recognize 

the contribution small business makes to this province by 

reducing the small business corporation income tax from 10 to 

9 per cent. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Roy: -- It's the nature of the small-business person to be 

self-reliant.  It is their survival that demands efficiency.  It is 

their character that ensures that they will hire within the 

community, buy within the community and 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 313 

contribute to the prosperity of the community. 

 

Especially in a constituency like mine, Mr. Speaker, small 

business provides a barometer for the health of the community 

as well as providing leadership and maintaining that health.  

And, Mr. Speaker, there are signs, preliminary signs, that the 

health of our province and our small-business sector is coming 

out of the critical stage. 

 

In fact, investment dealers of Canada have predicted that 

Saskatchewan is probably going to . . . is positioning itself to 

be one of the best places to invest anywhere in Canada, but it's 

all predicated on one very important factor, Mr. Speaker, and 

that is we clean up this mess, and get this deficit under control. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- All members will have heard the recent news that 

housing starts are up substantially.  These figures show one 

thing, Mr. Speaker.  They show that attitudes are changing.  

They show that where before there was gloom and surrender, 

now there's confidence.  They show that Canadians are coming 

to where they believe the economy will improve, and that is 

going to be Saskatchewan once again.  They might even show 

that some of Saskatchewan's children, now 10 years older, are 

finally going to come home.  They show that people are 

responding to this new government and what it represents.  

They show that people are eager to be a part of our mandate for 

change. 

 

And leading the way will be our self-reliant, quiet, efficient, 

small business -- hiring Saskatchewan people, buying 

Saskatchewan goods and services, and enhancing 

Saskatchewan life, but with a smile on their faces for the first 

time in years. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, like more than a third of the 

constituencies in this province, Kinistino depends on 

agriculture for its prosperity and for its identity.  It may be 

statistically fair to say that Saskatchewan is becoming more 

urbanized.  The movement from the farms and the small towns 

and the cities is happening all over the world, but for some time 

to come agriculture will remain the economic, social, and 

cultural backbone of this province. 

 

I'm proud to represent the people of Kinistino and I'm deeply 

concerned for their welfare, Mr. Speaker, because of the 

current farm revenue crisis, a crisis not of their making but a 

crisis none the less.  I'm proud as well to be a part of a 

government that seems interested in doing something to help 

people through this crisis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, farmers are self-reliant, they're honest, 

hard-working, and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that they resent 

being labelled as getting hand-outs. 

 

And let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the GRIP changes we 

made -- and certainly we've heard a lot about it -- but let me tell 

you that we put a committee together to look at the concerns of 

the GRIP '91 program and that committee came back with 

some recommendations that we felt were 

fair and reasonable in addressing some of the major problems 

in the '91 program.  And I'm telling you that overall I think 

farmers are supporting this change and are going to carry 

forward. 

 

Responding to the crisis in agriculture takes no less of an effort 

than solving our constitutional dilemma, no less of a 

commitment from all involved.  The Government of 

Saskatchewan has responded; the Government of Canada is 

sitting on its thumbs.  Members opposite voted down a $500 

million resolution to bring aid to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the federal government has a responsibility to 

Saskatchewan agriculture.  Sixty-three per cent of the funding 

for agriculture has been cut.  Mr. Speaker, this cannot continue.  

The responsibility is with the federal government.  We're 

asking them for aid.  They promised a third line of defence, Mr. 

Speaker.  We want them to come through with this third line of 

defence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, I was appalled, I was appalled this 

weekend to hear federal Agriculture minister, Bill McKnight, 

respond to Saskatchewan's budget and saying that the 

Saskatchewan government was abandoning rural Saskatchewan 

and farmers.  Let me tell you who's abandoning rural 

Saskatchewan and farmers.  It's the federal government and 

Agriculture minister Bill McKnight that's abandoning the 

farmers. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Mr. Speaker, we did our part.  The federal 

government is reneging on its responsibilities, Mr. Speaker.  

One could make some pretty good guesses as to why the 

federal Tory government is no longer interested in helping the 

farmers of Saskatchewan.  One could argue that there are some 

reasons having to do with political expediency and upcoming 

federal elections.  Some might argue -- I don't. 

 

M. le Président, ça me donne un grand plaisir de me lever ici 

aujourd'hui pour répondre au discours du budget dans ma 

langue maternelle. 

 

Notre gouvernement, M. le Président, dans le discours du 

budget, nous donne un plan pour la province et aussi nous faire 

réaliser comme société que c'est impossible et irresponsable de 

continuer à dépenser des fonds au niveau courant. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- Quand les voteurs de la Saskatchewan nous ont 

élus, ils nous ont confiés un mandat pour change, M. le 

Président.  Il faut prendre le bull par les cornes.  Il faut 

commencer à réaliser qu'on ne peut plus continuer à dépenser 

des fonds et d'être efficace; c'est notre première responsabilité. 

 

Mr. le Président, il faut pas avoir peur de change.  C'est 

important de l'accepter et aussi le diriger.  Le défi est gros, 

mais notre gouvernement a décidé d'avancer et de travailler 

avec tous les secteurs de notre société pour 



314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

développer et réaliser les changes. 

 

Mr. le Président, trois-quarts du budget est dépensé dans les 

domaines de santé, de l'éducation, des services sociales.  Alors 

c'est naturel que le gouvernement va regarder à ces régions 

pour les plus grosses compressions et changements. 

 

Prenons comme exemple le système de santé.  L'année dernière 

on a dépensé 1.6 milliards sur les besoins medicales.  Si on 

continue, si on ne fait pas des ajustements, on prévoit une 

augmentation de 200 millions dans 1992. 

 

M. le Président, c'est impossible à continuer à mettre des fonds 

à ce niveau-là.  Il faut faire quelque chose.  Alors Mme. la 

Ministre nous a sorti avec un plan.  C'est un change d'attitude.  

C'est basé sur l'idée d'empêcher la maladie.  Aussi c'est basé 

sur l'idée des centres communautaires. 

 

M. le Président, c'est une vision; c'est un plan pour le futur.  

Notre gouvernement regarde au futur et dit, on va prendre le 

contrôle puis mettre les contrôles dans le système. 

 

M. le Président, c'est aussi un plaisir pour moi de m'être debout 

ici ce soir et parler pour les francophones dans la Saskatchewan 

-- très important pour moi.  Et je remercie la législature pour 

me donner cette opportunité-là. 

 

(Translation:  Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to stand 

here today to reply to the budget speech in my mother tongue. 

 

In the budget speech our government, Mr. Speaker, gives us a 

plan for the province and also makes us realize that as a society 

it is impossible and irresponsible to continue spending at the 

current level. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- When the voters of Saskatchewan elected us, they 

gave us a mandate for change, Mr. Speaker.  We have to take 

the bull by the horns.  It's time we realized that we can't keep 

spending and that we must be efficient; that's our first 

responsibility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can't be afraid of change.  It's important to 

accept it and to take charge.  The challenge is great but our 

government has decided to move ahead and to work with all 

sectors of our society to develop and realize these changes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three-quarters of the budget is spent in the areas 

of health, education, and social services.  So it's natural that the 

government is going to look to these areas for the largest 

reduction and changes. 

 

Let's take the health system as an example.  Last year we spent 

1.6 billion on medical needs.  If that continues, if adjustments 

aren't made, we forecast a rise of 200 million in 1992. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's impossible to continue that level of spending.  

We have to do something.  So the Minister of 

Health gave us a plan.  It's a change of attitude.  It's based on 

the idea of preventing the illness.  It's also based on the idea of 

community-based centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's a vision; it's a plan for the future.  Our 

government looks to the future and sees that we have to take 

control and put controls on the system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's also a pleasure for me to be able to stand here 

this evening and speak for Saskatchewan francophones -- it's 

very important to me.  And I wish to thank the legislature for 

giving me this opportunity.) 

 

Mr. Speaker, many years ago the great Indian chief, Chief 

Seattle, said, we did not weave the web of life; we are merely a 

strand in it.  Whatever we do to the web, we do to ourselves.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, that statement can obviously apply to our 

modern concern for our environment and what we have done to 

it.  And in that regard I am pleased to see the efforts outlined in 

the throne speech to speed the healing process of this fragile 

earth, our island home.  But this quote also reminds us that on 

this earth, we all exist together, people of every race and creed.  

The web is small, the strands are fragile -- and we can mess it 

up in more ways that one if we are not careful. 

 

My constituency, like many others, has within it a number of 

reserves.  Unlike no other constituency in Canada, mine holds 

the place of the last shots fired in anger on Canadian soil.  I'm 

talking of Batoche, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And my constituency has a number of Metis people living on 

their ancestral land.  These people, Mr. Speaker, both treaty 

Indians and Metis people have heard enough talk.  And I need 

not go into our inept history of dealing with aboriginal people 

in detail.  It is time they be given their due and it is time they 

are allowed to become partners in the economic advancement 

of our province.  Co-operation and community apply here as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Roy: -- I'm therefore both happy and hopeful to see the 

specific commitments to address historic wrongs.  And more to 

the point, Mr. Speaker, we should all be pleased with the 

attitude revealed in these commitments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure to have spoken here 

tonight.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I want 

to speak tonight about the fiscal situation of the province in 

terms that Saskatchewan families can understand.  And to talk 

about the province tonight as a bit of a family or a provincial 

household. 
 

As the previous speaker, my colleague from Kinistino 

indicated, this government was elected on the mandate for 

change and a mandate to clean up the mess left in the public 

household.  As we travelled the province over the last number 

of years, in opposition and during the election campaign, many 

of the people who said to me, if I ran my household or my farm 

or the small business the 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 315 

way that the PC (Progressive Conservative) government ran the 

government, I'd have nothing left to show for my efforts.  I'd be 

bankrupt.  There'd be nothing left. 

 

And were they right?  Well of course they were.  We all know 

that.  The province is basically bankrupt now.  It was run into 

the ground by the previous administration.  And there isn't very 

much left now; the cupboard is really bare. 

 

It's almost as if an ordinary household started to live off the 

line of credit at the bank or the credit union.  And once that line 

of credit is exhausted, well you turn to your Bay card and you 

start to charge things on your Bay card.  And then you go to 

your Eaton's card when your Bay card is all charged up, and 

then you turn to Simpsons, Simpsons-Sears.  And when you 

can't charge anything more on your bank line of credit or on 

your Eaton's card or your Bay card or your Simpsons-Sears 

card, what do you do?  Well it's been known, Mr. Speaker, that 

people will turn to their gasoline credit cards and start to buy 

groceries at the Petro-Can convenience store or at the Esso 

station.  And that's exactly what we've had here in 

Saskatchewan with the government opposite, utter and total 

fiscal irresponsibility. 

 

So we inherit a situation then where we have one enormous 

mess to clean up.  We have 10 straight years of Tory deficit 

budgets, a total accumulated deficit of $14 billion.  And what's 

to do about it?  Well the very first thing we're going to do, Mr. 

Speaker, that we promised in the election campaign and that we 

are doing in this budget, is restoring fiscal and financial 

integrity to the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

(2030) 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Common sense financial management -- what 

we're doing is we're beginning to tear up the credit cards and 

the spending and put the brakes on the enormous debt that this 

province has inherited.  And that began back in the 1991-92 

budget when, after taking over in October, the provincial 

government trimmed expenditures by 60 or $70 million and 

began to reverse, already then, with the previous government's 

budget that was never passed.  But we began even then to trim 

expenditures and to reverse the projectory of provincial 

spending in a downward fashion.  And we've continued that in 

this budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

People should know, the public of Saskatchewan should know, 

that after health, which is the first largest expenditure of the 

public treasury, at one point $5 billion, that's about a third of 

the provincial budget, then comes education at about a billion 

dollars, second largest expenditure of the public treasury.  The 

third largest expenditure is interest payment on the public debt.  

That's not any payment on the principal, that is just payment on 

the interest, Mr. Speaker.  And so this year we are paying $716 

million worth of interest alone just on the public debt. 

 

Now what an irony, what an irony, Mr. Speaker, for us to have 

inherited this situation from the previous 

government.  And I say it's because the Progressive 

Conservatives don't believe in government even when they 

assume office.  I say they don't believe in government. My 

leader has said this on a number of occasions. They don't 

believe in government even though they assume public office.  

Basically I maintain that the Progressive Conservatives run for 

public office to get government off the backs of people and to 

get their own pockets lined. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- My colleague says, they don't believe in 

government and they prove it every time they get there.  And 

they certainly have done that here in Saskatchewan with the 

enormous deficit that we've inherited.  How else can we 

explain it?  They haven't governed for the benefit of the public 

or the people of Saskatchewan. They've governed for the 

benefit of themselves. 

 

And here are just a few examples of that, Mr. Speaker.  The 

premier had an office not here in Regina in the Legislative 

Building alone. He had to have an office in Saskatoon and one 

in Regina -- and Prince Albert, rather.  Three offices for the 

premier.  Well I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan we 

started to tackle that.  There is one Premier's office in 

Saskatchewan for the Premier of Saskatchewan this present 

day.  We've cancelled the office in Prince Albert, saving 

$150,000 a year, and we're going to be taking steps to unload 

the obligations we have for the Premier's office in Saskatoon as 

well. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Another example of the Progressive 

Conservatives governing in the interests of themselves and not 

the people of Saskatchewan is that they had the largest cabinet 

in Saskatchewan history, a million dollars worth of money 

going in to salaries for back-benchers as cabinet ministers and 

legislative assistants.  And we've saved a million dollars right 

there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Another example of their governing for themselves was 

all-expense-paid retirement villas for former Progressive 

Conservative cabinet ministers like Bob Andrew and Graham 

Taylor and Paul Rousseau, in Hong Kong and Minneapolis and 

Zürich.  And we saved taxpayers not a million dollars there in 

getting rid of those three offices, those three trade offices; 

we've saved taxpayers $2 million there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. We can 

talk about $1,500 a year in free liquor for cabinet ministers or a 

thousand dollars a night, a thousand dollars a night for the 

premier to stay in European hotels.  What Saskatchewan person 

would do that with public money?  There's only one, the former 

premier of this province governing for himself.  Or which 

premier of this province would countenance a retirement or a 

severance package for George Hill, the former president of 

Sask Power Corporation, for $1.3 million?  Who would be 

party to that kind of rip-off of the public interest? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say tonight to the people of 



316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Saskatchewan that New Democrats believe in government.  We 

believe that we need government to do some of the things that 

we can't do for ourselves, like to provide health care, hospitals, 

highways.  But more than that, Mr. Speaker, we need 

government to help us to be our brother or our sister's keeper, 

to provide services for our brothers and sisters that we can't 

ordinarily provide for ourselves on an individual basis.  We 

believe that we have a collective responsibility to one another 

as New Democrats. 

 

And that's why, in this budget . . . And it's not just cutting back 

on expenditures across the board, pubic expenditures, but we're 

providing for those who are most needy.  This is a budget of 

restraint but it's a budget of restraint with compassion. 

 

There's a 35 per cent increase for child hunger funding, Mr. 

Speaker, in this budget.  That bespeaks public priorities, 

governing for the people of the province and not just for 

oneself.  That's a 25 per cent increase in the child tax credit to 

help those lowest income families -- up to $250 per child 

annually.  Grants for child-care centres have been increased by 

21 per cent.  When is the last time we heard about that 

happening in Saskatchewan? 

 

An Hon. Member: -- 1982. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- It was probably 1982, as my colleague says.  

Home care funding increased by 20 per cent to $38 million a 

year.  This, Mr. Speaker, is a budget of restraint but restraint 

with compassion. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And one small item, but one item that 

bespeaks our commitment to compassion is the restoration of 

the northern food allowance, being  doubled to $50 a month.  I 

know it doesn't affect large numbers of people here in 

Saskatchewan, but anybody who knows anything about the 

importance of the northern food allowance for the province and 

the people up there, knows that this is one of the right 

priorities, a priority of compassion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Twenty million dollars, Mr. Speaker, for more family support 

services like counselling for teenage mothers and family 

violence programs.  And don't we need that, Mr. Speaker.  Isn't 

that the right priority for this province -- a priority of 

compassion?  And that, Mr. Speaker, is the way we're going to 

rebuild this province and protect those who are most vulnerable 

in our society. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the 

experience of these last number of years in some terms that I 

think ordinary Saskatchewan people can understand and relate 

to.  I want to say that what has happened in this province these 

last numbers of years is very analogous or similar to a break 

and entry. 

 

What we have had is a government come into Regina and sort 

of come into the public household and loot and plunder and 

destroy what it has found.  It's almost as if any of us going 

home tonight, if we had gone out shopping or 

gone out to a movie or something, were to come home and find 

the doors of the household open, the picture window in the 

front of the home shattered, with the wind blowing in, maybe 

the rain.  We walk inside and the entire household has been 

trashed - 

_ trashed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The wall unit, with the stereo and the television set perhaps, 

has been overturned.  The television and the stereo of course 

are gone.  They've been taken.  The VCR (video cassette 

recorder) is gone.  There are enormous holes that have been 

punched into the walls for no reason at all.  The rug has been 

set on fire, didn't burn down the whole house but that's been 

trashed.  You step into the kitchen -- the refrigerator has been 

overturned.  There's damage everywhere.  The liquor is all 

gone, as my colleagues are saying.  And basically, Mr. 

Speaker, the house is in shambles. 

 

And that's pretty well analogous to what we have found upon 

returning to office as the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

What is some of this damage that's been done?  I think, Mr. 

Speaker, of Rafferty-Alameda.  What starts out as a $49 

million project in the former premier's home riding of Estevan, 

an election project, turns out now to weigh in at a $159 million, 

Mr. Speaker.  That is trashing the province of Saskatchewan, 

the public household. 

 

With a golf course, a 21-hole golf course that isn't even 

completed, that has over a million dollars worth of irrigation 

equipment with no water there to irrigate with.  That's trashing 

the public household, Mr. Speaker.  And if that golf course is 

built, Mr. Speaker, how much do you think it'll cost to maintain 

it on a yearly basis?  A half a million dollars?  A half a million 

dollars to maintain a golf course down at the new Mainprize 

Park in the former premier's constituency, when children are 

going hungry and there's no money to keep hospitals open, Mr. 

Speaker.  That's trashing the public household. 

 

A lavish clubhouse, the foundations, the concrete footings of 

which are there at the new Mainprize Park for everyone to see.  

That would cost $2 million if it were to be completed.  These 

are the right priorities of a Government of Saskatchewan at a 

time when there is 10 consecutive deficit budgets?  No wonder 

we're in trouble, Mr. Speaker.  The public household has been 

trashed. 

 

I'll give you another example, Weyerhaeuser corporation 

getting a lavish, sweetheart deal for one-sixth of our northern 

forest, for the Prince Albert pulp mill, the Saskatoon chemical 

company, and the Big River saw mill, on the strength of a 

promissory note for $236 million.  A promissory note that they 

will pay some day off in the great beyond.  If and when they 

make a 13 per cent profit they will repay the people of 

Saskatchewan $236 million.  Well, Mr. Speaker, what do we 

have to show for that repayment schedule?  Absolutely zero.  

Nothing. 
 

(2045) 

 

I say, if the former premier had even had a repayment schedule 

of let's say a million dollars a year, we would be $5 million less 

in debt today than we are right now.  And we'd still have 231 

years to go in repaying that promissory 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 317 

note, not calculating interest.  That's trashing the public 

household. 

 

And then we could talk about Joytec and GigaText and all the 

other hare-brained schemes that this province have seen; the 

privatizations, the megaproject mentality.  And, Mr. Speaker, 

what do you do?  What do you do when you return to your 

home after being out for an evening at the show or shopping or 

whatever, and you come home and you find that it's been 

vandalized and you've been victimized? 

 

Well I suppose the first thing most people would do is start to 

break into tears and bemoan their fate.  The next thing they do 

is they call the police.  Then they take a deep breath and start to 

try to set things back in order.  And you don't start to set things 

back in order by going out that very night, out to Woolco or 

Zellers, and try to buy another television set or another VCR 

that's been stolen.  You probably start by trying to set up the 

refrigerator, plugging it in and see if it still works.  And maybe 

then you go out to the garage and you see if you can find a 

hammer and a sheet of plywood, or some plastic or something, 

maybe even cardboard, put that over the plate glass window to 

keep the rain and the wind and the cold out for the evening. 

 

But you know something, Mr. Speaker, this is just a little bit of 

a detail.  It's almost like going out to the garage, that the garage 

has been victimized too. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- They stole the garage. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- They didn't quite steal the garage; the garage 

is still standing.  But when it comes to the Crown corporations 

that are an arm's length from government -- just a little bit 

away from the ordinary operations of government much as a 

garage is away from most homes -- you go out there and you 

find that it's empty, that all your tools have been swiped.  

Maybe your car is gone too.  And that's exactly what has 

happened with the Crown corporations.  We're basically 

holding an empty bag there.  The very instruments that used to 

pay for a child's school-based dental program for children, and 

the prescription drug program that we've enjoyed for so many 

years, for things like the SAIL (Saskatchewan Aids to 

Independent Living) program that have enabled us here in 

Saskatchewan not to impose premiums on medicare, those very 

Crown corporations have been vandalized as well. 

 

So what do you do?  Life is never going to be quite the same.  

We know that.  If you come home and you find your home 

vandalized, if you've been victimized, but life goes on.  And 

you turn to the task of rebuilding. 

 

Now where does this leave us then here in Saskatchewan?  

Well the leader of the Liberal Party would basically have us 

rebuild the province in economic terms by turning to the 

nuclear industry and throwing what little money we have, if 

any, into the nuclear reactor -- $1.2 billion, if they build it on 

time.  This is her brilliant scheme, as shared in the provincial 

election, for economic development here in Saskatchewan.  

That's what we need at this time, the leader of the Liberal Party 

says, a nuclear reactor.  We can do.  I say, Mr. Speaker, we 

can do without a nuclear reactor.  We must do without a 

nuclear reactor at this time. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And it's part of that whole megaproject, 

megabuck, megadeficit mentality that we see in both the 

Progressive Conservative and Liberal parties together, Mr. 

Speaker.  And this government says, those days are gone.  It's 

time to start paying the bills and forgetting the frills. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- It's time for us to face up to reality, Mr. 

Speaker.  And the reality that many Saskatchewan families are 

experiencing these days is the days of steak and lobster are 

pretty well over.  The days of hamburger are here.  Who said 

hamburger?  Who said hamburger?  Maybe we're talking about 

macaroni and cheese for the province of Saskatchewan.  Who 

said cheese?  Maybe, Mr. Speaker, we're talking here in 

Saskatchewan for these next few years of living on a diet of 

macaroni.  And if we're lucky, with a little bit of margarine, not 

butter -- butter's too expensive.  Little bit of margarine and a 

little bit of salt and pepper. 

 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, that there are people sitting in this 

Assembly right now, and there are people across the province 

of Saskatchewan who have lived on that diet.  They may not 

have enjoyed it, but they've lived on it.  And maybe they're the 

better for it too, in some respects -- not that it's the way we 

want to live. 

 

But the day will come, Mr. Speaker, when we can put cheese 

onto the macaroni, not a lot of cheese, a little bit of cheese.  

And that's what we're doing now with this budget, putting a 

little bit of cheese onto the macaroni, so to speak.  Putting the 

money where it needs to go to those who are most helpless, 

most victimized by the previous administration and most in 

need of help.  There's a little bit of cheese for those people, Mr. 

Speaker.  And it's a new day for them here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And the day will come, and it won't be that 

long before we'll get the hamburger, Mr. Speaker, we'll get the 

hamburger.  And you can do a lot with hamburger; you can 

make spaghetti, you can make meatloaf, you can make 

hamburger.  Oh, you can make all sorts of things. 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Chilli con carne. 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Chilli con carne, somebody says.  And we 

could have a pretty good life here in Saskatchewan as we leave 

the macaroni times behind and we get to the hamburger times. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And somebody says, Mr. Speaker . . . 

somebody here says, what about the steak and the lobster? 



318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I say there was a time here in Saskatchewan 

when Saskatchewan people fed every night on steak and 

lobster.  There was a time here in Saskatchewan when 

Saskatchewan people enjoyed steak and lobster every night.  

We had the finest health care program in all of North America.  

We had the largest highway system in all of North America and 

a top quality highway system at that.  We had a school-based 

dental program that was adding a new year of Saskatchewan 

citizens to the base of dental care in the province each and 

every year, year after year -- that was steak and lobster, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We had a first class university system, Mr. Speaker, with no 

limits on access quoted on university entrance, Mr. Speaker.  

And that was steak and lobster.  We had an economy, Mr. 

Speaker, in which people worked.  They went to work, they 

didn't have to rely on welfare, Mr. Speaker, and that was steak 

and lobster.  And, Mr. Speaker, we had a province in 1982 

where there was not one food bank, Mr. Speaker, not one food 

bank. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- And that was steak and lobster, Mr. Speaker.  

But we don't have steak and lobster now because we've been 

victimized and we've been trampled on. 

 

So it's time to face reality.  It's time for people . . . yes, it's time 

for people across this province to lower their expectations 

across the board, to live a bit differently, to reorient priorities.  

And that's what this budget is doing -- reallocating the money 

where it's needed most to rebuild this province and to try to 

hang on and pull together for a better day. 

 

And I want to close, Mr. Speaker, by sharing a letter that I 

received this past week, a letter from a former constituent.  And 

it's one of the most thoughtful letters I've received in recent 

years and I've been in this Legislative Assembly now about 

five years. 

 

I talked to the family who wrote the letter earlier this evening 

to ask permission to read it in the legislature and they told me it 

was very difficult to write.  They didn't even know whether 

they should send it or not. 

 

But they sent it to the Premier of the province with a carbon 

copy to myself and to three other ministers of the government.  

And it reads like this, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Dear Mr. Romanow: I'm writing this, my first letter to a 

political figure, in response to the numerous disclosures of 

"perks" and mis-spending of public money by corporate 

and Government officers.  I began this letter after reading 

comments by Mr. Messer and Ms. Bryant regarding 

annual costs for vehicle expenses.  I first telephoned Mr. 

M. Koenker, my former M.L.A., and I believe he made 

verbal representation to various Cabinet Ministers. 

 

My intent in writing to you is to try to bring into focus the 

view as seen from the "average" Saskatchewan taxpayer.  

Our family income (one 

wage earner) is $42,000 gross, approximately $25,000 net, 

from an average 45 hour week.  My wife, a trained 

teacher, has chosen to stay at home and raise our twelve 

year old daughter.  Our only performance bonus comes 

from overtime, which must then be balanced by a loss of 

family time.  All my benefits (medical, group insurance 

and pension) are included in my hourly salary which is 

often legislated at a sub-inflation rate percentage, (even 

zero). 

 

We have always prided ourselves in paying all our bills on 

time, and if we have emergency expenses, we have gone 

without in other areas in order to pay back the loans which 

are always necessary.  We do not smoke, drink or gamble.  

Our vehicle is of the 1970's vintage, as is our dwelling.  

Quite often, we feel penalized for trying to live 

responsibly.  A holiday in our own Province is not always 

possible.  Our daughter, a talented violinist, is quite 

capable of being accepted into the Youth Orchestra next 

year but with the fees and fund-raising necessary, it looks 

to be out of the question. 

 

Our income, which we can do little to increase, has not 

kept pace with increased costs, and asking for 1% here and 

there on top of the 25% we now pay in Income Tax is not 

realistic.  You, Mr. Premier, must use the mandate we 

gave you, but use it fairly and wisely.  This government 

has an opportunity to set new standards in personal & 

Corporate restraint, after the scandalous behaviour of the 

Conservatives who have essentially left us as a "public in 

poverty."  If you lead an overburdened electorate by 

example, you may restore some faith in our government 

representatives. 

 

I will not harp on the "perks" except to say that the hefty 

salaries each executive receives, should and must be 

enough for all their expenses.  Fleet vehicles should be 

sufficient for each of them.  The Corporate logo may 

remind them as to who is paying the bill. 

 

We realize that it will be a difficult task to remedy the 

damage done by those now sitting in Opposition.  Their 

political tactics are obvious, made even more deplorable 

by their apparent lack of conscience.  Perhaps when Mr. 

Devine returns to the Legislature, he will face some hard 

questions. 

 

The fact remains however that we, as average citizens, feel 

financially overwhelmed, and a cavalier attitude in certain 

levels of government only increases the sense of 

frustration -- hence this letter to the office of the Premier. 

 

In you, Mr. Romanow, the Province now has an eloquent 

and dignified speaker.  We wish you well in the difficult 

decisions that must be made in the months ahead. 

 

Thank you for your kind attention. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 319 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2100) 

 

Mr. Koenker: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by saying 

that in my view, this letter exemplifies the best in 

Saskatchewan people.  Their willingness to sacrifice and to do 

without and to work hard and to put their values straight, to not 

spend more than they take in, to pay their bills and to be 

concerned about the public treasury and the course of public 

leadership. 

 

I believe that we owe this family and thousands of others 

across this province what they are asking for and that is 

leadership, Mr. Speaker.  Leadership not just politically but 

morally as well; leadership by example from the highest levels 

of government.  And that is what we intend to do, Mr. Speaker.  

This is what Saskatchewan people are asking for -- for 

leadership, for honesty, for openness in government, for 

fairness, and for good stewardship of the public purse.  And we 

who have been placed in positions of public trust, Mr. Speaker, 

have a deep and abiding responsibility not to betray the trust 

that has been put in us. 

 

I want to conclude by saying, Mr. Speaker, to the people of 

Saskatchewan, that we intend to honour the public trust that 

they have put into us.  With this first budget we have a first 

step toward a new tomorrow and toward restoring to 

Saskatchewan a government that is as good as its people.  

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'd like to take a few moments tonight to speak on this 

important subject, on the budget, its effect on the people of this 

province, most importantly the kind of direction that this 

budget signals for the next four years of our mandate, and what 

it means as we begin to turn the corner and to try to create the 

kind of society that we all want to build. 

 

I want to take a few minutes first of all, Mr. Speaker, to 

elaborate some thoughts and some comments that people have 

made to me concerning precisely this issue. 

 

On October the people of this province rejected a vision of 

Saskatchewan society which put the needs of the greedy before 

those of the needy.  In October those representatives of a 

political philosophy which said, it's mine, it's only mine, maybe 

my family's, maybe my family but nobody else -- those who 

advocated that type of political philosophy, those in the 

Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, were rejected because 

their vision of what this province should be was soundly, 

soundly rejected given their record of governance since 1982. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that vision that they promoted, which they used 

every trick of the trade, every tool of government that they 

could to try to change the nature and thinking in philosophy 

and psychology of the people of Saskatchewan was a failure, 

Mr. Speaker.  They said there is no way; the people of this 

province said there is no way to the PC way.  And, Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that they will 

be saying that for many, many years to come. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- I say that, Mr. Speaker, because since October 

of 1991, between October of 1991 and today, each and every 

day goes by, the people of Saskatchewan see the results, the 

results of that political philosophy of putting the greedy before 

the needy.  They have seen it, Mr. Speaker, in a whole series of 

political policies, of governmental policies put in place from 

'92 which are now bearing fruit. 

 

In 1982 they put those policies in place.  In 1992 they're 

beginning to bear the fruit.  It's a bitter fruit, Mr. Speaker, it's a 

fruit filled with worms, it's a fruit which is rotten and it's a fruit 

that unfortunately the people of Saskatchewan have all that is 

left and have to discard and begin to plant anew. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that fruit, that fruit as be seen to be preserved I 

guess since we're on a dietary analogies tonight.  We see in the 

kind of preserves that have forced this government, that have 

forced this government into taking the actions it has around this 

budget. 

 

The Conservative philosophy which has led us to this point in 

time, Mr. Speaker, was founded on the notion, was founded on 

the notion that individual, individual greed, individual 

responsibility was foremost and primary in the construction of 

a society that would supposedly take care of itself, that would 

be self-managing. 

 

It was a philosophy economically that said that if you give to 

those at the top, and you give greatly to those at the top, that 

some of the benefits will trickle down to those at the bottom.  

Well, Mr. Speaker, it's plain to see that the results of that 

particular approach to economy and fiscal responsibility has 

been an abject failure.  The people of Saskatchewan haven't 

been trickled down, they been trickled upon, and this budget 

unfortunately comes to the point where in fact it's time to 

sponge up and mop up what has been trickled down upon us. 

 

I don't want to, however, Mr. Speaker, get too partisan about 

this other than to say, how in the world can any member of the 

Conservative caucus stand up and try to credibly make the 

criticisms that they have been making of this budget when in 

fact they were the architects of this budget?  This budget, Mr. 

Speaker, this budget is not the budget that we would be 

introducing in this House had the New Democratic Party, and 

the New Democratic government, been in power from 

Saskatchewan between 1982 and 1992.  Mr. Speaker, I can 

guarantee the people of the province that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Because central to our vision of society is the 

notion of shepherding our resources, of being good shepherds 

of what we have been given, and to share what we have been 

given in the belief that as we share, so shall all society benefit 

-- totally in opposition to the philosophy of the Conservative 

Party and I dare say, that of the Liberal Party as well, Mr. 

Speaker. 



320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

Because this province has had experience with both parties and 

with the same philosophy, that is, give to the greedy and let the 

needy go defend for themself.  Fundamentally, Mr. Speaker, 

we are confronted here in this budget with the two conflicting 

visions of society and two conflicting questions of the 

resolutions of the problems that face that society. 

 

First of all, the question of leadership and the question of 

having the courage and the will.  Mr. Speaker, in this budget, 

measures which were taken which each and every member of 

this House knows are not popular entirely by the population of 

this province.  There are things in this budget that none of us, 

of members of this House, would like to see in a budget. 

 

I don't believe that there's any member on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, who joyfully will end up supporting this 

budget because we believe that it's overall, for the short term, 

the best thing for the people of Saskatchewan.  We know that 

this budget will inflict hurt on families.  We know that it will 

inflict hurt but we also know that this budget would, without 

the fiscal measures taken in this budget, that the hurt that we 

experience now will be spread not only to ourselves but to our 

children and to our children's children unless we did what we 

had to do.  Mr. Speaker, I believe that. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- There is the oft-quoted statement that we're 

willing . . . that sometimes we need to take some short-term 

pain for long-term gain.  And that's what this budget is about. 

 

One of my constituents phoned the day that the budget was 

called, phoned in the evening and said, you know, Bob, it's like 

when we were kids and our mom gave us cod-liver oil.  We 

knew it tasted horrible, we knew that we felt sick after it, but 

we also knew that in the long term it was probably good for us. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a portion of the budget which reminds me 

of that cod-liver oil.  But there's another part of this budget, and 

the member from Saskatoon University, I think very 

eloquently, has outlined that portion that isn't cod-liver oil, that 

sets out a different vision of society, that says that despite the 

mess that we're in, there are those elements in society who can't 

look after themselves.  The government must be there to step in 

and support them and their families from the kind of situation 

in which they find themselves, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you look just in terms of hungry kids in this province, this 

budget contains a 35 per cent increase in the money going to 

the hungry kids -- to take a step, a small step admittedly, but at 

least it's a step in the right direction to saying that in 

Saskatchewan we on this side of the House believe that there 

should be no hungry kids and that the resources of this 

province should be used to feed our kids, not to put them on the 

street. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And I say that, Mr. Speaker, because again 

that demarcates our vision of society from the Conservative 

and Liberal vision of society.  We don't believe that it's every 

hungry kid for themselves.  We think that society has a 

responsibility to make sure that those kids can participate in the 

affairs of society as equally with everybody else, and that they 

have that opportunity, Mr. Speaker.  And I'm glad to see that 

that initiative is helping in whatever way we can to move 

towards eradicating the need for the food banks, the food banks 

mentioned by the member from Saskatoon University. 

 

There are many, many other areas, Mr. Speaker, which 

differentiates our vision of society from their vision of society.  

And that budget reflects -- this budget that we are dealing with 

now reflects -- some small steps towards the construction of 

that vision of society. 

 

But I think it's important on a political level, and I think it's 

important for the people of this province, that the measures 

taken in this budget begin to raise the kind of debate that's 

needed in this province over precisely what kind of province 

we intend to build here. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province in some 

ways are ahead of the politicians on this issue.  I believe that 

the people -- given the reaction I've gotten from the budget, and 

from the comments made to me by my constituents and others . 

. . that there is a fundamental rethinking going on as to 

precisely how we proceed during the 1990s and into the 21st 

century. 

 

That there's a fundamental rethinking going on as to what type 

of agricultural economy we want to build in this province.  

That there's a fundamental rethinking going on as to how 

government services are delivered to people in this province.  

There's fundamental rethinking going on as to the effects of 

technology and how those effects will impact on people's lives.  

There's thinking going on in the areas of can we proceed along 

the same old path to energy generation or do we look at 

alternatives -- for example through conservation, through 

alternative energy initiatives, to demand side.  To demand side 

as opposed to supply side. 

 

That kind of fundamental thinking, Mr. Speaker, I believe is 

going on throughout all of Saskatchewan.  And this budget is a 

reflection . . . in fact it's like a . . . I guess it's like a whack up 

side the head, as the manager, the title of a famous book on 

management . . . that once in a while we need to give ourselves 

a whack up side the head to think about precisely what we're 

doing and where we're going. 

 

And in some senses this budget reflects that there is a 

fundamental need.  There is a fundamental need to rethink a 

whole number of areas of daily life, and of economic 

development, and of social life in this province.  To ask 

ourselves what kind of society do we want to build in the 

future. 

 

(2115) 
 

One of those areas, Mr. Speaker, that has arisen in that debate 

is the question of taxation.  We have here an economic 

conundrum where we are a heavily taxed people.  We have a 

small population base which is wealth producing.  We have a 

small population base relative to 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 321 

the overall population which pays taxes and which pays the 

taxes to provide the services and the programs that we in this 

legislature -- but more importantly the people outside this 

legislature -- believe are important. 

 

We have a structure in taxation which I believe has reached the 

limit.  And I think this budget will probably end up proving 

that, but it gives us the opportunity, and it gives us the 

opportunity to begin to question the way in which taxation in 

this province is handled.  And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that 

because of the kind of debate which took place prior to this 

budget, on taxation and revenue generating measures, that it 

gives us the opportunity to look at the question of taxation 

reform.  And we on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, first of 

all believe that taxation reform is necessary provided that it is 

progressive taxation, provided that it's based on certain 

principles like based on the ability to pay, based on the 

question of those who have wealth versus those those who do 

not have wealth, and based on, and most importantly, based on 

the relationship of the ability to create wealth and to have a 

portion of that wealth taxed to provide the goods and services 

here in the province that we need to do. 

 

And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that this budget should provide us 

with the opportunity to begin to raise the question of taxation 

reform after the budget and between now and the time of the 

next budget is introduced in this legislature. 

 

We have seen for example, Mr. Speaker, in this province, an 

increase in personal taxation, historically, not just with this 

budget but previously, an increase in personal taxation and a 

decrease in corporate taxation.  This budget begins to reverse 

that trend.  This budget begins to reverse that trend, Mr. 

Speaker.  I support the reversal of that trend. 

 

But more importantly I support a notion of saying, isn't it about 

time?  Isn't it about time we begin to look at the whole question 

of revenue, of where it comes from, and how it's linked to the 

economic performance of the province.  I think that's very, very 

important, Mr. Speaker, for the coming year because it will be 

exceedingly important -- the questions that this province is 

going to face, questions like out-migration, whether people or 

not will find it to their benefit as a people to stay in this 

province. 

 

You know, unless we begin to undertake that kind of 

examination of what we are doing -- and I believe that this is a 

start in that direction -- that unless we do that in a 

thorough-going way, that we lose an historic opportunity to 

become a trend-setter in the area of taxation and tax reform. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have established the principle of progressivity 

once again in taxation in this province.  This budget does that.  

This budget established the question that those . . . 

re-established the principle that those who have the ability to 

pay should pay their fair share.  And we've taken a step towards 

that. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that we have the opportunity 

of building on those principles to begin to 

examine the taxation system as a whole in this province, and to 

begin to look upon those who create and produce wealth and 

who keep wealth in this province, should have the opportunity 

to participate in that kind of wealth creation without, without 

having their livelihoods or opportunities to build their families 

and to keep their families in Saskatchewan lessened, 

minimized.  So, Mr. Speaker, on that basis of progressivity and 

of ability to pay, this budget takes a step forward in that 

direction. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it takes a step forward in another direction and 

that relates to one of the fundamental and structural problems 

that we have in this province, and that is the problem of 

keeping wealth that is created in Saskatchewan, here in 

Saskatchewan.  We take that step forward, Mr. Speaker, in the 

initiative around the Saskatchewan savings bonds.  That, Mr. 

Speaker, says to the people of Saskatchewan and says to people 

throughout Canada that we can mobilize a capital pool or we 

can begin to mobilize a capital pool here in Saskatchewan, that 

we can create . . . the wealth that we have created in this 

province, we can keep in this province, and we can put some of 

that wealth to work to the rebuilding of our province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- The Saskatchewan savings bond is a good 

initiative, Mr. Speaker.  It's an initiative, I can tell you, that is 

well received by all sectors of the Saskatchewan population.  I 

have yet to hear one person that I have talked to, or has called 

my office about this budget, say, we don't like the 

Saskatchewan savings bonds. 

 

And I ask the members, I ask the members opposite, when you 

have somebody from your research department phone me and 

say that they like the notion, they like the notion of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds, I'm sure that when it comes time 

to vote on this budget, Mr. Speaker, that even the members 

opposite will not refuse to vote against the creation of 

Saskatchewan savings bonds, that they too know that this is a 

step towards financial independence. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- It's a step.  It's a step, Mr. Speaker.  It's a small 

step but it is really a step in the right direction.  In fact it's more 

than a small step.  It is a large step in the right direction 

towards creating a capital pool which we can use here in 

Saskatchewan -- Saskatchewan money used for Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, and I'm sure that all members of the 

House will applaud that step. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, there's the whole question of wealth, of 

wealth creation and of wealth . . . and the recapturing of wealth 

that leaves this province.  I want to refer some members of the 

House to a couple of articles, several articles which have 

appeared recently in the local press concerning this whole 

question of wealth and the need to capture and keep in 

Saskatchewan the wealth that we create here. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to refer you to the Prince 

Albert Herald, a fine, fine newspaper from Prince Albert, and a 

headline, "Dickenson Mines 1991 profits show 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

folly of Sask Minerals sale."  A very, very good article.  I 

notice here that there's a picture, in fact, of the member from 

Shellbrook-Torch River in this article.  Right?  Obviously the 

member of Shellbrook-Torch River understands the need for 

recapturing and keeping in Saskatchewan the wealth.  But just 

let me read, Mr. Speaker, if I may, a couple of paragraphs from 

this article. 

 

In the first nine months of 1991, Dickenson Mines made a 

profit of 2.5 million on revenues of 10.4 million at the 

company's mining properties in Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this Dickenson Mines that they talk about 

used to be Sask Minerals.  It used to be Sask Minerals.  The 

first three quarters of 1991 made a profit of 2.5 million, which 

is not unusual, Mr. Speaker, because each and every year of 

operation of that particular former, former Crown corporation 

made a profit in each and every year, money which came into 

the coffers of Saskatchewan, into the governmental coffers, to 

help build roads and schools and hospitals, and to keep our 

province out of the financial mess which those people who sit 

on the other side have put us in. 

 

Now it goes on to say: Readers of this column may wonder 

what that has to do with provincial political issues, but there's a 

connection.  On March 28, 1988, Dickenson Mines Limited 

bought sodium sulphate mines in Chaplin and Ingebrigt.  The 

mines had been owned and operated by Sask Minerals, a 

Crown corporation.  The Saskatchewan government announced 

that the province would receive 15.9 million from selling off 

Sask Minerals.  This immediately drew criticism when it was 

pointed out that Sask Minerals had earned profits of almost $50 

million -- profits of $50 million -- since it was established by 

the government of T.C. Douglas in 1945.  Sizeable portions of 

those profits have been paid to the provincial treasury as a 

dividend.  In fact, if only the Crown corporation's three most 

profitable years are totalled, Sask Minerals earned profits of 

more than 15.6 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here was a profitable corporation which provided 

revenue to the province of Saskatchewan, to the Government of 

Saskatchewan, helping to build roads and schools and hospitals 

for the people of this province -- a victim of Tory piratization.  

But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, a victim 

. . . We are all the victims of this privatization because it was 

one less Crown corporation to put revenue into the coffers of 

the Crown Investments Corporation, one less Crown 

corporation which provided the kind of revenue which helped 

to keep Saskatchewan financially stable, one less Crown 

corporation which, instead of adding to the public debt, helped 

to decrease the public debt year in and year out, year in and 

year out since 1945, part of the PC legacy. 

 

This is one small, one small, Mr. Speaker, one small item in 

that legacy of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . folly and 

mismanagement, as my colleague so ably puts it. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that of course isn't just political rhetoric. I 

refer you to, of course, the Star-Phoenix, April 27, 1992. The 

headline: "Gass indictment of resource mismanagement." 

The report of the Gass Commission on the financial 

management of the province details a remarkable record of 

reckless spending of public money on financially-risky 

projects that damage and deplete our endowment of natural 

resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the writer goes on, and the Star-Phoenix goes on 

to talk about the list.  For example, the Rafferty-Alameda 

project that's already been mentioned in tonight's debate, but 

it's probably worthwhile mentioning once again.  "Cost the 

province $155 million to date ($113 million over estimate)" -- 

$113 million over estimate.  The Meadow Lake pulp mill. 

 

 Investments in non-renewable fossil fuels include the 

Bi-Provincial Upgrader at $177 million and New Grade 

Energy at $232 million plus loan guarantees of $334 million; 

(which) because of lower oil prices, significant operating 

losses of $67 million were recorded at New Grade (as an 

example) in 1991. 

 

Not responsible stewardship, not responsible stewardship, an 

investment, an adventure which was risky, which the former 

government was told was risky, which is totally dependent on 

the price of oil, which as we all know in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is up and down, up and down, year in, year out, month 

in and month out.  Something, Mr. Speaker, which does not 

necessarily lead to a good investment resource policy.  Another 

indictment of the PC record -- not a good shepherding and 

recapturing of wealth for this province. 

 

But I look, for example, on the Star-Phoenix of April 29, 1992, 

on page 5, the business section. 

 

 (Here we find the) Cameco Corporation and the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan both posted strong first quarter 

earnings, according to financial statements released Tuesday. 

 

 Cameco made a profit of $17.7 million for the period ended 

March 31, compared with $7.2 million in the first three 

months of 1991. 

 

 PCS made a profit of $11.4 million for the quarter, slightly 

off the $12.3 million in the same period last year. 

 

The point, Mr. Speaker: Crown corporations, one of which was 

totally given away, one of which was given away, and that's the 

only term I can use, Mr. Speaker -- not sold; not sold because 

sold implies good faith between the buyer and the seller.  In 

this case, Mr. Speaker, in this case, in this case, an example of 

their slavish devotion to the right-wing ideology.  Just 

privatize, privatize at no cost, no concern for the future, no 

concern for the long-term effects it has on the fiscal situation of 

this province. They went and sold off one of the primary 

resources of wealth creation in this province, the Potash 

Corporation of Saskatchewan. 

 

They gave it away, they gave it away to their friends. They 

gave it away, Mr. Speaker, and who is suffering as a result?  

It's not Chucky Childers, it's not Mr. Childers with his 

three-quarters of a million dollar salary.  It's not those 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

shareholders who are reaping the dividends of this profitable 

corporation.  It's not the New Mexico potash owners who find 

PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) so profitable 

that now they've bought into their marketing arrangement down 

in New Mexico. 

 

(2130) 

 

It's none of those, Mr. Speaker. None of those are suffering, but 

the people of this province are suffering and they're suffering 

because the revenues, the profits from the Potash Corporation 

of Saskatchewan which formerly came into the consolidated 

fund, which formerly came in as revenues for the people of the 

province, are gone, Mr. Speaker, gone.  And I say, Mr. 

Speaker, that we've got to look at the question of how we 

recapture that wealth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Because, Mr. Speaker, in my mind, the 

resources of this province are here to be used for the benefit of 

all the people of Saskatchewan -- not for a tiny few, not for 

those who can afford, not for the investment dealers and the 

large institutional investors of Toronto or New York or Hong 

Kong, but they're here to be used by the people of 

Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I say we can't afford, we 

cannot afford not to bring those resources back under public 

stewardship. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that's my position on this.  That's my position.  I 

think that this budget proves it more than anything else, Mr. 

Speaker.  We need those revenues. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- But I guess that opens the debate, Mr. Speaker, 

that provides the dividing line in a very clear and fundamental 

way between members of this side of the House and those of 

the Conservative or Liberal Party.  Because you will hear two 

contradictory arguments from those members when it comes to 

the question of utilizing the wealth that we have here in 

Saskatchewan for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 

 

On the one hand, because of their ideological devotion and 

slavishness to private ownership, they will say that, no, no, no 

you don't need public management of resources.  You don't 

need that public management.  The private sector can do it 

better, and all you have to do is tax them.  And you can get part 

of that resources back from tax revenue. 

 

On the other hand, those same members, Mr. Speaker, will also 

say this, that you can't afford to tax the corporations because -- 

and the litany goes on -- they'll either shut down production, or 

they'll move it out of the province or they'll do one dire thing 

after another dire thing.  Right?  They come up with the 

ideological justification, Mr. Speaker, of why we shouldn't 

capture our wealth here in the province. 

 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, that the budget process that we've gone 

through points out in a very stark way the legacy of 10 years of 

PC privatizations, of 10 years of slavish devotion to an 

ideology to feed the greedy and not the 

needy, of 10 years of giving away what the people of 

Saskatchewan used to own, and now are left bereft of, of 10 

years of putting the interests of their friends ahead of the 

interests of the province, both short-term and long-term. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to that kind of ideology and that 

kind of political policy that this former government engaged in, 

it was rejected in October, it is rejected in May, it will be 

rejected four years from now, and it will be rejected for the 

next 50 years because the people of Saskatchewan know, the 

people of Saskatchewan know, that there is a better way of 

shepherding the resources that were given us here in the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, as many members of this side of 

the House have said, this budget is a turning point, and is a 

reflection of the turning point here in Saskatchewan, because 

we're caught, Mr. Speaker, in times which are not normal 

times.  It's becoming so that one finds it very difficult to define 

what normal times are any more. 

 

We have for example, in agriculture, a situation where food 

stocks are nearest the lowest records that they have been ever, 

and the continuing, continuing flat market prices for 

agricultural products.  We find ourselves in a situation where 

we have hungry kids in Saskatchewan, and we find farmers 

leaving the land; the age of farmers increasing, the average age.  

The question arises of who will farm the land next; to feed 

whom? 

 

There are many contradictions, Mr. Speaker, in this society 

which are coming to the fore.  We find ourselves, as the saying 

goes, in a land of plenty where there is great want.  We have 

the technology to be able to talk to one another directly 

anywhere in the world, to see each other as we speak to them.  

Yet we have problems in our education system so that 

aboriginal students can't relate to an educational system which 

doesn't seem to be meeting their needs. 

 

All these, Mr. Speaker, these are just small examples but they 

all point to a time in history unlike any other.  This is not the 

'30s.  This is not the '30s, Mr. Speaker, and the solutions of the 

'30s I don't believe can apply today. 

 

We have, for example, economically, the push towards a North 

American free trade deal.  I just may take a word to speak 

about that because a North American free trade deal, like the 

Canada-U.S. trade deal, will be foisted upon the people of this 

province and foisted upon the people of this country unless we 

see the kind of leadership exhibited by the Premier of 

Saskatchewan when he said in the constitutional talks, it's time 

for provinces who are affected by international trade 

agreements, that they have some say in structuring and 

ratifying those trade agreements.  Mr. Speaker, that's got to be. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- There's no more, Mr. Speaker, and the people of 

this country and of this province can see, that there is no more 

time for Irish eyes are smiling on the lawn of the White House 

when the songs . . . We don't hear 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

singing here; we hear cries of pain, cries of pain that will only 

be heightened as we've seen in the free trade deal, the 

Canada-U.S. free trade deal.  Will only be heightened. 

 

It's time, Mr. Speaker.  It's time, Mr. Speaker, and this has 

always been and always been a principle with this political 

movement, that the resources of the world should be traded in 

such a manner that is fair and that brings benefit to all.  Not just 

benefit to a few and hardship to many but should be shared 

equitably, fairly, so that we can achieve the kind of social 

objectives that we have long stood for. 

 

Fair trade.  Fair trade in agricultural products with all those 

countries around the world and particularly with those areas of 

the world that lack the necessary proteins and carbohydrates 

and vitamins, right?  Who lack food, who have kids who are 

starving -- 40,000 kids a day around the world die each and 

every day because of malnutrition, right?  We can change that.  

We may not be able to change it globally but we can make 

steps towards that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And the province is demanding a say in the determination of 

the kind of international trading arrangements, whether it's 

GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) or whether 

it's any North American free trade agreement, that the right of 

the province to be able to . . . government of the province to be 

able to put forward an alternative vision to that of the corporate 

agenda.  Mr. Speaker, that's what this government stands for.  

That's what we've been doing.  And that is a measure, Mr. 

Speaker, that I know all the people in Saskatchewan support.  

It's time Saskatchewan had its say on the international level 

when it comes to developing fair trade to feed the world. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And, Mr. Speaker, we have the opportunity to 

do that in a very concrete method.  I'm sure that in the coming 

weeks and months ahead you will see that unfolded, in which 

we take the bull by the horns and we say, we're a trading 

nation.  Trade is good for the people of Saskatchewan.  Fair 

trade is good for the people of the world.  And we're going to 

develop mechanisms to ensure that that kind of fair trade, 

whether it's at the level of international treaties, whether it's the 

level of bilateral relationships between countries, that those 

mechanisms we put in place so that those people in 

Saskatchewan who produce wealth, whether it's farm 

machinery, whether it's wheat, whether it's pork, all will have 

the ability to make sure that their products get out there to help 

build this a better world. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am positive that in the coming weeks that 

you will see that happen.  And which is why, Mr. Speaker, in 

this budget, in the Department of Economic Development, 

there is an increase of almost $2 million over last year -- almost 

$2 million to develop those kind of economic initiatives, Mr. 

Speaker.  And that is a step forward for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- Mr. Speaker, I want to conclude by raising a 

couple of issues that have been raised by members opposite in 

regards to their criticism of this budget. 

 

And let me say, Mr. Speaker, that first of all anything that these 

people have to say lacks credibility.  Everybody in the province 

knows that we've just come through 10 years of their 

mismanagement.  Everybody in the province knows that if they 

had real criticisms, if they had real criticisms of the way this 

budget was laid out, that they would have in fact instituted their 

own fiscal arrangements and fiscal responsibility. 

 

My colleague says that the arsonists can't become fire-fighters 

overnight, Mr. Speaker, and that is for true.  So any criticisms 

that they do lay forth have no credibility whatsoever. 

 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, having said that, there are issues 

that they do raise that I think all of us as members of the House 

have to grapple with.  The questions that they raise concerning 

migration -- and I know that's an issue on people's minds.  

They have raised it in question period and they've raised it in 

their speeches, and the effect that this budget will have on 

migration. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I am willing to admit that it may have a 

detrimental effect.  It may.  It may, Mr. Speaker, for those who 

see this province as only a place to sojourn to make some 

wealth and to move on.  And some of those people may find 

that there are greener pastures. 

 

But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that those people in 

Saskatchewan who believe, who believe and who know that 

there's a different way, who believe and know that we can 

together rebuild this province; that we can put together a 

different kind of society, a society that doesn't have hungry 

kids, a society that moves towards eradicating social inequality, 

a society which treats working people fairly, a society which 

provides opportunity for all people to utilize their creativity and 

energy in ways which helps their own neighbour; that those 

people, those people who have got what has come to be known 

as the Saskatchewan way, the Saskatchewan tradition, the 

Saskatchewan spirit of co-operation, that those people, Mr. 

Speaker, understand that this, too, shall pass; that there is going 

to be a better day in this province, that there is going to be 

greater opportunities, that there will be a future for their 

people; and, Mr. Speaker, they know that the future is with the 

members on this side of the House, not those old discredited 

Tories over there, not that new discredited Liberal over there, 

but with a government which understands, has the courage and 

the will to do what is right, Mr. Speaker, and to take that step 

forward into tomorrow knowing that it's not all going to be 

easy. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will be with us on 

this journey.  Those naysayers won't.  Those naysayers may go 

and buy the ranches in Arizona.  They may end up with Jimmy 

Garner, flying Jimmy Garner.  They may be down there with 

some of their big-business buddies in Palm Springs.  But I can 

tell you, the people with the guts, the people with the 

imagination, and the people with the courage, and the people 

who care will be here in Saskatchewan building that new 

society, Mr. Speaker. 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Lyons: -- And with that, Mr. Speaker, I wish to close my 

remarks.  Thank you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(2145) 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it's indeed 

a pleasure to again rise in this Assembly to speak to the budget 

debate.  Of course, Mr. Speaker, it's also been interesting 

sitting in the Assembly and listening to a number of the 

speakers that have spoken both Friday and again today, and 

listening to the debate as it has preceded me this evening, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting as I looked at the budget and 

its presentation, presented by the Minister of Finance just four 

days ago, the thing I found interesting about this budget 

presentation, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that it, like the throne 

speech, again went back to many policies and many ideas of 

the former government through the 1980s, and talked about the 

benefits that Saskatchewan had, and specifically related them 

to policies and economic development that we saw through the 

80s, initiated by the government of the member from Estevan.  

Mr. Speaker, I find that interesting. 

 

I also find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, and it's been noted by a 

number of columnists, that this probably was the most 

politically motivated budget speech ever delivered by any 

Finance minister in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again we saw, as we did on the throne speech, the 

Finance minister continually belating the fact that he wasn't 

able to move, or didn't have the ability to move or to adjust his 

budget because of former government policy.  And I believe, 

Mr. Speaker, as we had indicated on the Speech from the 

Throne, that indeed the members opposite, including the 

Premier of the day, knew what the fiscal position of this 

province was.  They knew where this province was sitting 

because the books, as Mr. Gass indicated, the books were as 

wide open as . . . for anyone who really wanted to take the time 

and look at the books. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, maybe there were mistakes made by the 

former government.  We will not . . . I don't think anyone in his 

right mind, regardless of political persuasion, will not admit 

that or would even try to admit that they are not guilty of 

making a mistake or two once in a while. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think when we take a look over the past 

number of years and we look at what's happened since October 

21 of 1991, I believe what we have seen and what I've been 

hearing and what my colleagues have been hearing on the 

street over the last few days, there are a lot of unhappy people 

in the province of Saskatchewan, a lot of people who are just 

somewhat disturbed at what has taken place in this province, 

Mr. Speaker.  They're disturbed about the fact that they were 

led to believe that there would 

be no increase in taxes.  They were disturbed about the fact that 

there would be more services, that there would be more money 

for services, that there would be more money in the area of 

health care. 

 

They were disturbed about . . . and they've been disturbed 

about the fact that they believed this was a government or a 

party that had indicated that they were going to be more open 

and more honest and more consultative.  And as I get into my 

speech, Mr. Speaker, I want to take the time to address some of 

these issues.  They were also . . . many people are concerned 

out there because this party and the present government 

indicated prior to the election that they indeed, Mr. Speaker, 

would not become blatantly political in their job fillings; in 

fact, Mr. Speaker, become . . . just look at whether you held an 

NDP card or a Conservative card, whether you get a job or not.  

You enter into blatant political politics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe people in Saskatchewan feel a sense of 

betrayal.  They believe they've been betrayed by a government 

that they had so much hope for.  At least I think and I believe 

there were people out there who actually believed that indeed 

that this government would indeed offer them some hope, offer 

them a vision for the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, even as I was travelling back to the city today to 

take my place in this Assembly, I stopped in the coffee shop 

and just talked to a number of people.  And it didn't matter who 

you talked to, Mr. Speaker, many people of all types of 

political persuasions and regardless of whether they were 

farmers or business men or women or labourers, they were all 

speaking about the budget.  They were all speaking about what 

the budget was going to do to them, what it meant to them, 

what it was going to mean to them out of their pocket-books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what I gathered as I was visiting with people 

today is that people were not happy at all, were not one bit 

happy.  They were just totally annoyed at what had taken place. 

 

They weren't happy with the fact that prior to October 21 and 

all through the spring of 1991, the government of the day, the 

then opposition, had basically taken and run with the 

harmonization tax, of the E&H (education and health) with the 

goods and services tax, and basically what was the cry of the 

day, Mr. Speaker?  I believe the cry of the day was axe the tax; 

no more tax; no PST. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the government of the day, the then opposition, 

ran around and told people that there wouldn't be any more tax; 

we wouldn't need any more tax; we wouldn't need one dollar 

more; in fact, $4.5 billion should be enough to operate this 

province on.  In fact any party should be able to operate and 

run a budget in this province and provide the services and 

provide the needs of individuals with $4.5 billion. 
 

However, Mr. Speaker, what has taken place?  What has 

transpired?  What have we seen, Mr. Speaker? 
 

We have seen the fact that the members opposite didn't just 

eliminate the PST or the expanded E&H tax, didn't take the 

time to harmonize.  The result being, Mr. Speaker, that they 

gave up $180 million of revenue to the province which the 

former minister of Finance, back in the spring of 1991, 

indicated in his plan -- the government of the 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 1992 

day's plan -- not only to balance the budget but to meet the 

fiscal needs of the government to operate. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan, prior to October 21, 1991, Mr. 

Speaker, were led to believe that the E&H would disappear, the 

provincial sales tax would disappear.  And, Mr. Speaker, many 

people on October 22 when they went to purchase goods and 

purchase some of the services that they expected would be tax 

free, all of a sudden, here there was that 7 per cent was still on 

those goods and services and taxes.  Mr. Speaker, they felt 

betrayed then and they feel betrayed even worse now that the 

minister has brought down his budget. 

 

Why do they feel betrayed, Mr. Speaker?  Because where the 

present government said that there would be enough in the 

budget to operate, Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden that 7 per cent 

harmonize tax which was such an evil word, an evil thought, 

that this province would enter into, now we've seen, Mr. 

Speaker, has become a 1 per cent increase in the E&H tax. 

 

What is 1 per cent?  It's gone from 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, to 8 

per cent.  The people in the province of Saskatchewan, we now 

pay 8 per cent on everything we purchase, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that is an indication of the betrayal that this 

government has left to the province of Saskatchewan, to people 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think as we spend the next year or two or 

three or whatever time it's going to take for the Premier of the 

day to indeed look forward to calling another election, people 

of Saskatchewan are going to look with interest and they're 

going to follow with interest the proceeds of this government, 

the process of this government.  They're going to be taking a 

very serious look, Mr. Speaker, wondering if indeed this 

government is ever going to come up with a plan of balancing 

the budget, a plan of reducing the deficit, a plan of being fair 

and honest and open with the people of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think over the next four years your loyal 

opposition, the loyal opposition in this province, is indeed 

going to continue to remind the people of Saskatchewan that 

indeed the former government laid out a plan. They went to the 

people of Saskatchewan with a plan, a plan that included 

harmonization of the sales tax.  And, Mr. Speaker, when you 

take a look at what harmonization would have done for the 

people of Saskatchewan, you talk to small-business men and 

women around the province today, and Mr. Speaker, what do 

you find?  Many men and women in business in the province of 

Saskatchewan began to realize that the harmonized tax 

certainly would have been of greater benefit to them as well as 

providing money to the coffers of the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, what was harmonization going to do?  It 

was going to return the tax on the services used by business 

men and women to provide services to their customers.  It 

would have returned the E&H tax on their power bills and on 

the telephone bills and on their heat bills -- and also, Mr. 

Speaker, not just business men and women in this province but 

also the farming community of this province. 

Mr. Speaker, we take a look at the budget today, and what has 

the budget done for the business men and women of this 

province?  What has it done for farmers?  Certainly many 

people in this Assembly have come from a business 

background.  Many people in this Assembly have come and are 

active in the farming sector.  I'm sure many of the members 

opposite who are actively trying to, or may be in the process of, 

planting their crop, have been taking time to sit down and just 

try and count the cost of what it's going to cost them to put a 

crop in the ground this year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of a sudden to find 3 cents on gasoline, 3 cents 

on diesel fuel, a limit of $900 on a fuel rebate to produce in this 

province.  As one MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 

already indicated, he's bypassed that a long time ago.  He's 

limited now to $900 in a fuel tax rebate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that may have seemed like an insignificant 

amount of a rebate to many people in this province.  But when 

you consider the fact that farmers in Saskatchewan and over 

the years work hard, they're diligent, they're good keepers of 

the land, they're good environmentalists, they're good 

conservationists, Mr. Speaker . . . and they work hard, they put 

many hours a day in the fields, Mr. Speaker, they produce food 

for the consuming public not only of this country, of this great 

nation we live in, but for men and women around the world. 

 

I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, as the men and women of our farming 

community go out to put the crop in the ground, they're going 

to be more discouraged than ever, than they ever have been.  

Not only are we looking at depressed agricultural markets, Mr. 

Speaker, we're also looking at . . . we also see where the 

provincial government has taken away almost any incentive, 

any initiative the farming has had to get out and produce a 

crop, to take the time, Mr. Speaker, to produce, to put the seed 

in the ground. 

 

One of the members opposite, as the Minister of Finance has 

taken the time to do, continues to tell us that it's all the federal 

government's responsibility.  Well, Mr. Speaker, it's easy to 

blame somebody else.  It's always easy to look at the other 

person and blame the other person for our faults, or blame the 

other person for some of the problems we face.  Mr. Speaker, is 

that what the former premier did of this province?  Is that what 

the former premier said to the farming community in the 

province of Saskatchewan -- no, we'll blame the feds? 

 

Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the deficit . . . and 

certainly the government of the day takes great pleasure in 

talking about the deficit so they can cover up where they're 

going with their budget and with their spending. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we take a look at where the deficit is.  And if you 

take a serious look at where the deficit accumulated over the 

past nine years, Mr. Speaker, you would find that despite the 

drought, despite the poor economic climate, despite the poor 

world grain markets, Mr. Speaker, and prices, despite the low 

prices for our natural resources like potash and uranium and oil 

. . . Mr. Speaker, the former premier of this province believed 

in the men and women who formed the backbone of this 

province.  The former premier of this province didn't just say to 

Ottawa 



May 11, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

it's all your responsibility.  The former premier and the former 

government took the time to support the major industry in this 

province, which is agriculture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe it is imperative.  Yes, Mr. Speaker, the 

federal government does have a responsibility.  But, Mr. 

Speaker, we in Saskatchewan, as a provincial government, 

have a responsibility to our people as well, including men and 

women, agriculture producers across this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we look at the agricultural sector and we 

look at this budget and we ask ourselves, what's the 

government doing today for farmers?  Is the government 

showing support for farmers?  In fact, we just have to look 

back over the last few years and listen to the debate and even 

go back into Hansard, Mr. Speaker, and many of the members 

who are presently sitting on that side of the House, every time 

the former government brought forward a budget, were 

continually condemning the former government for not putting 

enough into agriculture, not taking the time to put enough into 

health, not putting enough into education. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what did the Minister of Finance do the 

other day?  What did he say to the farmers of Saskatchewan, 

and indeed speaking to the farmers of Saskatchewan, what did 

he offer them?  You know, Mr. Speaker, when money is put 

into agriculture, it's money not just put into the hands of 

farmers, it's money put into the small businesses in all our 

communities around rural Saskatchewan.  It's money put into 

our educational system, Mr. Speaker.  It's money put into our 

health system. 

 

And not only that, Mr. Speaker, but this government took the 

time to cut -- cuts in our health program and our health 

spending, cuts in education, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  It now being 10 o'clock this House 

stands adjourned until tomorrow afternoon at 2 p.m. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 10 p.m. 

 

 


