




















































Hansard: May 21, 1992


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 539 

 May 21, 1992 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTIONS 

 

Authorization of the Standing Committee on 

Constitutional Affairs 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion of the Hon. Mr. Romanow, as amended. 

 

Mr. Martens: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I want to point out 

to the Assembly, as I deal with the remarks that I'm going to 

make, three important items that I believe that the Opposition 

has presented to the government in a very clear, precise way in 

order to have them understand what our position is and what I 

believe the position of the people of Saskatchewan is.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, deals with three things. 

 

First of all, we want to point out to this Assembly and to the 

people of Saskatchewan that we're convinced that the Premier 

of the province of Saskatchewan does not feel that a 

referendum is necessary in the discussion that we've had up to 

this point. He is going to have to clearly identify whether in 

fact that is a part of his agenda and whether he will commit to 

this Assembly whether he will do it. 

 

And he has the right, Mr. Speaker, to close the debate on this.  

And I hope that when he does, that he will clearly enunciate 

that he will have a referendum for the people of Saskatchewan 

as they suggested to him on October 21 by over an 80 per cent 

vote. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is what this Assembly . . . what the 

opposition presented to the people of this Assembly for them to 

discuss, and we presented amendments dealing with that 

referendum item.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is what we think 

should be included as a part of the discussion and I hope the 

Premier says that he will have the people choose what they 

want to have. 

 

With that, Mr. Speaker, there is a responsibility that the 

Premier is also going to have and that the committee is going to 

have, and that they're going to have to have terms of reference 

that clearly describe what their roles will be. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, they're going to have to clearly describe 

what the proposals that the province is going to present to the 

federal government are, what the other provinces are going to 

propose in relation to that.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is very 

important for the people of the province to understand.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, will be the responsibility, I believe, of the 

government members of this committee to enunciate that to the 

people of Saskatchewan in a very clear way, and not have a 

political agenda appear as what we have seen described by the 

Premier earlier in the earlier motion. 

 

And I want to point out at least eight different items that 

appeared there that I think could have implications as it 

relates to politics being played in this issue in the province of 

Saskatchewan -- not the political content of Canada, but in the 

politics of Saskatchewan.  And, Mr. Speaker, I want to point 

out to all the members of the Assembly that there are a number 

of them. 

 

I believe that the province of Saskatchewan would be well 

served with a Triple E Senate.  And the Premier made an 

observation about that. That's what I call a national program.  

And we can have the politics in the province be very firm on 

that, and we can represent it from this side of the House and he 

can from that side, and the people will have a choice. 

 

Mr. Speaker, here are some of those things that are, what I 

believe, Canadian political ramifications.  And he talks about 

the provincial jurisdiction in treaties, trade treaties with the 

United States, for example, and with Mexico.  I think those are 

issues that he wants to put on the table through this committee 

to enhance the opportunity of the federal NDP (New 

Democratic Party) Party in relation to the province of 

Saskatchewan.  That is what I believe he is doing and that's 

why I think it's wrong for him to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the referendum in the province of Saskatchewan 

has to be a referendum that is clear, it has to be precise, and it 

has to have the information provided to it by the government of 

the province of Saskatchewan.  And we will, as an opposition 

and membership on that committee, make sure that that 

opportunity is presented to the people as much as is allowed to 

us by the government and the information they provide. 

 

The second thing that we raised as a part of this discussion was 

the committee has the opportunity, as we have voted . . . And 

we didn't vote for this but the government gave the legislature 

the responsibility of the committee saying whether there was 

going to be a referendum or not.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is a 

choice that the government made.  They're going to choose, 

rather than allow the people to have the referendum, they're 

going to say that this committee shall decide.  And this 

committee, Mr. Speaker, is made up of, as we have been told 

by the House Leader, is going to have six government 

members, three from this side of the official opposition, and 

one from the independent member.  That, Mr. Speaker, is 

supposed to be the context of this committee.  And it's obvious 

to us that the context will deliver for the Premier his mandate, 

personal mandate, in relation to the content of what the 

conclusions of this committee are going to be.  That's the 

second item, Mr. Speaker, that I think is what we want to point 

out to this Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

And the third item, I believe, is this.  This Assembly was given 

the opportunity to talk about Meech Lake.  This Assembly, on 

a resolution passed in this House by members of this House, 

and by the majority of the NDP opposition, said . . . And they 

had the opportunity to speak for and against the motion.  Mr. 

Speaker, I recall the individuals who didn't vote for this Meech 

Lake accord motion.  I recall some of them.  And that, Mr. 

Speaker, was an opportunity for people in this Assembly to say 

to the province of Saskatchewan that as elected people we have 

a choice. 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

But we had a debate, Mr. Speaker.  We had a debate in this 

Assembly that clearly described what our position was at the 

time and what the NDP position was at the time and that, Mr. 

Speaker, is the third item that has been taken away by the 

leader of the government, the Premier of this province. 

 

He has said that he doesn't want to have a referendum; he has 

said that if the referendum is to be taken, it is to be taken and 

the decision made by the committee; and third he will not allow 

that this Assembly have an opportunity to debate those items in 

a clear parliamentary format.  And I think that that's absolutely, 

totally wrong.  And when we deal with this in committee, Mr. 

Speaker, and Mr. Premier, it will be our responsibility to make 

sure that the people of the province of Saskatchewan not only 

understand the terms of reference, the content of the proposals 

by the federal government, the content of the proposals made 

by the other provinces, and the content of the proposals made 

by you, sir, as a part of the overall strategy in dealing with the 

constitutional reform of the province and the country of 

Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have tried to have the people of the province 

have a voice in democratic reform.  We have tried as an 

opposition to present to the government alternatives that would 

clearly help and assist the people of the province to be able to 

be a part of the decision making.  And, Mr. Speaker, on every 

occasion we have been told, no you won't get this; no, you 

won't get that.  And really, Mr. Speaker, it's a slap in the face of 

the people of Saskatchewan.  Eighty per cent, Mr. Premier, said 

-- 80 per cent -- said that they wanted to have a very vital, 

important role in deciding and determining what it was that 

Saskatchewan was going to do.  And you, sir, if you don't agree 

with that, then you have a very serious problem. 

 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is the choice that you're going to be 

making.  And as the decision completes and as the focus of 

attention comes to the vote in Quebec, the federal election, that 

serious implication will be made by the terms of the reference 

you give to this committee. 

 

The kinds of things that we want to have and the people want 

to have are the kinds of things that we need to represent for this 

province to the constitutional debate.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is 

as important for me as a parent in this Assembly and as a future 

grandparent.  The possibility of this country breaking up is 

extremely serious.  And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that we 

don't want to have.  And it makes us believe that we need to 

have the people speak for what they want to have.  And that, 

Mr. Speaker is very important to us. 

 

(1915) 

 

We have, on this side of the House, raised these matters 

repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, in these three points.  And I want to 

say to the public of Saskatchewan that we will raise these three 

points over and over and over again as we participate in this 

debate on the constitution. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that the 

opportunity presented to the people of Quebec, by the 

Government of Quebec, that they have an opportunity to vote 

for the second time on their involvement in Canada, should 

give us a reasoned sense of security in determining that the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan have just as 

fundamental a right to do that as the people of Quebec do.  And 

that, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity we want to raise and we 

will be raising so that the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan can have that opportunity to deliver a vote on 

the basis of whether they want to have the things that you 

describe for them in the constitution.  We will work to see that 

that happens.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

I'm not quite sure how to begin the closing remarks, having 

listened to two days of what can only be described at the very 

best as rather contradictory position taking by the opposition 

members, and at worst a certain sinking below the standards 

that this Legislative Assembly expects on an issue which is as 

important as national unity. 

 

The remarks of the member who just took his seat I think 

exemplify the point that I make.  Confusion is the most 

charitable way that I can describe his remarks. 

 

Let me begin by the third point that he made -- the third point, 

that somehow the establishment of a standing committee on the 

constitution for this legislature was a denial of the full 

legislature's right to debate the constitutional amendments 

proposed.  He cited the Meech Lake constitutional amendments 

that were proposed as an opportunity for the legislature to 

debate those amendments. 

 

I don't know whether the member speaks from an enormous 

wealth of ignorance or malevolence, or both, when he fails to 

observe the plain fact that you cannot have -- I repeat, Mr. 

Member -- you cannot have a constitutional amendment in this 

country without the amendment coming before the Legislative 

Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan for debate for 

passage, rejection, or amendment.  It is impossible. 

 

Now surely, as an elected person . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- I understand that. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Well you say you understand that.  

You do not understand that because you accuse us in 

establishing the standing committee on the constitution as a 

way to obviate what you did on Meech Lake.  That's exactly 

what you said a moment ago.  And I say, Mr. Speaker, that that 

is either deliberate attempt to mislead, an element of 

malevolence, or it is, Mr. Speaker, if not that kind of a situation 

. . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Mr. Speaker.  A point of order, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- What's your point of order? 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, I think it's a well-established 

tradition that no member will call into  



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

disrepute any other member by saying, deliberately misleading.  

And the Premier just made that accusation to the member of 

Morse.  And I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to call that member 

to order. 

 

The Speaker: -- On the point of order that the member from 

Rosthern makes, I think his point of order is well taken.  It is a 

well-established fact and Beauchesne makes that very clear on 

page 109, that we may not use the words "deliberately 

misleading."  And so I ask the Premier to withdraw those 

words. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- I'll withdraw the words.  I did not 

make the accusation as much as I made an alternative position.  

But none the less I accuse the member of misleading the 

House.  He has misled the House, or he displays ignorance on 

the way the constitutional amendment is made.  And he either 

knows that -- in which case the misleading is unacceptable, and 

is purely political -- or he does not know that, in which case I 

commend him strongly to take a first-year, primer course on 

what it is in order to allow the full constitutional debate to take 

place.  So please, whatever you say in opposition to this 

standing committee on the constitution, do not say to us that we 

are establishing this committee as a way to get around the 

debate in the House.  You, sir, as every member in this House, 

will have full opportunity to debate whatever constitutional 

resolution may be negotiated, and you know that.  And if you 

don't know that, you ought to have known that. 

 

This debate is contradictory, Mr. Speaker, for other reasons as 

well.  The amendment that they proposed, if you would 

believe, would have had a public report not be publicly filed, 

after having argued for two days that all of this was a ruse to 

keep the public away from the consideration of the issue.  Even 

the Liberal leader spotted that particular ruse and voted with 

the government side in rejecting what the Conservatives 

intended to do.  How can it be said by a responsible opposition 

party, advocating public involvement, that they're putting an 

amendment to the resolution which would have a public report 

no longer publicly filed?  That, Mr. Speaker, I think again is 

either an indication of misleading or, in the alternative, shows a 

wealth and a depth of ignorance which simply is unacceptable 

for any Legislative Assembly.  And I say that regardless of 

your political ideology.  You're the ones who profess that 

Canada should not be political.  Well for goodness' sakes, 

please understand the fundamentals before you launch your 

debate as to whether or not the essentials of the proposed 

agreement is going the right way or the wrong way. 

 

And there's a last thing with respect to the confusion which is 

important.  Their whole proposition . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  My memory, I think, serves me 

well that when members spoke earlier today there was very 

little interruption by the Premier at that time.  And I would ask 

the members to let the Premier make his presentation now.  All 

right? 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And I was 

going to point out the last contradiction, which I think is a 

fundamental one.  Can you imagine for two days, even in the 

summary by the member for Morse, the 

would-be next leader of the Conservative Party . . . He says that 

they want a referendum.  And what did they do when the 

amendment, the subamendment which we proposed was 

advanced to this House, which provided the option of that 

amendment taking place?  And I want to say a word about the 

other misrepresentation which has been put forward by the 

Conservatives.  They voted against it. 

 

Ironies of all ironies, confusions of all confusions.  For a 

political party talking about the need for a referendum, they 

stand up in their places and, to a person, vote against the option 

of a public referendum.  Mr. Speaker, I say that is total 

confusion and total unacceptability. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- There is another aspect of this debate 

which I think is absolutely unacceptable as well for any 

responsible political party.  I've got a copy of the amendment 

moved by the member from Kinistino and seconded by the 

member from Saskatoon Idylwyld on our side, which speaks to 

this very last point.  The amendment says that at the 

appropriate time the committee be asked to consider -- note the 

words -- "to consider and recommend to the legislature." 

 

An Hon. Member: -- A committee of 10 and 6 of your 

henchmen. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Now the member says, of our 

henchmen.  That is the attitude displayed by the member from 

Rosthern.  You, sir, are applying the standards of your party to 

the standards of the government side and you make a fatal 

mistake.  There is no such situation on this side. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- But it was your colleague, the member 

from Morse, and your colleague, the other would-be leader 

from Thunder Creek, who said that this committee would have 

the power to decide and to close the debate.  And they know 

full well that the wording says "to consider and recommend to 

the legislature," and it would be the power of the legislature to 

decide whether or not there is a referendum.  Those are the 

plain black and white of the words on this paper, to consider 

and to recommend, and yet to this very last moment in this very 

last aspect of this debate they mislead the public and the House 

by saying the committee's got the absolute authority.  I say 

shame on them for this kind of a fraudulent position taken to 

the legislature and the people of the province of Saskatchewan.  

That's not acceptable.  Shame on you. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Then the members opposite get up and 

they say, what is your constitutional position?  I don't know 

whether it was the member from . . . member in the back row.  

Where's he from?  Souris-Cannington, the member from 

Souris-Cannington.  It might have been him or the member 

from Maple Creek.  He gets up and he says, you know, oh well, 

I'd like . . . No, I think it might have been the member from 

Morse.  Well I'd like to know 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

where they stand on the Triple E.  I'd like to know where they 

do this.  No it was the member from Maple Creek.  I'd like to 

know where they stand on this and stand on that and stand on 

this and stand on that. 

 

Why didn't he take a look at the submission that the 

government made to the Dobbie/Castonguay/Dobbie report?  

Why didn't he take the study of that submission?  He would 

have known where we stood.  Why didn't he take an example 

of the speech which I delivered to the national credit unions?  

He would have known where we stood. 

 

No, but it's as if somehow this was taken in a vacuum.  It's as if 

they didn't read it.  It's as if they either do not want to read it, or 

if they want to read it, they don't want to accept the words that 

are stated there. 

 

And moreover, the standing committee is designed exactly to 

do that.  The standing committee is designed exactly for you 

members of the opposition and for the back-benchers on the 

government side to come forward and say, I want to know 

precisely what this means. 

 

But they speak against the standing committee.  They argue 

that as if somehow our position was "secret," which is an 

absolute untruth.  They know what we have said and we've said 

it repeatedly over and over again. 

 

But no, Mr. Speaker, they say, we want to know what the 

position is.  The member from Morse, by the way, got up just a 

few moments ago, talking about positions.  He says he likes 

Triple E.  That's what he likes.  I want to know whether the 

member from Thunder Creek likes Triple E just as much as the 

member from Morse does.  Or does the member from Rosthern 

like it just as much? 

 

He says, where does the government stand?  I ask the members 

of the official opposition, where do you stand on the 

constitutional position?  Why don't you stop hiding and come 

out with a concrete position as to where you stand on these 

various issues?  You've got a responsibility to this issue, but 

you hide. 

 

He says, you know the international trade provision. It's an 

NDP plot, he says, an NDP plot to allow the federal NDP 

somehow to come in through the Saskatchewan NDP to control 

international trade.  But he tells us . . . he does not tell us the 

one very obvious fact that if it's an NDP plot I've got two of the 

wildest NDPers on my side in Premier Getty and Premier 

Filmon and the other western premiers.  Why doesn't he tell us 

that?  Why doesn't he tell us that? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- He doesn't tell us that because he 

either doesn't know this or he knows it but he's not telling it 

because he's trying to score the political points involved in this 

debate. 
 

I say to the member opposite, if you take a look at the positions 

and study the western premiers' conference positions, study the 

joint positions on equalization -- study them and I mean study 

them -- then you will know that the positions that we advocate 

do not depend on 

political ideology, they depend on advancing a western 

Canadian objective.  Not all of the issues may be accepted by 

all of us as a western Canadian objective, but I say to you, 

member from Rosthern, stand up for western Canada and 

Saskatchewan. Don't keep ducking in support of Mr. Mulroney, 

the Prime Minister in central Canada.  He can defend himself.  

Stand up for this province.  Stand up for the people in this 

province. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- No, Mr. Speaker, they won't do that.  

They won't do that because they continue -- and that's why this 

debate's been going on for two days -- they continue this 

posture of theirs of telling a little bit of the story, not all of it, 

withdrawing it a bit, telling us maybe in a peekaboo style, 

they're for the Triple E, maybe they're not for the Triple E.  But 

they simply will fail and refuse to understand the basic facts 

and then they chide us for playing politics with this operation.  

I say, Mr. Speaker, that's not a very credible position to take. 

 

Somebody said during the course of the debate, you know 

ownership by the people.  He said, you know we need 

ownership of the people.  Well of course the constitution 

believes to ownership of the people.  What ownership did the 

desk-mate of the Leader of the Opposition and the member 

who is talking non-stop from his seat right now, what 

ownership did they give to the people of Saskatchewan when 

they concocted Meech Lake one week -- morning, noon, night, 

and day -- behind closed doors?  What option did you give of 

ownership to people then?  What? 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

(1930) 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Nothing, absolutely nothing.  Who 

was rolling the dice then and where were you?  You were right 

in there rolling the dice with all those boys back there in Meech 

Lake.  You say this: you say, say as I say; don't do as I do.  

And they ask us to adopt this as a credible position.  I simply 

say to the hon. members opposite, we expect a whole lot more 

of you.  And no wonder there are only 10 of you.  The people 

of Saskatchewan represent a whole lot more of you than that 

kind of a position on a two-day debate on a standing 

committee, which was and should be and still will be a 

contributing committee to the constitutional debate both in the 

province of Saskatchewan and nationally.  You can't get away 

with those kinds of comments and do that under the pretence of 

being somehow involved in the integrity of Canada.  You know 

that full well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say this debate is full of contradiction and 

confusion and it is, in the case of the opposition, the official 

opposition, a sad situation indeed. 

 

I want to make one other point about the referendum.  I have 

said totally over again . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: -- Herman, he can't talk from his seat 

steady. 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- My colleague, the House Leader, 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

is urging the member from Rosthern, the Conservative member 

from Rosthern, to stop talking from his seat.  I don't mind that 

at all because frankly I think it's worth even hearing his views 

from that seated position than it is from a stand-up position, 

although I must confess that it might hurt his thinking capacity 

if he is seated down.  Perhaps if he'd stand up we'd have a little 

more logic and reason to what you had to say. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- A little more logic and reason than 

what you had to say.  But the referendum situation -- we take 

the position, Mr. Speaker, that the referendum is not to be 

rejected . . . 

 

The Speaker: -- Order, order.  I've tried in vain to get the 

member from Rosthern to stop intervening.  It just doesn't seem 

that he was willing to abide by the rules.  I don't want to ask 

him again and I ask him to please refrain from interrupting 

while the Premier is speaking. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Hon. Mr. Romanow: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. 

Speaker, I'm about to make a statement on the referendum, and 

I repeat again the government's position.  And this amendment 

reflects it as a compromise to the opposition.  That's what we 

intended it, or at least we accepted it. 

 

And the amendment we made, it wasn't the perfect solution that 

you wanted but it was an attempt to compromise.  And it 

reflects the position the committee can recommend the option 

of a referendum that this body will decide in public with all the 

television cameras and the journalists that are there. 

 

And what I said in the debate yesterday I repeat again: we're 

not ruling out the notion of a referendum.  But I say that to say 

this now by way of a hammer-lock or strait-jacketed position is 

wrong.  The negotiations are at a very critical stage.  We don't 

know if they're going to fall apart.  If they fall apart, the content 

or whether or not a referendum should be conducted is a very 

important issue for national unity which needs to be 

considered.  It shouldn't be written into the subamendment.  It 

should be debated at the time the negotiations and the various 

positions are articulated. 

 

Is that such an unreasonable position, Mr. Speaker?  I don't 

think that's an unreasonable position at all. And I repeat again: 

the committee does not determine; the committee recommends 

and it is we who determine it. 

 

Now somebody in the course of this debate, in the course of 

talking in support of the referendum would have us believe 

that, you know, what we need to have is a referendum question 

which is nice and neat and simple about Canada.  Well I would 

love to have such a question.  But this is not a nice and neat, 

simple country.  It's a nice country but is not a simple, neat 

country that can be summed up in a nice and simple, neat 

question. 

 

Quebec is different than all the other provinces.  Newfoundland 

is different than all the other provinces.  I 

like to think that Saskatchewan is different than the other 

provinces.  British Columbia is different than all the other 

provinces.  We come from different regions. 

 

The trick of keeping this country together is balancing national 

interest and regional diversity.  The Conservatives in Alberta 

call it unity in diversity. 

 

And these are not very easily answered questions.  You can't 

square that circle in a nice, neat, simple question about Canada 

-- at least a question that can be translated into a constitutional 

resolution.  Let me give you an example.  The province of 

Ontario is fighting for a social covenant.  Now there are some 

who say they're for it and there are some who are against it but 

I want to give you an example of how difficult it is to put into a 

nice, neat, simple question. 

 

Is the social covenant going to be enforced by a court of law?  

Yes or no?  If it's going to be enforced by a court of law, does it 

mean that the court of law can impose its social judgements on 

a duly elected Legislative Assembly -- yes or no?  If there's a 

social covenant, does it override the Charter of Rights and 

Freedoms?  Where do you stand on that -- yes or no?  If a 

social covenant is going to be implemented, will it take away 

from the division of powers under section 92, the powers of the 

provinces -- yes or no?  Where do you stand on those things? 

 

Now all of these have tremendous impacts on the various 

aspects of the delicate balance which is federalism, between the 

provincial powers and the federal power.  This is the nature of 

Confederation.  It's this healthy tension or confrontation from 

time to time -- I described it as co-operative federalism the 

other day -- which ultimately decides some of the answers to 

these matters.  And if members opposite think that they can 

simply reduce this into a nice, neat, simple question about 

Canada, a question that can have impact and implication and to 

be carried out, then I say they are totally mistaken. 

 

This is not to be said I conclude that there's no option for a 

referendum.  Of course there's room for an option for a 

referendum.  It would be wonderful to have the people of 

Canada, at the end of the day, vote and support and endorse 

what the governments and what the legislative assemblies 

agree to.  I think that would be an act of unity; that would be an 

act of building us together.  But can you imagine a referendum 

where the country is divided on emotional lines of language or 

culture or regional differences or some of the other provisions, 

whether it's social covenant or provisions of equalization?  Can 

you imagine whether or not that is an act of unity or an act of 

division, for 30 days at a cost of $100 million nationally and 

goodness knows how much of a cost provincially?  Does that 

enhance the unity and the integrity to the process or does it hurt 

it? 

 

These are questions which the committee, the standing 

committee of which we are debating, needs to look at and 

should look at properly, intelligently, in concert with our 

public, with full consultation with our public, full dialogue - 

_ and that's exactly what we're intending to do. 

 

So I say to the members opposite, you can't so summarily 

dismiss or so airily categorize with a flippant comment 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

the notion that you can summarize this beautiful, complex 

creation called Canada into a "nice, neat, simple question."  It 

hasn't been a nice, neat, simple question since 1867 or earlier 

and it probably won't be for 20 years after that.  That's one of 

the strengths, one of the challenges. 

 

And all I'm saying is: for goodness' sakes, members, whether 

you're Conservative or Liberal or New Democrat or the public, 

let's make sure that we act responsibly.  Let's make sure that we 

act reasonably, pragmatically.  Let's not rush into these kinds of 

circumstances as Meech Lake was -- a rush into a situation 

which, as we know now, has put this province and this country 

in the dilemma that we're in.  That's all I'm saying to you.  So if 

you say they're mutually exclusive, they're not.  We hold that 

option open to you. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, is the question that I simply want to 

close on because I think in a way it indicates how the debate in 

my judgement has taken a disappointing turn, and that is the 

comments that the member made from Souris-Cannington.  

When the member from Souris-Cannington, as a first-time 

member, I say this to him, succumbed to somebody who 

poison-penned the comments that you make about betrayal of 

Canada in 1982. 

 

You can reject everything that I say to you.  You can say I'm 

patronizing, I'm arrogant, anything you want.  I've been in this 

Chamber off and on for 25 years.  And I tell you, if you allow 

your back-room people to give you words accusing Canadians, 

even though they make error, of betraying Canada, and you do 

that with languages referring to that guy and that leader and 

that arrogant person, I tell you, sir, your political life in this 

legislature is not going to be long.  And it shouldn't be long. 

 

Because I tell you this, sir, in 1981-82 I readily admit that the 

end result was imperfect.  I said it at the time.  I've written a 

book about it, or co-authored a book about it.  I've said it many 

times since.  I repeat it here today.  If it was betrayal, then I'm 

in good company of betrayers.  Peter Lougheed was there.  Bill 

Davis was there.  John Buchanan was there.  Angus MacLean 

was there.  Sterling Lyon was there.  Pierre Trudeau was there. 

 

Oh, sir, if you could have the experience in the course of your 

public life to have been associated with such a gang of 

betrayers.  Honest men and women who worked for three years 

and more to fight separatism, which you by implication are 

endorsing, because you say we should not have accepted the 

deal at the time.  And you have the audacity -- forget about me 

-- to accuse that kind of personage, that category of personages, 

as a concept of betrayal.  That I say to you, sir, is unbecoming a 

member of the Legislative Assembly in any legislature in 

Canada.  It is unbecoming of any politician in Canada.  I say to 

you, I urge to you, if you want to make a contribution, use your 

own thoughts.  Because I do believe that you are civil.  I do 

believe that you are thoughtful, and that you are a decent guy.  

And that kind of a comment simply is not to be applicable. 

 

So I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and to the members opposite, this 

is a sad situation, a sad situation when the 

debate is lowered to that kind of a level, a sad situation when 

the debate is lowered to confusion and contradiction -- sad and 

confusing. 

 

Now let me close.  Mr. Speaker, we are making a positive step 

toward national unity in this resolution.  And we've had some 

hard words in this debate over the last two days.  I admit that.  I 

don't think that this should impair us in struggling for what we 

think is more important than either my political views or yours, 

impair us in building this great country which is the finest place 

in the world in which to live.  I don't think it will. 

 

I urge all of the members opposite, a standing committee on 

ongoing interprovincial matters is the thing that we need.  We 

should have had it a couple of years ago or maybe even more 

than that.  I urge the hon. members to put aside, as we will 

endeavour to do, the political differences that exist.  And let's 

take a look from a Saskatchewan and a western Canadian 

perspective what it is that we can do to strengthen this great 

country of ours called Canada. 

 

We'll have our differences but we don't need to question the 

motivations of men and women in those differences as we have 

on the occasions of this debate from time to time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of this legislature and to the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, this is not the answer, 

the committee alone.  The end of the day the answer is going to 

be the resolve of Canadians in Sturgis or Lloydminster or 

Estevan or Saskatoon or Regina, the resolve to keep this great 

country together.  That's going to be the answer at the end of 

the day. 

 

And the politicians will reflect that.  All of us will reflect that 

because I think we're committed to this country every bit as 

strongly as everybody else is.  The end of the day it's going to 

be the resolve of keeping this great Canadian experiment 

together as I talked about the other day. 

 

May I close on one final quotation.  This may not be an 

accurate quotation but there's a noted Canadian historian by the 

name of Father Jacques Monet.  And Monet from the 

University of Ottawa tried to describe Canada in this way.  He 

said, you know Canada is not an act of common sense or an act 

of economics. Monet said, at the end of the day Canada is a 

question of the heart.  That's what Monet said.  And as I quoted 

Lower the other day, it's a miracle which has to be reworked 

every generation.  That's what this country is -- complex, 

fragile, beautiful, powerful, free, full of opportunity, but it's a 

miracle and it's an act of the heart. 

 

And I summons and I urge all members to summons that spirit 

as we approach this task of building Canada together.  We can 

do it and we will do it.  And I urge unanimous support of the 

House for this resolution. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

The division bells rang from 7:44 p.m. until 8 p.m. 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

Motion as amended agreed to on the following recorded 

division. 

 

Yeas 

Romanow Sonntag 

Van Mulligen Cline 

Wiens Scott 

Simard McPherson 

Tchorzewski Wormsbecker 

Lingenfelter Crofford 

Shillington Knezacek 

Koskie Harper 

Anguish Keeping 

Solomon Kluz 

MacKinnon Carlson 

Penner Jess 

Bradley Langford 

Koenker Neudorf 

Lautermilch Swenson 

Calvert Boyd 

Hamilton Martens 

Johnson Britton 

Trew Toth 

Draper D'Autremont 

Serby Haverstock 

-- 42 

 

Nays 

-- Nil 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 11 -- An Act to amend The Marriage Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I'm 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of The Marriage 

Amendment Act, 1992.  These amendments provide that 

marriages will no longer be solemnized under the authority of 

the publication of banns.  This change will mean that all 

couples who plan to marry must purchase a marriage licence.  

It will also mean that churches will be free to publish banns in 

accordance with religious traditions rather than having to 

comply with the provisions in the Act.  The churches that have 

been consulted are pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see this change 

being made. 

 

A second change being proposed today is to authorize the 

minister responsible for the Act to appoint marriage 

commissioners rather than requiring that these appointments be 

made by the Lieutenant Governor in Council.  This amendment 

will facilitate the appointment of commissioners. 

 

A few other housekeeping amendments are also included in 

this Bill, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Marriage Act. 
 

Mr. Toth: -- Mr. Speaker, I've taken a brief glance at the Bill 

that's been presented by the hon. minister.  And I guess if you 

could say there is a regret in this Bill, it's the fact that it is 

going to be somewhat costly.  But maybe most people in this 

province are not aware of the fact that they could have had a 

marriage transpire just by using 

banns rather than taking out or buying a marriage certificate. 

 

I think when we look at the Bill, we don't have a lot of 

problems with the Bill.  And certainly we will be addressing 

more questions as we get into second reading and certainly into 

Committee of the Whole.  So I beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 12 -- An Act to amend The Enforcement of 

Maintenance Orders Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Enforcement of Maintenance 

Orders Amendment Act, 1992.  The enforcement of 

maintenance orders program has been very successful in 

ensuring that child and spousal support payments are being 

made by respondents who have the ability to pay. 

 

Since the program was introduced in 1986, the default rate for 

maintenance payments has gone from an estimated 80 per cent 

to 32 per cent.  In 1991 the maintenance enforcement office 

collected $12 million for spouses and children in 

Saskatchewan.  There are currently 12,300 orders registered in 

the office with an average of 40 new orders being registered 

every week. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed today will allow for 

increased efficiency in the office and increased powers of 

enforcement for the director.  Together with the additional staff 

to be hired in the maintenance enforcement office over the next 

few months, the amendments will ensure the continued success 

of the operation of the office. 

 

Difficulties have been encountered in enforcing maintenance 

orders through the use of writs of execution.  This legislation 

amends the procedure to ensure that the writs of execution will 

remain in force for as long as the maintenance payments 

remain enforceable. 

 

The policy of the legislation that no property is exempt from 

execution for enforcement of maintenance orders is also 

confirmed. 

 

The director of the maintenance enforcement program is given 

additional powers to enforce arrears of maintenance.  The 

director will be able to fix a portion of the arrears to be 

enforced by continuing garnishment on a periodic basis. 

 

The arrears garnishment procedure is streamlined to be 

consistent with the continuing garnishment procedure.  The 

documents will no longer need to be issued by the court and the 

payments will be made directly to the maintenance 

enforcement office which will be able to pay the money out to 

the claimant after the 10-day waiting period has expired.  This 

change will help to see that the money collected is received by 

the complainant as quickly as possible. 

 

In addition, a major loophole in the garnishment procedure is 

being closed.  No longer will a respondent be 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

able to avoid garnishment of a bank account by placing his or 

her money in a joint bank account.  These amendments will 

allow for the garnishment of joint bank accounts. 

 

The director of the program is also given increased powers to 

obtain information about the respondent's financial situation.  

The director will be able to demand information about the 

respondent's income, assets, liability, and financial status from 

anyone who has information about these matters. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill reflect the 

commitment that this government has to protecting the rights of 

spouses and children and combating poverty among women 

and children in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Again I would just like 

to bring to the attention of the Assembly that I think we've 

already indicated to the government and to people in the 

province of Saskatchewan that we're really in favour of this 

Act, the enforcement of maintenance.  We quite well agree 

with the observation and the areas that the Act is intending to 

address and the ongoing problems that have been associated 

with people walking away from their responsibility as parents.  

And we will continue to monitor and certainly follow through 

with possibly some questions regarding repayment of arrears 

and payments of enforcement. 

 

We would also want to just keep in mind and maybe ask a few 

questions regarding the increased powers to investigate.  And 

I'd also like to commend the minister for the fact that they have 

taken out the loophole of joint bank accounts so that indeed as 

enforcement is expanded and enhanced, we can address the 

needs and the problems associated with enforcement of 

maintenance orders. 

 

So therefore, Mr. Speaker, we are generally in agreement with 

the Bill and in fact we would even allow the government, if 

they so chose, we would give them leave to take the Bill to 

Committee of the Whole, if they so choose tonight.  So I 

adjourn debate. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 13 -- An Act to amend The Adoption Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise 

today to move second reading of The Adoption Amendment 

Act, 1992.  The changes are required to expand and clarify 

existing provisions of The Adoption Act.  Some of the 

amendments are housekeeping in nature.  There are changes 

designed to better protect the rights of birth parents and 

adoptees and to better protect the confidentiality of adoption 

records. 

 

The first amendment will ensure that birth parents considering 

an independent or agency adoption will have ready access to 

professional counselling before signing consent to adoption.  

This amendment recognizes the importance of the decision 

being made by the birth 

parents and allows them to fully explore their options before 

signing consent to the adoption.  The birth parent will have an 

opportunity to fully explore all alternatives with a counsellor. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there will also be counselling respecting the 

technical aspects of revoking consent to adoption and the 

effects of an adoption order on parental rights.  Counselling 

will be available in departmental offices throughout the 

province, Mr. Speaker, at no cost to the birth parent.  It will be 

provided by professional staff who are equipped to provide 

alternatives, counselling, and independent advice with respect 

to the technical aspects of adoption consents. 

 

The second amendment relates to section 14 of the Act, Mr. 

Speaker, and will provide greater protection for adoptees by 

ensuring that in the case of independent adoptions a report is 

prepared for the court by a qualified professional with respect 

to the suitability of the applicants to adopt a child. 

 

Although the current legislation requires certain information be 

provided to the court, there is no requirement as to the training 

or qualifications of the person preparing the report.  By setting 

a standard for the professional qualifications of the person 

completing the adoption report, we believe that the interests of 

the adoptee in independent adoptions will be better protected. 

 

Also, a provision is added that will permit applicants in 

independent adoptions the option of processing the adoption 

through the department rather than having to retain legal 

counsel.  This is particularly important for persons residing in 

more remote areas and also for those applicants who don't have 

the additional financial resources to pay for an independent 

home study or to retain private counsel. 

 

(2015) 

 

The third amendment, Mr. Speaker, clarifies provisions 

regarding the confidentiality of adoption information and 

assures that confidential information is protected by The 

Adoption Act. 

 

The fourth amendment is a new provision which gives greater 

protection against the possibility that, as a result of civil 

litigation, staff will be compelled to provide information from 

adoption records.  This amendment is not intended to restrict 

the right of staff to testify in court, but is more intended to 

prevent harassment of our workers. 

 

The fifth amendment is strictly housekeeping and provides for 

deletion of clauses that are already covered in The Adoption 

Act and regulations. 

 

The sixth and final amendment clarifies restrictions on 

advertising related to adoption.  The original legislation was 

intended to forbid advertising for adoption, except in the case 

of the director who from time to time may require the use of 

the media to recruit prospective applicants.  The amendment 

clarifies this intention by prohibiting all advertising except by 

the director and ensures that 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

advertising by individuals to solicit or procure children for the 

purpose of adoption is not permissible. 

 

I am satisfied the amendments as introduced will provide birth 

parents with better opportunity for counselling and greater 

awareness of options available to them in planning for their 

children.  The amendments also strengthen security for the safe 

keeping and release of adoption information. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Adoption Act. 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  And as far as The 

Adoption Amendment Act is concerned, Mr. Speaker, I've 

taken the time to look it over quite carefully and I've had a brief 

consultation with the minister, for which I am thankful.  I 

wasn't quite sure of some of the implications involved and after 

listening to Madam Minister speaking I have a few more 

concerns than I had originally. 

 

And so we'll be taking a very close look at that and, quite 

frankly, we're also in the consultation process right now with 

some agencies that are going to be affected by these 

amendments, Madam Minister.  And at this stage yet, having 

received the Bill yesterday, we haven't had an opportunity to 

get a response from them.  So until such time as their concerns 

and so on have been voiced to me, I will not be in a very good 

position to respond directly to some of these proposed 

amendments.  And so with that in mind, I'm going to move 

adjournment of debate for this time. 

 

Debate adjourned 

 

Bill No. 14 -- An Act to amend The Child and Family 

Services Act 

 

Hon. Ms. MacKinnon: -- Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise today to move second reading of this Child and 

Family Services Amendment Act, 1992.  The amendments are 

required to clarify existing provisions of The Child and Family 

Services Act. 

 

The first amendment to The Child and Family Services Act is 

housekeeping in nature and will ensure provisions respecting 

voluntary committals of children to the minister's care match 

similar provisions in The Adoption Act.  Guardians of children 

where the birth parents are no longer alive will now be able to 

voluntarily place the children in the care of the minister for 

adoption.  This amendment is required to clarify the intent of 

the legislation and is not a change in the department's previous 

practice. 

 

The second amendment clarifies the rules regarding 

confidentiality and release of client information.  Because of 

the nature of child protection services, the staff of the 

Department of Social Services regularly have information 

about children in families that is of a highly sensitive nature.  

I'm pleased to say that staff of my department value and respect 

their clients and their right to privacy and are highly committed 

to maintaining the 

confidentiality of client information.  This amendment will 

ensure the rules respecting client confidentiality are very clear. 

 

In some very limited instances, however, Mr. Speaker, there 

will be situations where the benefit of the release of client 

information will outweigh any invasion of privacy that may 

result.  For example, a known abuser of children might apply to 

court to adopt a child.  In those cases, it is our responsibility to 

protect the child and we must be able to release information to 

the court for its consideration.  I am satisfied the amendment as 

introduced will strike the correct balance between respecting 

the client's right to privacy and the need to protect children. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Child and Family Services Act. 

 

Mr. Neudorf: -- Mr. Speaker, in response to the comments 

made by Madam Minister, I too have the same concern.  But 

I'm not concerned so much about the balance struck between 

protection of the child and the right to privacy.  My concern is 

the safety and the protection of the child as paramount.  And 

I'm not quite sure, looking at some of these amendments, 

whether the best interests of the clients are going to be served 

at all times. 

 

Another concern that I have is the apparent -- and I say 

apparent because I want to have a greater, in-depth look at it -- 

the apparent sweeping powers that this does give to the 

minister.  And until I have had the time to consult and the time 

to study it carefully, I would now beg leave to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 15 -- An Act to amend The Wills Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am pleased to 

rise today to move second reading of The Wills Amendment 

Act, 1992.  This amendment is consequential to an amendment 

that was made to The Intestate Succession Act in 1990.  At that 

time the preferential share for surviving spouses under The 

Intestate Succession Act was increased.  Section 32 of The 

Wills Act, which refers to the preferential share, will now be 

updated to refer to the increased amount.  The amendment is 

retroactive to 1990 but not so as to upset any estates that may 

have been distributed in the interim. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Wills Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, I've just 

taken a quick and brief look at Bill No. 15 and certainly I don't 

immediately see any major problems with it.  But I'm not that 

familiar with the Act or familiar enough with the Act to make 

any major comments on it and I would like to look into it in a 

little more depth.  And so I at this time move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 16 -- An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of The Jury Amendment Act, 1992.  The 

Jury Act, 1981 is being amended in two ways.  The 

requirement to serve a jury summons by registered or certified 

mail is removed.  This amendment will permit the sheriff's 

office to serve jury summons by the most efficient type of mail 

service offered.  The amendment will reduce a legal burden for 

prospective jurors.  Persons who are summoned for jury duty 

and fail to attend will be required to explain rather than 

establish that they did not receive the jury notice, or received 

the notice after the trial date.  This onus is consistent with the 

presumption of innocence found in section 11(d) of the 

Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 

 

I move second reading of An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, just taking 

a quick look at the Bill as it's been presented and in response to 

the minister, a couple concerns that I see immediately and I'd 

like to look in a little closer. 

 

First of all, the fact that you would strike out "by registered or 

certified mail" and just go by common form of mail or 

everyday mail would strike me as being maybe a little 

somewhat cost-effective, but one questions and wonders what 

avenue a prospective juror would have in really being able to 

relay to the court whether or not they received or didn't receive 

the mail.  Registered or certified gives that person . . . you have 

to sign for the letter or sign for the note.  And so I think it 

makes it more appropriate and easier for a person to 

acknowledge their having received the mail. 

 

And also, Mr. Speaker, the other argument and the other fact 

out there remains that sometimes the mail may not be as swift 

and as handy.  And there's another point that is raised here.  It 

says, "A document served by mail is deemed to have been 

received . . ."  I guess the onus is then there again put on a 

prospective juror.  What if it doesn't arrive in the mail? 

 

And I guess these are some of these questions that we will be 

looking at and getting more detail on so that we can indeed 

acknowledge and pass the Bill.  So at this time I move to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 17 -- An Act to amend The Commissioners for 

Oaths Act 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to rise today to 

move second reading of the The Commissioners for Oaths 

Amendment Act, 1992.  The present legislation provides for 

both annual appointments and five-year appointments of 

Commissioner for Oaths.  The proposed amendment removes 

the annual appointments so that all future appointments will be 

for five years. 

 

There is a significant amount of administrative paperwork 

associated with the appointment of a Commissioner for Oaths.  

This change removes a large proportion of this paperwork and 

results in cost savings. 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 

Commissioners for Oaths Act. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Just a couple of short 

comments in response to the minister.  It would appear to me 

that certainly the change from annual to five-year term would 

be appropriate and probably very considerate rather than going 

through the formality yearly of just reappointing 

Commissioners for Oaths.  And so we will examine this Bill 

somewhat closer and address any concerns that we may have, 

certainly in consultation with the minister at a later date, so I 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

Bill No. 18 -- An Act to promote Regulatory Reform in 

Saskatchewan by repealing Certain Obsolete Statutes 

 

Hon. Ms. Simard: -- Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased again to rise to 

move second reading of The Regulatory Reform Act, 1992.   

As the long title of this Act indicates, the purpose of regulatory 

reform legislation is to repeal Acts that are no longer used.  The 

Acts to be repealed by this legislation are as follows.  The 

Agricultural Products Market Development Fund Act set up a 

market development fund to assist persons to explore, develop, 

and expand markets for agricultural products.  No new activity 

has been undertaken by the funds since March 31, 1988.  All 

outstanding activities have been completed. 

 

The Community Capital Fund Program Act and The Provincial 

Capital Fund Program Act provided for the construction of 

capital works in urban municipalities and hamlets between 

1980 and 1986.  Funding for these matters is no longer 

provided pursuant to these Acts. 

 

The Economic Development Foundation of Saskatchewan Act 

was passed in 1981 with the intention of establishing a 

foundation to support native and northern economic 

development.  No activity was ever conducted under the 

legislation. 

 

The Senior Citizens' Heritage Rebates Act has not been used 

since 1986.  It was replaced in that year by the The Senior 

Citizens' Heritage Program Act.  The Succession Duty Act and 

The Succession Duty Act, 1972 imposed succession duties 

during the period 1918 to 1947, and 1972 to 1976 respectively.  

They have been kept in force for the purpose of collecting 

outstanding succession duties.  They can now be repealed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to promote 

Regulatory Reform in Saskatchewan by repealing Certain 

Obsolete Statutes. 

 

Mr. Toth: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, it would 

appear that this Bill is certainly looking at rescinding a number 

of Bills that have become redundant on the order paper.  

However, I would like to take a little closer look at the Bill 

before we move further.  And so I move to adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

(2030) 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 8 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 8 -- An Act 

to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have a number of 

questions and concerns about this Bill, Mr. Speaker.  Some 

examples of those questions are: what are the total dollars to be 

allocated to the urban municipalities?  What are the total 

dollars to be allocated to the rural municipalities?  How does 

the revenue sharing formula work?  And why are some of the 

RMs (rural municipality) being cut back 24 per cent, another 

one 44 per cent, and one by 80 per cent, Mr. Speaker, when the 

minister says the average is 7.4 per cent? 

 

This Bill simply represents another down-load by this 

government, a government who said they wouldn't do that, as 

well as a government that's been very critical of what they 

called federal government unloading.  They are reducing the 

services and increasing the costs to all of the municipalities.  

Mr. Speaker, we have a number of questions about this Bill, as 

I said, and we'll be asking them further in the Committee of the 

Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 5 -- An Act 

to amend The Wascana Centre Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, what this 

Bill does is reduces the funding to the Wascana Centre 

Authority.  This is being presented by a government, Mr. 

Speaker, who is made up of people who while in opposition 

argued that the Devine . . . the former administration was not 

funding this park enough.  All the Regina MLAs ((Member of 

the Legislative Assembly), while in opposition, said not 

enough was being spent in this area.  Yet, Mr. Speaker, each 

and every one of them will, Mr. Speaker, and I predict each and 

every one of them will vote in favour of this Bill which does 

exactly that, reduces the level of funding to the Wascana 

Authority. 

 

So we find that very interesting that while in opposition they 

were very, very opposed to any cut-backs to the Wascana 

Authority, or even freezes for that matter.  And yet now in 

government they are very, very adamant that they'll do exactly 

that thing.  That's why we will again have a number of 

questions, Mr. Speaker, once we move into the Committee of 

the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 6 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 6 -- An Act 

to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Boyd: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This Bill covers a 

number of areas ranging from funding to easements, Mr. 

Speaker.  The levels of funding are a cut-back of 5 per cent, a 

measure that again while in opposition, all of the MLAs in 

opposition, the former opposition MLAs argued that there 

should be no cut-backs or even freezes to this area.  In fact, the 

Premier, Mr. Speaker, always argued against cut-backs in this 

area.  He consistently said that while in opposition more money 

should be set out for the Meewasin Valley Authority. 

 

Also, one has to wonder, Mr. Speaker, if there was any 

consultation with the Meewasin Valley Authority regarding 

these funding cut-backs.  We will again be asking a number of 

questions once we reach the Committee of the Whole. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter that Bill No. 4 -- An Act 

to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act be now read a 

second time. 

 

Mr. Swenson: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Wakamow 

Valley Authority has been Moose Jaw's answer to cleaning up 

the Moose Jaw River valley over the last 10 years, and I'd like 

to commend the government for the modest increase that has 

come forward in their budget.  It certainly has been well known 

amongst the local MLAs from the area, and I think that's from 

both sides of the House, that Wakamow has been getting the 

short end of the stick ever since its inception as an authority 

and that it needed to be recognized. 

 

That recognition was important because, Mr. Speaker, of the 

amount of volunteer effort that has gone in by citizens from not 

only the city of Moose Jaw but the two rural RMs that 

contribute to the authority.  It's a level of volunteerism that we 

don't see in a lot of the other urban parks in Saskatchewan and 

I'm glad that the government has seen fit to recognize the 

hundreds of men and women in our community and area that 

contribute to Wakamow. 

 

The other thing I would say to the government members on this 

Bill is one of the secrets of Wakamow's success is that they 

were able to use other government programs, particularly the 

New Careers Corporation, the work for welfare type of 

programs that in Wakamow's instance, because of the excellent 

management they have, have seen, I believe of the 16 

employees that I know went through the program with 

Wakamow, 15 of them went on to other employment. 

 

In that way our community has been able to access other 

government programs on a modest budget and yet do 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

tremendous work in that area.  And I would say to the Minister 

of Social Services, and other ministers who are contemplating 

and have made changes in this very significant area, that 

Wakamow, and areas like Wakamow, can make a tremendous 

contribution to their community if they are allowed to access 

some of the tools. 

 

They don't need large chunks of cash from the provincial 

taxpayer, but if there's an existing program out there that makes 

sense, then allow them to access those people and those 

programs.  This modest increase is going to help Wakamow, 

but for goodness' sakes, don't cut back on some of the other 

areas that they have been able to use so effectively, and by 

doing so have been able to take citizens in our society who 

maybe weren't contributing as much as we would have liked, 

and have made contributing members out of them.  That's been 

the secret of Wakamow, and I congratulate the government 

once again for making this modest increase. 

 

Mr. Calvert: -- Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to 

join with the member from Thunder Creek in commending the 

Government of Saskatchewan in the Bill that's now before the 

House which will restore what we have called for consistently 

over the past four years and over the past 10 years, and that is a 

restoration of fair funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The member from Thunder Creek hit it very accurately tonight 

in his remarks a few moments ago when he indicated that under 

his government Wakamow received the short end of the stick, 

Mr. Speaker.  He pointed that out in his remarks a few 

moments ago.  He noted that under his government the 

Wakamow Valley Authority indeed had received the short end 

of the stick, and he's right. 

 

I feel some satisfaction tonight, Mr. Speaker, in seeing this Bill 

come before the legislature where we resolve that short end of 

the stick, where we resolve some fairness in the funding that 

goes to the urban parks in Saskatchewan, recognizing that 

Wakamow over the years has received less than its fair share of 

that funding. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to join with the member from Thunder 

Creek in recognizing that Wakamow Valley Authority has 

depended a great deal and has accomplished a great deal 

through the valuable, valuable contribution of volunteers over 

the years.  Indeed, at former levels of funding it is only through 

the hard, hard work and contribution of volunteers that the 

Wakamow Valley has been able to accomplish the major 

transformation of the Moose Jaw River valley in the short 10 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am here to commend the government for this 

Bill.  And I hope that all members in the House will support it.  

And just to conclude, Mr. Speaker, I would want to extend an 

invitation to every member of the legislature through the course 

of this summer to drive the 45 miles, the 40 and 45 miles it 

takes you to come to Moose Jaw, spend an afternoon or a day 

or two days in the beautiful Wakamow Valley, and see indeed 

what has transpired and transformed in the Moose Jaw River 

valley under the authority of the Wakamow board.  Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 9 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 9 -- An Act to 

amend The Mineral Taxation Act, 1983 be now read a second 

time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  We have some 

concerns with this Bill, and we need some time to consult with 

the industry to discuss this Bill with them and find out what 

their concerns are and have them point out to us their problems 

so we can take it to the minister.  But we feel these points can 

be raised in committee, Mr. Speaker, and so we are prepared to 

allow this Bill to go to committee at this time. 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 10 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Penner that Bill No. 10 -- An Act to 

amend The Crown Minerals Act and to make consequential 

amendments to certain other Acts resulting from the enactment 

of this Act be now read a second time. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- Mr. Speaker, again as I said, we do have some 

concerns in regard to Bill No. 10.  We are now in the process 

of consulting with the industry and we would like to make a 

few comments now.  And, Mr. Speaker, what we find in these 

Bills, a little more than what meets the eye.  And we're in the 

process right now of consulting with the industry officials 

regarding the Bills, so I will make some comments today and 

then I will ask the House to adjourn debate so that we can 

complete our consultations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must tell the Assembly that I am informed that 

almost the only consultation that was done in regard to these 

Bills is the consultation that I'm now engaged in.  Now, Mr. 

Speaker, the interested people that I've spoken to told me that 

they were told some of what was going to happen but that in 

essence it was not an act of consultation.  It was actually a 

dictation from on high, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And in conversation just before the bells rang today, Mr. 

Speaker, the Saskatchewan Mining Association told me that 

not only had they never been presented a draft of the Bill to 

comment on but that some of the provisions in the Bill came as 

a complete surprise to them.  And it was a complete surprise, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now I don't want to put too fine a point on it, Mr. Speaker, but 

the minister and the whole government needs to learn the 

difference between consulting with people and simply flat out 

telling them how things are going to be.  This is what's coming 

through to me through the mining industry, Mr. Speaker. 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

(2045) 

 

And in regard to the principle of the Bill, Mr. Speaker, there 

are a number of what we consider serious defects.  And I am 

disturbed at the attack on the small operator and the lone 

prospector.  I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the minister is not fully 

aware of the consequences of his own Bill, precisely because 

he did not consult with the people. 

 

I want to make a couple of points to illustrate some of the 

harmful effects.  The preliminary advice that I have is that the 

increase in the annual fee for holding a claim will put many 

individual prospectors out of business.  What has happened 

historically, Mr. Speaker, is that some people get into 

prospecting almost as a hobby and it's very small-time stuff. 

 

They do it on speculation that they can find a mineral-bearing 

area and they stake a claim and later attract some of the big 

players into the game and they can sell out their claim.  And 

this has resulted in many cases where previously unknown 

deposits of our resource wealth have been discovered and 

developed. 

 

This process of individual speculation has resulted in jobs and 

revenue for the government, Mr. Speaker.  And while I know 

government members find the word speculation to be 

offensive, Mr. Speaker, the facts are facts.  Small players using 

this technique explore for resources in areas that the big players 

don't think are worth their time.  Small players, Mr. Speaker, 

who contribute through their speculative activities and who 

now may not be able to afford to engage in this business.  

These are some of the points that we'll have to explore a little 

deeper. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, also the Assembly has to question the 

minister whether or not -- considering how little additional 

revenue will be generated by this measure -- whether or not it 

is just a spiteful act against people doing things that the present 

government don't approve of.  And I honestly think, Mr. 

Speaker, that most of the provisions of the Bill are a symbolic 

move to quiet down the radicals who keep on saying, go after 

the mining companies.  Go after those companies and make 

them pay.  Make them into a cash cow.  That's what I think 

most of this Bill is about, Mr. Speaker, and we have to develop 

this a little further. 

 

But the attack on the little guy who does a bit of speculative 

prospecting, that doesn't accomplish anything constructive at 

all, Mr. Speaker.  When you attack that little entrepreneur, you 

don't accomplish anything, you just take another player out of 

the action. 

 

And I'm also very concerned that the provision in the Bill that 

gives the minister, himself, such sweeping and absolute 

powers.  The principle of allowing a single person the power to 

simply deem whatever he wants by itself goes against the 

democratic principles.  They seem to have a fixation in the 

word deem.  They want to deem this and that, and they want to 

deem something that has happened that really hasn't happened, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 

But to allow that power to a minister in regard to taxes is even 

more upsetting.  And to look at that word again, Mr. Speaker, 

the minister can deem things not proven.  This 

government seems to have a great love for that word and it 

goes to the very heart of the principle of the Bill.  This is the 

same ugly principle that the Minister of Agriculture has 

threatened our farm families with so that they will understand 

what the mining industry is worried about. 

 

And the government should figure this one out, Mr. Speaker.  

The more you do these things to the families of Saskatchewan, 

the more they will understand the impact on others including 

the mining industry.  Soon you will not be able to simply get 

away with telling the people you're only beating up the big 

mining companies, and the big oil companies, and lead the 

people down that offensive path of wanting to blame it on 

others.  Because once you deem a family's rights away, they 

will understand how it works.  And they will understand it is 

not just a matter of going after the mining and energy 

industries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So this is a bad principle that lets the minister deem whatever 

he wants.  Provision says that any company in the mineral 

industry will be subject to the personal opinion of the Minister 

of Energy.  Mr. Speaker, that is a lot of power.  At his own 

whim, he can say that anything the company is doing somehow 

interferes with the government's ability to take money from that 

company.  And if he makes up his mind that that's what he 

wants to do, then this Bill will give the minister the power to 

simply send the company a bill.  Just like the Minister of 

Agriculture can just up and take away farm families' rights -- 

that's the same principle at work in this Bill. 

 

There are several other problems, Mr. Speaker, with the 

principle of this Bill, including its negative incentive for 

companies on the marginal size definitions -- marginal size 

definitions.  But as I said earlier, this industry has just now 

been given the opportunity to comment on the Bill.  I think it is 

a basic right for them to have their comments known by the 

members before we vote on second reading. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it's on that basis I now . . . I now take my seat, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: -- Order.  I did not get the last comments of the 

member from Wilkie.  So would he repeat them please. 

 

Mr. Britton: -- On the basis, Mr. Speaker, of the . . . that we 

want to have some more debate on this Bill, I now take my 

seat. 

 

The Speaker: -- Is the member from . . . I recognize the 

member from Saskatoon Greystone.  I assume the debate 

continues. 

 

Ms. Haverstock: -- Mr. Speaker, I am most concerned about 

this Bill, and it's my sincere hope that through a thoughtful 

exchange of ideas with the members in this House that we can 

devise innovative new policies and avoid what I consider to be 

the blinders of partisan politics. 

 

I must express some reservations about this Bill.  While I 

commend the government for showing concern for the 

environment by attempting to create a process for 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard May 21, 1992 

environmental assessment within this Act, I fear that the means 

that they are choosing, Mr. Speaker, may bring with it far too 

many unintended side-effects. 

 

The environment is of great concern to me as it is with every 

member of this legislature.  We can, however, protect the 

environment while also protecting individuals and businesses 

from the arbitrary actions of government.  And I repeat my plea 

that we work together to help make the system of government 

politician-proof. 

 

I'm afraid, Mr. Speaker, that the Bill that the government wants 

passed will only add to the potential for political interference.  

This Bill provides many assurances for the government, Mr. 

Speaker, but leaves the businesses that provides jobs and pay 

taxes at the whim of distant politicians and officials.  Leaving 

the people at the whim of politicians, and not laying out the 

rules clearly and fairly, is no way to encourage people to invest 

in this province. 

 

As the Minister of Finance and the rest of the members 

opposite so frequently remind all of us, Saskatchewan is in a 

serious state of financial despair.  You would think however, 

Mr. Speaker, that knowing that we are in trouble they would 

make every effort to foster a climate where businesses want to 

come to Saskatchewan.  And I'm afraid that this Bill is merely a 

step backwards in our efforts to attract investment and will not 

ultimately address what we really want to be doing by a Bill 

such as this. 

 

The Minister of Energy and Mines, Mr. Speaker, wants the 

approval of this House for a Bill that is lacking in proper 

process.  This Bill aims to extinguish common-law rights to 

resource developers that come up short in an environmental 

assessment.  This Bill also prevents the same people from 

gaining an appeal.  Unfortunately, it also allows the minister to 

set resource royalties outside of the rules when it is, and I 

quote: "in his opinion to do so". 

 

Mr. Speaker, where is the process and where is the fairness in a 

Bill that does this?  The proposals before us today will allow 

the government to arbitrarily revoke the claims held by 

resource companies if such a resource company fails to gain a 

favourable decision through an environmental impact study.  

Now let's examine this because the government does not stop 

here.  It wants to go on to extinguish the rights of the resource 

companies to seek redress for losses that occur when such a 

company loses a mineral claim under this Act.  Once the 

government has cancelled the claim, Mr. Speaker, that has 

failed to meet an environmental standard, it might then turn 

around and simply sell that same claim or disposition to 

another company.  To show that they still have some concern 

about how investors might react to having their common-laws 

rights extinguished, the government, and this is in quotations, 

"may offer compensation", end of quote, through regulations.  

Now what sort of confidence can an investor hold in this 

government when any legal protection they might have is left 

at the whim of a government minister who can change 

regulations at the stroke of a pen.  What message does this send 

to the Crown Lifes and the Pipers and the rest of the 700 other 

companies that say that they want to move to Saskatchewan? 

The members opposite, I believe could make a better decision.  

Why cancel a claim fait accompli when conditions change that 

demonstrate that the original reason for cancelling are no 

longer valid.  A company that loses an environmental 

assessment one year on a proposed development may come up 

with a better, a more environmentally sound proposal the next 

year.  Companies may invest up to $50 million exploring a 

claim, Mr. Speaker, and creating plans to develop the mineral 

resources that they discover.  When their claim is cancelled all 

hope for such a development is lost. 

 

Environmental assessments should encourage our corporate 

community to act in a more responsible manner but if they 

have no chance to change, no chance to correct past mistakes 

and to become more innovative in developing resources in a 

sustainable way, these assessments will not have a positive 

impact.  I say, remove the cancellation measures and give these 

companies a chance to change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I, along with many people of Saskatchewan who 

benefit from the $349 million that natural resources place in the 

coffers of our provincial government, worry.  I worry about 

how the introduction of measures to combat artificial royalty 

reductions will affect this important sector of our economy. 

 

I commend the government for its concern about preventing 

companies from dishonestly cutting prices to avoid paying 

royalties.  While this may be an abuse that should be curbed, 

we can't curb it at the price of leaving the majority of resource 

companies that would never contemplate such a practice at the 

whim of the Minister of Energy. 

 

According to Clause 14 of this Bill, Mr. Speaker, the Minister 

of Energy and Mines will be able to change royalty rates for 

certain claims if in his opinion such an abuse is being 

perpetrated by certain companies.  I ask, Mr. Speaker, where is 

the process in this, when one person can arbitrarily decide 

when the rules are being broken?  Where is the openness in this 

when one person can arbitrarily affect the well-being of many 

companies and their workers without even having to follow 

some guidelines when making these decisions? 

 

I urge the minister to reconsider this Bill and correct these 

shortcomings and I urge the members opposite to forsake what 

I consider a path of arbitrary decision-making and return to one 

of co-operation, consultation and communication that you once 

claimed to champion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people of our province deserve jobs.  They 

also deserve the $316 million in government revenues 

generated from abundant resources.  Placing resource 

companies in a position where they don't know the rules, 

placing them in a position where they don't have a chance to be 

innovative, placing them in a position where they are at the 

whim of a government minister's opinion, will not produce jobs 

and it will not produce the revenue that Saskatchewan so 

desperately needs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this House to consider 



May 21, 1992 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

these ideas with an open mind, to put politics aside, and to give 

Saskatchewan the best resource policies possible.  I have more 

to say on this Bill, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to 

adjourn debate. 

 

Debate adjourned. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 9:02 p.m. 

 

 

 


